
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    General Penalty

1.10    Administrative Citations and Penalties

1.12    Citations in Lieu of Arrest

1.16    Custody and Use of City Seal and City Insignia

1.18    Claims Against the City

Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION*
Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

1.01.050    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.

 

*    Note: History note references designated with the letters “CC” indicate sections of the San Diego County Code.

1.01.010 Adoption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the “Poway Municipal Code” as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the “Poway Municipal Code.” (Ord. 139 § 1, 1984)

1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.
This code shall be known as the “Poway Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Poway Municipal Code” or “PMC” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Poway Municipal Code” or “PMC.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Poway Municipal Code” or “PMC” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 139 § 2, 1984)

1.01.030 Codification authority.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Poway, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 139 § 3, 1984)

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.
The last ordinances included in this code were Ordinance 110, passed August 9, 1983, and Ordinance 123, passed March 13, 1984. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 110, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 111 through 120, 122, 124 through 137. (Ord. 139 § 4, 1984)

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Poway Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Poway, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 139 § 5, 1984)

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section thereof. (Ord. 139 § 6, 1984)

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 139 § 7, 1984)

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 139 § 8, 1984)

1.01.090 Effective date.
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Poway Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 139 § 9, 1984)

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 139 § 10, 1984)

Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Title of office.

1.04.030    Interpretation of language.

1.04.040    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.050    Acts by agents.

1.04.060    Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

1.04.070    Computation of time.

1.04.080    Construction.

1.04.090    Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

1.04.100    Time limits for judicial review.

1.04.110    Limitation on liability.

1.04.120    Notices of restriction on real property.

1.04.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the City of Poway, California, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

A. “City” or “town” each means the City of Poway, California.

B. “Chief of Police” means the senior officer of the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department assigned to Poway’s Sheriff Substation.

C. “Council” means the City Council of the City. “All its members” or “all Councilmembers” means the total number of Councilmembers holding office.

D. “County” means the County of San Diego.

E. “Law” denotes applicable Federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of California, the ordinances of the City of Poway, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

F. “May” is permissive.

G. “Month” means a calendar month.

H. “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

I. “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

J. “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.

K. “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

L. “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

M. “Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.

N. “Property” includes real and personal property.

O. “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

P. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

Q. “State” means the State of California.

R. “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State.

S. “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

T. “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

U. “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 123 § 4, 1984; Ord. 91 § 1, 1983)

1.04.020 Title of office.
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City. (Ord. 91 § 2, 1983)

1.04.030 Interpretation of language.
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 91 § 3, 1983)

1.04.040 Grammatical interpretation.
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the City, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

A. Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

B. Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

C. Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 91 § 4, 1983)

1.04.050 Acts by agents.
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 91 § 5, 1983)

1.04.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
Whenever, in the ordinances of the City, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 91 § 6, 1983)

1.04.070 Computation of time.
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 91 § 7, 1983)

1.04.080 Construction.
The provisions of the ordinances of the City, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 91 § 8, 1983)

1.04.090 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 91 § 9, 1983)

1.04.100 Time limits for judicial review.
The Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 is made applicable to all adjudicatory administrative decisions by the City. The limitations for seeking judicial review as provided in said section shall be observed and the City Clerk shall provide the notice required thereby. (Ord. 114 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 11.120)

1.04.110 Limitation on liability.
It is the intent of the City Council of the City that any ordinance establishing performance standards or establishing an obligation to act upon a City officer or employee, shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty for purposes of tort liability, if the officer or employee fails to perform the act. Except when otherwise specifically indicated, the obligations imposed upon City officers or employees for implementation and enforcement of this code are directory in nature. Nothing in the code shall be construed as limiting or eliminating any defense or immunity from liability for the City or its officers or employees, established by the provisions of Title 1, Division 3.6 of the California Government Code, or by any other provision of law. Except when otherwise specifically indicated, the manner and timing of enforcement and implementation of this code shall be within the discretion of the City Manager or other designated City officers or employees. Except when otherwise specifically indicated, this code shall not be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee of the City responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of a failure to enforce, implement or execute any of the provisions of this code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee of the City responsible for any damage resulting to persons or property by reason of any interpretation of this code by any City officer or employee. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 168 § 1, 1985)

1.04.120 Notices of restriction on real property.
The City shall record with the County Recorder of San Diego County all documents relating to real property in the City with respect to building, planning, zoning and engineering matters, if it is determined to be in the best interests of the City. The determination as to the necessity for recordation shall be made by the City Council, City Manager, City Clerk, Director of Development Services, Director of Public Services, or City Attorney, and such determination shall be conclusive.

Any fees charged by the recorder for the recordation of the documents are to be borne by the property owner or developer. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 249 § 1, 1987)

Chapter 1.08
GENERAL PENALTY
Sections:

1.08.010    Violation – Penalty.

1.08.020    Appeal of administrative citation.

1.08.010 Violation – Penalty.
A. It is unlawful for any person, or any responsible person, to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code, the zoning development code, or of any ordinance adopted by the City.

B. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, a violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this code, the zoning development code, or any ordinance adopted by the City shall constitute a misdemeanor; provided, however, that any such violation constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. Alternatively, the City may enforce the provisions of this code by any remedy available under applicable law.

C. Causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting noncompliance with any part of the Poway Municipal Code shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. Any falsification or misrepresentation made to the City concerning compliance with this chapter, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure, any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission, and any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this chapter in order to delay City enforcement action, is a violation of this chapter. Concealing a violation of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.

D. Prior to issuing a citation for a violation of this code that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the enforcement officer may serve a pre-citation or courtesy notice to the responsible person for the violation containing, when available, the following information:

1. The date the violation was observed;

2. The address or a definite description of the location where the violation was observed;

3. The section of this code violated and a brief description of the violation;

4. The compliance date by which the violation shall be corrected or otherwise remedied, which shall be no less than 15 days and no more than 60 days from the date the pre-citation notice is given, as determined to be reasonable by the code enforcement official;

5. A statement that if the violation is not corrected by the specified compliance date, an administrative citation may be issued which imposes a fine, the amount of which will be specified; and

6. The name, signature and department of the enforcement officer issuing the pre-citation notice.

E. After the compliance date has lapsed of a pre-citation or courtesy notice, the enforcement officer may serve a written notice on the violator personally or mail to the address at which, in the opinion of the enforcement officer, such notice is most likely to be received by the violator. Such notice shall provide the nature of the violation and that the violator is required to abate or correct the condition constituting the violation within a reasonable time frame as determined by the enforcement officer, unless, in the opinion of the Director of Development Services, a shorter period of time is required, but in no case less than 10 days. After the reasonable time frame provided in the notice of violation has elapsed, the enforcement officer may seek any additional remedies allowed by the PMC to correct the violation within a reasonable time frame.

F. In addition to notice issued to the responsible person, when time permits and when practical, the owner of the property on which the violation occurred shall be sent notice(s) at the same time as the notices to the responsible person to the address of the said property owner as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or, alternatively, as it appears from such other records of the Assessor or City Treasurer that contain more recent addresses.

G. Any responsible person or other person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code, the zoning development code, or of any ordinance adopted by the City, unless provision is otherwise made, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six months or by both fine and imprisonment. Any responsible person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code, the zoning development code, or any ordinance adopted by the City, unless provision is otherwise made, shall be punishable by fine in accordance with Government Code Section 36900, as may be amended.

Each responsible person who violates any provision or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this code, the zoning development code, or any ordinance adopted by the City shall be charged by a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted by any such responsible person and shall be punished accordingly.

H. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, the zoning development code, or any ordinance adopted by the City shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the City, abated as such, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

I. Pursuant to Government Code Section 36900, the City Council, in the alternative to subsections A, B, and C of this section, may redress a violation of any State or local ordinance by civil action. Civil action by the City Council may include the following, in addition to any other civil remedy allowed under the laws of the State and the United States: forfeiture of any or all permits, licenses, approvals and privileges or benefits of any nature granted by the City.

J. The prevailing party in any action or proceeding involving a public nuisance shall be entitled to recover all of its reasonable costs and expenses incurred with respect to said action, including without limitation its costs of investigation and discovery, attorneys’ fees, and expert witness fees.

K. “Person,” as referred to in this section, includes individuals, corporations, partnerships, and organizations of any kind.

L. “Responsible person” means any person, including but not limited to any person who is the owner or occupant of or who controls, possesses, occupies, or has an interest in real property, the holder or the agent of the holder of any permit, entitlement, or review, or the party or agent of a party to any agreement covered by this chapter; the owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity subject to this chapter; or the parent or legal guardian of any such person under the age of 18 years; who violates any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, review, or agreement described in PMC 1.10.030.

M. Citation for Infraction. As an alternative to a misdemeanor prosecution, the Director of Development Services or his/her designee, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, the Director of Community Services or his/her designee, or the Director of Safety Services or his/her designee may issue a criminal infraction citation to the responsible person(s) or any other person deemed responsible for violating any provisions of the Poway Municipal Code. For purposes of this subsection, any such violation shall be classified as an “infraction,” pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900, which section and the penalties prescribed are adopted and incorporated in this section. For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this code and other regulations, the Director of Development Services or his/her designee, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, or the Director of Safety Services or his/her designee, and the Director of Community Services or his/her designee are deemed to be public officers, as described in California Penal Code Section 836.5.

N. Administrative Citation. Upon a finding by the City official vested with the authority to enforce the various provisions of this code that a violation exists, he or she may issue an administrative citation under the provisions of Chapter 1.10 PMC.

O. Arrest or Issue Citations. The assistance of a peace officer may be enlisted to arrest violators or issue a criminal citation and notice to appear as prescribed in the California Penal Code, including Section 853.6. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement remedies be exhausted or otherwise used prior to such actions being taken. The immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code are applicable to authorized enforcement officials acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this chapter.

P. Injunctive Relief. The City may enforce compliance with this section by judicial action for injunctive relief.

Q. Cease and Desist Orders. Written orders, verbal orders or both may be issued to stop unauthorized actions. If it is determined by an authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of a bond or other security to assure the violation is corrected, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official.

R. Notice and Order to Perform. Written orders, verbal orders or both may be issued to perform activities to comply with the Poway Municipal Code or a resolution of approval by the City Council, or as directed by an authorized enforcement official where conditions warrant.

S. Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or other laws implemented through enforcement of this chapter, an authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the authorized enforcement official to proceed with the work. Failure to comply with the specified order shall require double payment of permitting fees, an additional inspection fee, the filing of a complaint with the State Contractor License Board against the responsible person and/or relevant licensee, and a criminal citation.

T. Permit Suspension or Revocation. Violations of this chapter may be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit and other City license pursuant to subsection I of this section.

U. Penalties and Remedies Not Exclusive. Penalties and remedies under this section may be cumulative and in addition to other administrative, civil or criminal remedies.

V. Recorded Notice of Violation. The enforcement officer may, at its sole discretion, in addition to or in place of civil and criminal penalties, cause to be recorded with the County Recorder a notice of violation in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. This notice of violation may provide for denial of any application for approval by the City until the original violation has been corrected in accordance with City regulations in effect at the time of correction. Any correction shall be done under the authority of a valid permit issued, as applicable. A notice of violation shall be expunged only after completion of all work necessary to correct the original and all subsequent violations of the Poway Municipal Code. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 1, 2002; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 211 § 1, 1987; Ord. 203 §§ 1, 2, 1986; Ord. 145 § 2, 1984)

1.08.020 Appeal of administrative citation.
In accordance with Chapter 2.20 PMC, any recipient of an administrative citation may appeal an administrative citation to contest that there was a violation of any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, or agreement covered by this chapter, or that he or she is the responsible person. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019)

Chapter 1.10
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND PENALTIES
Sections:

1.10.010    Legislative findings and statement of purpose.

1.10.020    Definitions.

1.10.030    Issuance of administrative remedies.

1.10.040    Service procedures.

1.10.050    Contents of citation.

1.10.060    Satisfaction of administrative citation.

1.10.070    Appeal of administrative citation.

1.10.080    Failure to pay fines.

1.10.090    Reduction of cumulative fines.

1.10.100    Late payment charges.

1.10.110    Procedural compliance.

1.10.010 Legislative findings and statement of purpose.
A. The City Council hereby finds that there is a benefit to having an alternative method of enforcement of the Poway Municipal Code, conditions imposed on permits, entitlements, and CEQA reviews, and the terms of City agreements made pursuant to the City’s constitutional police power. The City Council further finds an alternative method of enforcement is the imposition of administrative penalties as independently authorized by both California Constitution Article XI, Section 7, and Government Code Section 53069.4.

B. The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law for violation of the Poway Municipal Code or permit and entitlement conditions. Issuance of a citation pursuant to this chapter shall not preclude enforcement by a separate criminal, civil action, or any other proceeding authorized by law.

C. The City Council hereby finds and determines that enforcement of the Poway Municipal Code, other ordinances adopted by the City, conditions of approval of entitlements, permits, and CEQA reviews, and terms and conditions of City agreements made pursuant to the police power is a matter of public health, safety and welfare and serves important public purposes. The City of Poway adopts this administrative penalties program in order to achieve the following goals:

1. To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City;

2. To gain compliance with the Poway Municipal Code, ordinances, agreements, and regulations of the City enacted pursuant to its police powers, and the conditions of approval of permits, entitlements, and CEQA reviews granted by the City pursuant to the City’s police powers in a timely and efficient manner;

3. To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines;

4. To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the Poway Municipal Code, ordinances, agreements, or terms and conditions of entitlements or permits enacted or approved pursuant to the police power; and

5. To avoid or minimize the expense and delay of enforcement in the civil or criminal justice system. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002)

1.10.020 Definitions.
A. “Enforcement officer” means any officer, employee, or agent of the City with the authority to enforce the Poway Municipal Code, including but not limited to a code compliance officer, inspector, and the Fire Marshal.

B. “Person,” as referred to in this section, includes individuals, corporations, partnerships, and organizations of any kind.

C. “Responsible person” means any person, including but not limited to any person who is the owner or occupant of or who controls, possesses, occupies, or has an interest in real property, the holder or the agent of the holder of any permit, entitlement, or review, or the party or agent of a party to any agreement covered by this chapter; the owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity subject to this chapter; or the parent or legal guardian of any such person under the age of 18 years; who violates any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, review, or agreement described in PMC 1.10.030. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002)

1.10.030 Issuance of administrative remedies.
A. Any responsible person who violates any provision of the Poway Municipal Code or regulation of the City, any condition of approval of a permit or entitlement, any condition of an environmental review, or any term or condition of any agreement with the City made pursuant to the police power may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of the Poway Municipal Code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of that code, the Uniform Codes adopted by the City Council, and all uncodified ordinances. A violation of a condition of approval of a permit or entitlement includes, but is not limited to, a conditional use permit, minor conditional use permit, temporary use permit, development review, sign permit, variance, specific plan, parcel map, subdivision map, building or grading permit, any plan, permit or any best management practice authorized, issued or required by Chapter 13.09 PMC, any encroachment or right-of-way permit, any license or permit issued pursuant to PMC Title 5, any drug paraphernalia license issued pursuant to Chapter 9.08 PMC, and any adult-oriented business regulatory permit required by Chapter 17.38 PMC. A violation of a condition of approval of an environmental review includes, but is not limited to, any environmental impact report, mitigated negative declaration, negative declaration, or determination of categorical exemption. A violation of a term or condition of any agreement with the City made pursuant to the police power includes, but is not limited to, any development agreement, owner participation agreement, disposition and development agreement, road maintenance agreement, any easement, license, or other real property use agreement, or any agreement made with the City to implement any ordinance, plan, permit, entitlement, or review approved by the City. Causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting noncompliance with any part of the Poway Municipal Code constitutes a violation of this chapter. Any falsification or misrepresentation made to the City concerning compliance with this chapter, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure, any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission, and any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this chapter in order to delay City enforcement action, is a violation of this chapter. Concealing a violation of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.

B. Each and every day a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense.

C. Administrative Citations. A separate citation may be issued for each day a violation occurs. A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the City of Poway. Fines shall be assessed in amounts not to exceed $1,000 for each violation, or as follows:

1. A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

2. A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance, term, or condition within one year from the date of the first violation;

3. A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a third violation of the same ordinance, term, or condition within one year from the date of the first violation;

4. A fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation after the third violation of the same ordinance, term or condition within one year from the date of the first violation. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002)

1.10.040 Service procedures.
An administrative citation on a form approved by the City Manager may be served upon any responsible person by an enforcement officer in the following manner:

A. Personal Service. In any case where an administrative citation is issued:

1. The enforcement officer may attempt to locate and, if reasonable, personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation.

2. If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.

B. Service of Citation by Mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to locate a responsible person, the administrative citation shall be delivered to the responsible person by first class mail.

C. Service of Citation by Posting Notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving a responsible person, or by first class mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the City in which the City has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002)

1.10.050 Contents of citation.
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information, if readily available:

A. The date of issuance of the citation and the date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed, where applicable;

B. The code sections or conditions violated and a brief description of the violation(s);

C. An order to the responsible person to correct the violations by a specified correction date, if applicable, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s);

D. The amount of the fine for each violation;

E. An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the date by which it shall be paid (15 days after the correction date);

F. Identification of the right of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation;

G. The name and signature of the enforcement officer and if possible the signature for the responsible person; and

H. A statement that if the fine is not timely paid, a late payment charge of 50 percent of the amount of the fine will be added to the fine. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002)

1.10.060 Satisfaction of administrative citation.
Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do both of the following:

A. Pay the fine to the City within 15 days from the correction date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Poway. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City.

B. Remedy the violation(s), if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied.

If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s) or a criminal or civil action may be filed. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002)

1.10.070 Appeal of administrative citation.
Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, or agreement covered by this chapter, or that he or she is the responsible person in accordance with Chapter 2.20 PMC. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002)

1.10.080 Failure to pay fines.
The failure of any responsible person to pay the civil fines imposed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the filing of a claim with either the Small Claims Court or the Superior Court for recovery of the fine or sending the debt to a collection agency. The only issue to be adjudicated by the court shall be whether or not the fines were paid. A responsible person cited may only obtain judicial review of the validity of the citation by writ of mandate after exhausting their administrative remedies by requesting and participating in an administrative hearing before a hearing officer in compliance with the procedural requirements for such process in accordance with Chapter 2.20 PMC. In the court action, the prevailing party may also recover its collection costs, including the cost of the hearing officer, and any court fees, according to proof. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002. Formerly 1.10.110)

1.10.090 Reduction of cumulative fines.
If the violation is corrected within a reasonable time after the decision of the hearing officer, the City Manager shall have the discretion to reduce any cumulative fines upon good cause shown by the responsible person. The determination of the City Manager shall be final and shall not be subject to appeal or judicial review. Fines shall not otherwise be reduced. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002. Formerly 1.10.120)

1.10.100 Late payment charges.
Any responsible person who fails to pay a fine imposed by this chapter on or before the date that payment is due shall also be liable for the payment of a late payment charge of 50 percent of the fine. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002. Formerly 1.10.130)

1.10.110 Procedural compliance.
Failure to comply with any procedural requirement of this chapter, to receive any notice or decision specified in this chapter, or to receive any copy required to be provided by this chapter shall not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder unless the responsible person is denied constitutional due process thereby. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 557 § 2, 2002. Formerly 1.10.150)

Chapter 1.12
CITATIONS IN LIEU OF ARREST
Sections:

1.12.010    Citation in lieu of taking arrested persons before Magistrate.

1.12.010 Citation in lieu of taking arrested persons before Magistrate.
If any person is arrested for a violation of any one or more of the provisions of this code and such person does not demand to be taken before a Magistrate, the arresting officer may issue a citation in the manner prescribed in Chapter 5(c) of the Penal Code (commencing with Section 853.5 of Title 3, Part 2). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 13.101)

Chapter 1.16
CUSTODY AND USE OF CITY SEAL AND CITY INSIGNIA
Sections:

1.16.010    Definitions.

1.16.020    Designation of City seal and logo.

1.16.030    Use of City seal and City insignia.

1.16.040    Prohibited uses of City seal and City insignia.

1.16.050    Penalties.

1.16.010 Definitions.
A. “City seal” and “City logo” is as adopted by the Mayor and City Council on December 29, 1981, by Resolution No. 197.

B. “City insignia” is defined as the City seal, City logo, and City flag as well as other logos, website banners, letterhead, business cards, or emblems depicting or including City insignia as approved by the City Manager. (Ord. 824 § 1, 2019)

1.16.020 Designation of City seal and logo.
A. The seal and logo of the City of Poway, California, shall be as follows:

B. The City seal and City logo is described as oval in shape, and two inches at its widest diameter with two concentric ovals. Within the smaller oval shall appear a design depicting Twin Peaks and the Espola Road Oak Tree with the words, “Incorporated 1980.” Within the larger oval and outside the limits of the inner oval shall be the words, “City of Poway” and “The City in the Country.” (Ord. 824 § 1, 2019)

1.16.030 Use of City seal and City insignia.
A. Use of Seal and Logo. The City Clerk or designee, acting as the custodian of the official seal of the City, is authorized to use the City seal on any ordinance, resolution, honoraria, certificate, notarial jurat or acknowledgement, or other instrument necessary to authenticate official City documents or to indicate institutional sanction for official, legal and ceremonial purposes. The City seal shall only be used for the official business of the City of Poway, its City Council, boards and commissions, committees, officers or departments, except upon approval of the City Council by ordinance or resolution. Except as provided for in this section, no person, other than the City of Poway, shall reproduce, use, give away, sell, or distribute any seal or logo, or facsimile thereof, purporting to be or represented to be the City seal or City logo of the City of Poway.

B. Additional City Seals. The City of Poway City Council retains the right to create variations of the City seal and City logo and to adopt and establish other official seals. Such variations may include, but are not limited to, centennial seals, or other seals which mark anniversaries, events, and/or any other City occasion the City Council wishes to commemorate.

C. Amendment of City Seal. The City seal may be altered pursuant to resolution of the City Council.

D. Custodian of City Seal and Other Council-Adopted Seals. The City Clerk shall be the official custodian of the City seal, and any other City seals adopted by City Council.

E. Custodian of City Logo and City Insignia. The City Manager shall be the official custodian of the City logo and City insignia.

F. Use of City Insignia. The City Manager or designee, acting as the custodian of the official City insignia of the City, is authorized to determine the appropriate use of and to ensure that City insignia is used only on documents, property, and programs that reflect official City business, ownership, or endorsement, and to identify persons duly elected or appointed to a City position or office. In deciding the manner by which the City’s official insignia may be utilized, the City Manager shall endeavor to protect the City’s brand, reputation and credibility by preventing use of the insignia in such a manner as to suggest City endorsement of events, political issues, products and other uses that are prohibited by law. The City Council may allow use of the insignia in a manner consistent with this chapter and in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 824 § 1, 2019)

1.16.040 Prohibited uses of City seal and City insignia.
A. It is unlawful for any person or entity to make use of the City seal and/or the City insignia or any portion, facsimile, mock-up, or reproduction thereof, or make or use of any design, symbol, emblem, insignia or similar device that is an imitation of said City seal or City insignia, or that may be mistaken therefor, that is designed, intended or likely to confuse, deceive or mislead the public, for private or commercial purposes or for any purpose other than the official business of the City without the express written consent of the City Clerk or City Manager or their designees under the authority granted by the City Council.

B. No person, firm, association, or corporation shall use the City seal and/or the City insignia, or any facsimile thereof for purposes of supporting or opposing the nomination or election to any City or other public office of him or herself or any other person, or for purposes of supporting or opposing any ballot measure, nor include such City insignia on any writing distributed for purposes of influencing the action of the electorate, or any part thereof, in any election. This section shall not be applicable to writings issued by the City of Poway or the City Council as a whole pursuant to law. (Ord. 824 § 1, 2019)

1.16.050 Penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall be an infraction or misdemeanor, as determined by the City Attorney, and punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Nothing herein prevents the City from using any other available civil and/or criminal remedies allowed by law to protect the City seal and City insignia from improper or illegal use. (Ord. 824 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 1.18
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Sections:

1.18.010    Authority.

1.18.020    Claims required.

1.18.030    Form of claim.

1.18.040    Claim prerequisite to suit.

1.18.050    Suit.

1.18.010 Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 548 § 1, 2001)

1.18.020 Claims required.
All claims against the City for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another State law (hereinafter in this chapter, “claims”) shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. (Ord. 548 § 1, 2001)

1.18.030 Form of claim.
All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. (Ord. 548 § 1, 2001)

1.18.040 Claim prerequisite to suit.
In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the City Council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 548 § 1, 2001)

1.18.050 Suit.
Any action brought against the City of Poway upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 through 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City of Poway shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 548 § 1, 2001)

Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:

2.04    City Council

2.08    City Manager

2.12    Emergency Services

2.16    Personnel System

2.18    City Council Meetings

2.20    Administrative Appeals

2.21    Rehearing

2.24    Municipal Elections

2.28    Campaign Contributions and Expenditures

2.30    Repealed

Chapter 2.04
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

2.04.010    Legislative body.

2.04.020    Compensation.

2.04.030    Planning Agency.

2.04.040    Redevelopment Agency.

2.04.050    Planning Commission.

2.04.060    By-district electoral system.

2.04.070    Establishment of City Council electoral districts.

2.04.080    Election schedule.

2.04.090    Map of Council districts.

2.04.010 Legislative body.
A. The City Council shall be the legislative body with the exclusive and original jurisdiction to interpret and govern all matters described and/or set forth within the City interim general plan and all ordinances, resolutions, codes and other regulatory directives adopted previously by this Council by reference or currently applicable to any activity, event, request, forbearance and/or issue raised of any nature within the boundary of the City.

B. The ordinance codified in this section is in addition to the authority vested in the Council pursuant to PMC 2.04.030. (Ord. 8, 1980)

2.04.020 Compensation.
A. The Mayor and each member of the City Council shall receive compensation as follows:

1. Effective January 1, 2019, the Mayor shall receive as salary the sum of $1,922.43 per month as authorized by Sections 36516 and 36516.1 of the Government Code and all other members of the City Council shall receive the sum of $1,373.16 per month as authorized by Section 36516 of the Government Code payable at the same time and in the same manner as salaries that are paid to other officers and employees of the City.

2. The salaries established by this section are exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the City Council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties for the City. (Ord. 819 § 2, 2018)

2.04.030 Planning Agency.
The City Council establishes itself as the Planning Agency. (Ord. 5, 1980)

2.04.040 Redevelopment Agency.
A. It is found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the California Health and Safety Code, that there is a need for the Redevelopment Agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the City. Said agency is empowered by this section to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law, and shall be known as the “Poway Redevelopment Agency.”

B. Pursuant to Section 33200 of the California Health and Safety Code, the City Council does hereby declare itself to be the agency, and all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities, vested by law in a Redevelopment Agency, shall be vested in the City Council except as otherwise provided by law.

C. The Redevelopment Agency, authorized to function by this section, shall cause a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this section to be filed in the office of the Secretary of State of the State. (Ord. 96 §§ 1, 2, 4, 1983)

2.04.050 Planning Commission.
A. The City Council finds and determines that California Health and Safety Code Sections 33300 and 33301 require that before any area is designated for redevelopment, the community authorized to undertake the development must have a Planning Commission.

B. Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65100 and 65105, the City Council establishes itself as the Planning Commission for purposes of all redevelopment matters and activities to be carried out in compliance with the California Community Redevelopment Law (California Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq.). The Planning Commission shall consist of the five members of the City Council now serving or hereinafter elected, and the Councilmembers shall serve on the Commission for the duration of their respective Council terms. (Ord. 111 §§ 1, 2, 1983)

2.04.060 By-district electoral system.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 34886 and the schedule established in PMC 2.04.080, beginning in November 2018, members of the City Council shall be elected on a by-district basis from four single-member Council districts. The Mayor shall be separately elected on a City-wide basis. The City’s by-district electoral system shall be conducted in accordance with California Government Code Section 34871(c). (Ord. 809 § 3, 2017)

2.04.070 Establishment of City Council electoral districts.
A. Pursuant to PMC 2.04.060, members of the City Council shall be elected on a by-district basis, as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871(c), from the four Council districts as established and amended from time to time by ordinance, and numerically designated as District 1, District 2, District 3, and District 4.

B. Members of the City Council, excluding the Mayor, shall be elected in the electoral districts established by this section and subsequently reapportioned pursuant to applicable State and Federal law.

C. Except as provided in subsection D of this section and notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, once this chapter is fully phased in, the member of the City Council elected or (in the event of a vacancy filled by the City Council) appointed to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for City Council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227. Termination of residency in a district by a member of the City Council shall create an immediate vacancy for that Council district unless a substitute residence within the district is established within 30 days after the termination of residency.

D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, and consistent with the requirements of California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the City Council in office at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is qualified. At the end of the term of each member of the City Council, excluding the separate office of Mayor, that member of the City Council’s successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in this section and as provided in PMC 2.04.080.

E. Nothing in this section shall affect the election of the Mayor, who shall remain elected on a City-wide basis, in accordance with Government Code Sections 34871(c) and 34900 et seq. (Ord. 809 § 3, 2017)

2.04.080 Election schedule.
Except as otherwise required by California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the City Council shall be elected from Council Districts 1 and 3 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2018, and every four years thereafter, as such Council districts shall be amended. Members of the City Council shall be elected from Council Districts 2 and 4 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2020, and every four years thereafter, as such Council districts shall be amended. The election schedule for the Mayor is not affected by this section. (Ord. 809 § 3, 2017)

2.04.090 Map of Council districts.
The City Clerk shall maintain a map of the city showing the current boundaries and numbers of each City Council district as may be established and amended from time to time by ordinance of the City Council. (Ord. 809 § 3, 2017)

Chapter 2.08
CITY MANAGER
Sections:

2.08.010    Office created.

2.08.020    Residence.

2.08.030    Eligibility.

2.08.040    Bond.

2.08.050    Acting City Manager.

2.08.060    Compensation.

2.08.070    Powers and duties.

2.08.080    Internal relations.

2.08.090    Limitation on removal.

2.08.100    Agreements on employment.

2.08.010 Office created.
The office of the City Manager is created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the City Council. (Ord. 19 § 1, 1981)

2.08.020 Residence.
Residence in the City of a City Manager, while encouraged, shall not be required as a condition of employment. (Ord. 19 § 2, 1981)

2.08.030 Eligibility.
No member of the City Council shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such Councilmember has ceased to be a member of the City Council. (Ord. 19 § 3, 1981)

2.08.040 Bond.
The City Manager and acting City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by the said City Council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the City Manager and acting City Manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City. (Ord. 19 § 4, 1981)

2.08.050 Acting City Manager.
The Assistant City Manager shall serve as pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In the event there is no Assistant City Manager, the City Manager, by filing a written notice with the City Clerk, shall designate a qualified City employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of City Manager during the temporary absence or disability. In the event the City Manager’s absence or disability extends over a two-month period, the City Council may, after the two-month period, appoint an Acting City Manager. (Ord. 19 § 5, 1981)

2.08.060 Compensation.
A. The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall from time to time determine.

B. In addition, the City Manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties.

C. On termination of employment of the City Manager by reason of involuntary removal from service other than for wilful misconduct in office, the City Manager shall receive cash severance pay in a lump sum in an amount to be determined by the City Council, if any. (Ord. 19 § 6, 1981)

2.08.070 Powers and duties.
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City under the direction and control of the City Council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under the Manager’s control. In addition to these general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the duty and the City Manager shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections:

A. Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the City and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the City Council are faithfully observed.

B. Authority over Employees. It shall be the duty of the City Manager, and the City Manager shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the City under the City Manager’s jurisdiction through their department heads.

C. Power of Appointment and Removal. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the City, subject to all applicable personnel ordinances, rules and regulations except for the City Attorney, who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council.

D. Administrative Reorganization of Offices. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under the City Manager’s direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the City’s business.

E. Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as deemed necessary by the City Manager.

F. Attendance at Council Meeting. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to attend all meetings of the City Council unless, at the City Manager’s request, the Manager is excused therefrom by the Mayor individually or the City Council.

G. Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City.

H. Budget. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the City Council for its approval.

I. Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the City Council except on approval of the City Manager or authorized representative. The City Manager or authorized representative shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the City.

J. Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to make investigations into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof, and any contract for the proper performance of any obligations of the City. Further, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City.

K. Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council.

L. The City Manager shall be authorized to sign contract change orders for capital improvement projects as long as that approval does not cause any project to exceed its budgeted amount as established in the fiscal year budget approved by the City Council.

M. Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the City Council. (Ord. 748 §§ 1, 2, 2013; Ord. 218 § 1, 1987; Ord. 186 § 1, 1986; Ord. 19 § 7, 1981)

2.08.080 Internal relations.
A. Council-Manager Relations. The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take orders and instructions from the City Council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the City Council and no individual Councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the City Manager.

B. Departmental Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the City Attorney to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically and harmoniously.

C. Attendance at Commission Meetings. The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission, and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the City Council, upon the City Manager’s own volition or upon direction of the City Council. At such meetings which the City Manager attends, the City Manager shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which the City Manager wishes to address the members thereof, and the City Manager shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the City Council, and the City Manager shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards, or committees appointed by the City Council. (Ord. 748 §§ 1, 3, 2013; Ord. 19 § 8, 1981)

2.08.090 Limitation on removal.
Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 2.08.010, the City Manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the City at which election a member of the City Council is elected or when a new City Councilmember is appointed. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the City Council or a reorganized City Council to observe the actions and ability of the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of said 90-day period aforementioned, the provisions of PMC 2.08.010 as to the removal of said City Manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 19 § 9, 1981)

2.08.100 Agreements on employment.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the City Council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the City Manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 19 § 10, 1981)

Chapter 2.12
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Sections:

2.12.010    Purposes.

2.12.020    Emergency defined.

2.12.025    Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS).

2.12.030    Disaster Council – Membership.

2.12.040    Disaster Council – Powers and duties.

2.12.050    Office of Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services Created.

2.12.060    Powers and duties of Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.

2.12.065    City Council – Powers and duties.

2.12.070    Emergency organization.

2.12.080    Emergency plan.

2.12.090    Expenditures.

2.12.100    Violations.

2.12.010 Purposes.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for:

A. The preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency;

B. The direction of the emergency organization; and

C. The coordination of the emergency functions of the City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons following the requirements set forth in the State of California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS). (Ord. 644 § 1, 2006; Ord. 47 § 1, 1981)

2.12.020 Emergency defined.
As used in this chapter, “emergency” shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such or other conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 644 § 2, 2006; Ord. 47 § 2, 1981)

2.12.025 Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS).
The City shall use SEMS for coordinating all local emergencies. The basis framework of SEMS incorporates the use of the Incident Command System, multi-agency or interagency coordination, the State’s master mutual aid agreement, the operational area concept, and the Operational Area Satellite Information System. (Ord. 644 § 3, 2006)

2.12.030 Disaster Council – Membership.
The Disaster Council is created and shall consist of the following:

A. The City Manager, who shall be the chairperson;

B. The Assistant City Manager, who shall be vice chairperson;

C. Such Chiefs of Emergency Services as are provided for in a current emergency plan for the City, adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 644 § 4, 2006; Ord. 47 § 3, 1981)

2.12.040 Disaster Council – Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the Disaster Council, and it is empowered by this chapter, to develop plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in their absence from the City or inability to call such a meeting, upon call from the vice chairperson. (Ord. 644 § 5, 2006; Ord. 47 § 4, 1981)

2.12.050 Office of Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services created.
A. There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.

B. There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services. In the absence of an appointment, the Assistant City Manager shall serve in this capacity. (Ord. 644 § 6, 2006; Ord. 47 § 5, 1981)

2.12.060 Powers and duties of Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
A. The Director is hereby empowered to:

1. Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session;

2. Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3. Control and direct the efforts of the emergency organization of the City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4. Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

5. Represent the City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

6. In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the Director is empowered:

a. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practical time by the City Council,

b. To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

c. To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of their duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State law for registered disaster service workers,

d. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency, and

e. To execute all ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him/her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him/her by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority;

7. Designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform their duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.

B. The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of the Department of Emergency Services Chief, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the City and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. (Ord. 644 § 7, 2006; Ord. 47 § 6, 1981)

2.12.065 City Council – Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the City Council, and it is empowered by this chapter to:

A. Proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency.

B. Ratify the existence of a local emergency within seven days of a declaration of local emergency made by the Director of Emergency Services while the City Council was not in session.

C. Review the need for a continuing emergency declaration at regularly scheduled meetings at least every 21 days until the emergency is terminated.

D. Issue a declaration terminating the local emergency once the situation resulting from the emergency conditions is within the control of the normal protective services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the City. (Ord. 644 § 8, 2006)

2.12.070 Emergency organization.
All officers and employees of the City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, pressed into emergency service duties, specific to the protection of life and property in the City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of Poway. (Ord. 644 § 9, 2006; Ord. 47 § 7, 1981)

2.12.080 Emergency plan.
The City of Poway Fire Department shall be responsible for the development of the City of Poway emergency plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all resources of the City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. The Director of Emergency Services shall have the authority to make administrative changes to the emergency plan, which changes shall be brought forward to the City Council for their information. (Ord. 644 § 10, 2006; Ord. 47 § 8, 1981)

2.12.090 Expenditures.
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Poway. (Ord. 644 § 11, 2006; Ord. 47 § 9, 1981)

2.12.100 Violations.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with PMC 1.08.010, for any person during an emergency to:

A. Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization with enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him/her by virtue of this chapter;

B. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C. Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State. (Ord. 644 § 12, 2006; Ord. 47 § 10, 1981)

Chapter 2.16
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Sections:

2.16.010    Adoption.

2.16.020    Personnel Officer.

2.16.030    Scope.

2.16.040    Adoption and amendment of rules.

2.16.050    Improper political activity.

2.16.010 Adoption.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of personnel administration based on merit principles. These merit principles include:

A. Recruiting, selecting, and advancing employees on their relative abilities, knowledge, and skills, including open consideration of qualified applications for initial appointments;

B. Providing equitable and adequate compensation;

C. Training employees as needed, to assure high quality performance;

D. Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected;

E. Assuring the impartial treatment of applicants for employment and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, national origin, sex, religion, age, marital status, or disability, ancestry, medical condition, pregnancy, or sexual orientation, and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens. (Ord. 692 § 2, 2009; Ord. 90 § 1, 1983)

2.16.020 Personnel Officer.
The City Manager shall be the Personnel Officer. The City Manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him/her as Personnel Officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the City or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract. The Personnel Officer or designee shall:

A. Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules;

B. Prepare, recommend to the City Council, and, upon approval, implement personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules;

C. Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including classification specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the City Council;

D. Prepare or cause to be prepared an employee compensation plan including base salary and fringe benefits provisions. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the City Council;

E. Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of examinations for classifications in the classified service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of examinations; the certification to the appointing authority of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate classifications in the classified service;

F. Provide for the hearing of appeals submitted by any applicable employee relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion, interpretation, or alleged violation of this chapter or the personnel rules and to make findings and final disposition as provided in the personnel rules;

G. Investigate and make recommendations as may be appropriate on any matter of personnel policy;

H. Conduct, administer or otherwise carry out all labor relations activities on behalf of the City. (Ord. 692 § 3, 2009; Ord. 90 § 2, 1983)

2.16.030 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, classifications and employments in the service of the City, except:

A. Elective officers;

B. Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees;

C. The City Manager and City Attorney;

D. Positions identified as at-will in the classification system. An at-will classification is subject to an at-will employment agreement between the City and the officer. Incumbents hired prior to July 21, 2009, in classifications transitioning to at-will shall maintain their classified status;

E. Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services; or

F. Volunteer, provisional, temporary, seasonal and probationary personnel. (Ord. 748 §§ 1, 4, 2013; Ord. 692 § 4, 2009; Ord. 506 § 2, 1998)

2.16.040 Adoption and amendment of rules.
Personnel rules shall be developed by the Personnel Officer or designee and submitted to the City Council for approval. The Personnel Officer or designee shall give reasonable written notice to each recognized employee organization affected by the ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation or amendment thereof proposed to be adopted, if within the scope of representation. The rules shall contain regulations governing the personnel system including:

A. Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a classification plan covering all positions including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

B. Preparation, implementation, revision, and maintenance of an employee compensation plan including base salary and fringe benefit provisions;

C. Announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for employment;

D. Preparation and conduct of examinations and/or other selection methods and the establishment and use of resulting employment list containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

E. Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments;

F. Establishment of probationary periods;

G. Evaluation of employee performance;

H. Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees;

I. Separation of employees from the City service;

J. The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records;

K. The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation and application of this chapter and any rules adopted under this chapter;

L. Any other matter relating to personnel matters. (Ord. 692 § 5, 2009; Ord. 90 § 4, 1983)

2.16.050 Improper political activity.
The political activities of City employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of State law. (Ord. 692 § 2, 2009; Ord. 90 § 6, 1983. Formerly 2.16.060)

Chapter 2.18
CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS*
Sections:

2.18.010    Applicability.

2.18.020    Meeting defined.

2.18.030    Effect of nonobservance of chapter.

2.18.040    Time and place of regular meetings.

2.18.050    Special meetings.

2.18.060    Adjournment.

2.18.070    Agenda – Order of business.

2.18.080    Procedure for public hearing.

2.18.090    Minutes of meeting.

2.18.100    Voting.

2.18.110    Presiding officer – Designated.

2.18.120    Presiding officer – Duties and powers.

2.18.130    Speaking rights of members.

2.18.140    Motions.

2.18.150    Record of debate and remarks of Councilmembers.

2.18.160    Rules of order.

2.18.170    Addressing the Council.

2.18.180    Rules of decorum – Enforcement.

2.18.190    Attendance compelled by subpoena.

 

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 115 as amended by Ord. 167.

2.18.010 Applicability.
This chapter shall establish the Council procedure regulations of the City. It shall apply to all regular and special meetings of the City Council, and in addition, PMC 2.18.020, 2.18.030, 2.18.050, 2.18.060, 2.18.070(C), 2.18.090, 2.18.100(A), (B) and (D), and 2.18.110 through 2.18.180 inclusive, shall apply to all meetings of all City committees. When applied to committees, “Council” shall mean “Committee,” “Councilmember” shall mean “Committee Member,” “Mayor” shall mean “Chair,” “Deputy Mayor” shall mean “Vice Chair,” and “Clerk” shall mean “Secretary.” Reference to ordinances and public hearings apply only to the City Council. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.020 Meeting defined.
A. “Meeting” means the gathering together of a majority of the members of the City Council, each member within normal hearing distance of the other, at the time and place established by ordinance, resolution, or motion, for regular or adjourned meetings or at such other time and place as authorized by law for special meetings, for the purpose of acting in their official capacity as the legislative body of the City; to make decisions, commitments or promises by a majority of the Council or by actual vote by a majority of the vote of the Council when sitting as a body or entity upon a motion, proposal, resolution, order or ordinance.

B. Unless otherwise authorized by law to be held in private, all such meetings shall be open to the public; provided, however, the City Council may hold closed sessions as authorized by State law.

C. No other gathering of the persons who constitute the City Council or any portion thereof, shall be considered a meeting. Any action or decision required by law to be taken or made at a meeting shall be invalid and of no force and effect if the same is not taken or made at a meeting as defined in this section.

D. The foregoing shall not prevent less than a quorum, otherwise gathered at the time and place and for the purpose of conducting a meeting, from adjourning from time to time in accord with law until a quorum is present.

E. If at any time the legislature of the State or the final decision of an appellate court of the State should define a meeting of the City Council other than as set forth in this section, such legislative or final judicial definition shall thereafter supersede the definition set forth in this section.

F. A majority of the full authorized membership of the Council shall constitute a quorum.

G. A Councilmember present but abstaining shall be counted for purposes of constituting a quorum.

H. A Councilmember disqualified from voting by law shall not be counted for purposes of constituting a quorum. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.030 Effect of nonobservance of chapter.
Failure to observe the rules set forth in this chapter shall not invalidate any action taken which is otherwise lawful but defective only for failure to follow the procedure outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992).

2.18.040 Time and place of regular meetings.
Unless canceled, the City Council shall hold regular meetings in the Council Chambers of City Hall, 13325 Civic Center Drive, in the City or at such other place as may be determined by the Council, on the first and third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. When the day of each regular meeting of the Council falls on a holiday as defined in California Government Code Section 6700, no meeting shall be held on such holiday, but a regular meeting shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the next succeeding business day thereafter, or at such time and place as may be previously established by the Council. (Ord. 687 § 1, 2009; Ord. 651 § 1, 2007; Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.050 Special meetings.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor or by any two members of the City Council by delivering personally or by mail written notice to each Councilmember and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice at least 24 hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the notice and by posting, at least 24 hours prior to the special meeting in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public.

A. The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted.

B. No other business shall be considered at such meetings.

C. Such written notice may be dispensed with as to any Councilmember who, at or prior to the time the meeting convenes, files with the City Clerk a written waiver of notice.

D. Such waiver may be given by telegram.

E. Such written notice may also be dispensed with as to any Councilmember who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.060 Adjournment.
A. Any meeting may either be terminated or continued to another time, place or date by adjournment, regardless of whether or not all matters on the agenda or under discussion have been completed, acted on or concluded. Notwithstanding the above, no meeting shall be terminated before closing all public hearings notified for that meeting or without first continuing such public hearings to another time, place and date. Subject to the above, a motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.

B. If less than a majority of the Council appears at a regular meeting, any member or, if all members are absent, the City Clerk, shall adjourn the meeting to a stated day and hour. The Clerk shall cause notice of the adjournment to be delivered to each Councilmember at least three hours before the adjourned meeting and posted within 24 hours after the time of the adjournment. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.070 Agenda – Order of business.
A. All reports, communications, ordinances, contract documents or other matters, including basic fact and matters pertinent thereto, which have been submitted for the agenda, should be distributed to the City Council no later than 5:00 p.m. of the Thursday before any Tuesday meeting or three business days prior to any Council meeting, whichever is shorter. Upon distribution to the Council, the agenda materials shall become public records available to the public. The agenda shall be posted in accordance with Government Code Section 54954.2(a).

B. The business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order:

1. Roll call;

2. Pledge of Allegiance;

3. City Councilmember announcements;

4. Proclamations and awards;

5. Public oral communications;

6. Consent items;

7. Continued public hearings and ordinance readings;

8. New public hearings and ordinance readings;

9. Staff reports;

10. City Manager items;

11. City Attorney items;

12. Mayor- and Council-initiated items;

13. Adjournment.

The regular order of business may be changed or suspended for any purpose at any particular meeting by the Mayor with the consent of the majority of the Councilmembers present.

C. No matters other than those listed on the agenda shall be acted upon by the Council; provided, however, that matters not on the agenda may be submitted for Council consideration and action pursuant to Government Code Section 54954.2 as follows:

1. Upon a determination by a majority vote of Council that an emergency situation exists, as defined in Government Code Section 54956.5;

2. Upon a determination by a two-thirds vote of Council, or if less than two-thirds of the members are present, a unanimous vote of those members present, that the need to take action arose subsequent to the agenda being posted; and

3. The item was posted for a prior meeting of the Council occurring not more than five calendar days prior to the date action is taken on the item, and at the prior meeting the item was continued to the meeting at which action is being taken. (Ord. 651 § 2, 2007; Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.080 Procedure for public hearing.
Whenever a public hearing must be held pursuant to any provision of law, the City Council shall observe the following procedural requirements:

A. A public hearing shall be opened by the Mayor.

B. Once opened, the City staff shall present their reports, comments and responses to Council inquiries on the subject of the public hearing.

C. Public testimony on the matter shall be invited and heard; the Council and staff may comment on the public testimony.

D. The public hearing shall be closed by a majority vote of the City Council.

E. After the public hearing is closed, the City Council and staff may discuss the matter, but no new information may be introduced unless the public hearing is reopened. A public hearing upon which the Council has acted by majority vote may only be reopened upon the motion of a member of the City Council, and only if all persons who spoke during the hearing are still present.

F. The City Council shall take action on the subject matter of the public hearing. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.090 Minutes of meeting.
A. Tape recordings, word processors, electronic aids, and every other means of recording upon any form of communication or representation, including letters, words, pictures, sounds or symbols, or combination thereof, and notes, papers, magnetic or paper tapes, magnetic or punched cards, discs or drums may be used by the City Clerk for the sole purpose of facilitating the preparation of the minutes of the City Council meeting and not for preserving its information content for public reference.

B. The documents, aids and recordings are not public records and may be destroyed immediately after the minutes of the City Council meeting are approved.

C. Unless the reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a member of the Council, such minutes may be approved as a consent item.

D. No minutes or written record of closed sessions of the City Council shall be kept except as required by State law or as directed by majority vote of the City Council. The Council shall report at a public meeting any action taken in closed session, as required by Government Code Section 54957.1. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.100 Voting.
A. Voting may be conducted by the use of the voting light systems installed in the Council Chambers. A red light designates a “no” or “negative” vote. A green light designates a “yes” or “affirmative” vote. A white light designates an “abstain” or “abstention.” When a member of the Council votes to “abstain,” such member shall audibly state the reason for abstaining.

B. When the Council is voting by voice vote, an affirmative vote shall be registered by the oral statement of “yes” or “aye” by the Councilmember voting. Silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. A negative vote shall be registered by the oral statement “no” or “nay” by the Councilmember voting.

C. Ordinances shall be voted upon by roll call vote as announced by the City Clerk. All ordinances, resolutions and other matters submitted to the Council shall be passed or defeated by a majority vote of the Council unless a greater number of votes may be required by law. The word “majority” means three votes. In instances where a majority vote cannot be obtained and there have been no abstentions on the item and no additional action is taken, such matter shall automatically be added to the next agenda of the Council.

D. An abstention (as opposed to a disqualification) shall constitute an affirmative vote, so long as there is at least one additional affirmative vote other than an abstention, except and unless the abstention results from absence at a time that the item was previously discussed. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.110 Presiding officer – Designated.
A. The presiding officer of the Council shall be the Mayor, or, when absent, the Deputy Mayor.

B. Said officer shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the Council to order.

C. In the absence of the Mayor and Deputy Mayor, the City Clerk shall call the Council to order, whereupon a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by the members of the Council present.

D. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Deputy Mayor, the temporary presiding officer shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the particular business immediately before the Council at that time. Wherever in this chapter the term “Mayor” is used, it shall apply equally to the presiding officer as defined in this section. The Mayor shall have a vote but no veto power, and may move, second and debate from the chair. In the event of the taking of a roll call for the purpose of voting or otherwise, the Mayor’s name shall be called last. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.120 Presiding officer – Duties and powers.
A. The Mayor shall sign all ordinances, resolutions and other documents necessitating said officer’s signature; shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the Council; shall state, or call upon the Clerk to state, the question before the Council to be voted upon; shall call for the vote and announce the decision of the Council on all subjects; shall decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal by the Council or any Councilmember, in which event a majority vote of the Council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order; shall have and exercise such other powers and duties as are authorized by law.

B. The Mayor shall have power, authority and discretion, without a vote of the Council to:

1. Set time limits on Council discussion on any matter;

2. Set time limits on any communications from members of the public to the Council; in no event shall any individual public communication exceed three minutes without the consent of a majority of the Council present;

3. Declare the opening of a public hearing;

4. Rule any motion on a subject not on the agenda as being out of order, in which case the motion shall thereafter be void;

5. Table any motion on any matter until the next regular or special Council meeting whenever the City Attorney advises that there is a question as to the validity or constitutionality of the particular proposed course of action which is the subject matter of such motion;

6. May require any witness testifying to facts at any public hearing to be sworn before proceeding further with any such testimony;

7. Rule any speaker out of order, terminate any communication with the Council from a member of the public and/or declare a recess in order to establish order to any meeting. The Mayor, or such other member of the Council as may be presiding, may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all members. The Mayor shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Councilmember by reason of being Mayor or acting as the presiding officer. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.130 Speaking rights of members.
A. Every Councilmember desiring to speak shall address the chair. Upon recognition by the Mayor, a Councilmember shall speak only to the question under debate.

B. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking except to be called to order, or as otherwise provided in this chapter. If a member is called to order while speaking, said member shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined; if in order, said member shall be permitted to proceed.

C. The Councilmember moving the adoption of an ordinance, resolution or Council action shall have the privilege of being the final speaker. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.140 Motions.
A. Only one motion may be before the Council at any time.

B. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Council may be made only at the meeting at which such action was taken. Such motion must be made by a member of the prevailing side. The motion may be made at any time no other motion is pending, and shall be subject to debate. No member of the Council may make or remake the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the Council, if the subject matter of such motion, or such motion, has previously been tabled.

C. A motion to table takes precedence over all other motions and shall be subject to debate. When a motion to table is passed, the matter so tabled shall not again be considered by the Council unless such matter is taken from the table by a majority vote of the Council.

D. A matter once tabled shall not be placed on the agenda nor discussed unless a member who had voted to table such matter requests the Council to have such matter taken from the table, or requests the Clerk to place such matter on the agenda for the purpose of determining whether or not such matter shall be taken from the table. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.150 Record of debate and remarks of Councilmembers.
A. A Councilmember may request through the Mayor the privilege of having an abstract of any statement on any subject under consideration by the Council entered in the minutes. If the Council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. The Clerk may be directed by the Mayor, with consent of the Council, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question coming regularly before the Council.

B. Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his dissent from, or his protest against, any action of the Council entered on the minutes. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.160 Rules of order.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, proceedings of the Council shall be governed by common sense and good taste. In the event of a dispute concerning procedural matters not specifically covered in this chapter, the majority vote of the Council shall prevail.

B. Rules adopted to expedite the transaction of business of the Council in an orderly fashion are deemed to be procedural only, and the failure to strictly observe such rules shall not affect the jurisdiction of the Council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that is otherwise held in conformity with the law. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.170 Addressing the Council.
A. Any person desiring to address the Council shall first obtain permission of the Mayor. Unless the Mayor rules otherwise, any person shall have the right to address the Council upon obtaining recognition from the Mayor to speak subject to the following:

1. Public Hearings. Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address the Council orally or in writing relating to matters which are then subject to a public hearing. The order of presentation and the time thereof shall be under the direction and control of the Mayor.

2. Written Communications. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the Council by written communication with regard to matters with which they are concerned and are then the subject of Council discussion. When copies of such communications are furnished to each Councilmember present, such written communications shall not be read aloud at the meeting unless so ordered by a majority vote of the Council. Written communications from the administrative staff shall not be read aloud unless requested by the writer or any Councilmember.

3. Oral Communications.

a. Any person may address the Council by oral communications with regard to any City related matter with which such person is concerned and is then the subject of Council discussion. Preference shall be given to those persons who have first notified the City in writing of their desire to speak. All speakers shall give written notice to the City Clerk in a form approved by the City Council in order that the same may appear on the minutes of the Council meeting.

b. Each person addressing the Council shall speak into the microphone at the speaker’s podium when the same are in use, shall state his or her name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and, unless further time is granted by the Mayor, shall limit the address to three minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body, and not to any member thereof. No person other than the Council and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of the Mayor. No person shall address or question a Councilmember, the City Attorney, the City Manager or other official without the prior consent of the Mayor.

4. The Mayor shall not permit any communication, written or oral, to be made or submitted unless such communication addresses the agenda item then under discussion.

B. After a motion is made by a Councilmember, no person shall address the Council without first securing the permission of the Mayor and Council to do so.

C. Anonymous communications shall not be considered, nor placed on the agenda.

D. When any identifiable group of persons, as opposed to the general public at large, wishes to address the Council on the same agenda item, the Mayor shall have the discretion to request that a spokesperson be chosen by said group to address the Council. If additional issues are to be presented at the hearing by any other member of such group, the Mayor may limit the number of persons and the time periods to address the Council, so as to avoid unnecessary repetition of issues before the Council. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.180 Rules of decorum – Enforcement.
A. While the Council is in session, all persons shall preserve the order and decorum of the session. The standards of order and decorum shall be governed by common sense.

B. All persons must conduct themselves in a manner consistent with good taste and generally accepted standards of appropriate behavior.

C. Any person who does not comply with the above rules and who disrupts the orderly course of the meeting is guilty of an infraction and may be called out of order by the Mayor, removed from the podium, or, if necessary to maintain order, barred from further audience before that session of the Council. (Ord. 542 § 1, 2001; Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

2.18.190 Attendance compelled by subpoena.
Attendance of absent members of the City Council may be compelled by the issuance of a subpoena signed by the members of Council presiding over the Councilmembers attending a regular or special meeting which may be attended by less than a majority of the Council. A subpoena shall issue only upon a majority vote of the members present. Any member so subpoenaed shall obey such subpoena and shall participate in good faith in the meeting to which such member is subpoenaed in order that the essential business of the Council may be conducted. Any member who fails to obey such subpoena or fails to participate in such meeting shall be subject to the criminal penalties provided for breach of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 2.20
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
Sections:

2.20.010    Scope.

2.20.020    Filing of appeal.

2.20.030    City response.

2.20.040    Conduct of hearing.

2.20.050    Deposits.

2.20.060    Hearing officer.

2.20.070    Hearing procedure.

2.20.080    Hearing officer’s decision.

2.20.090    Right to judicial review.

2.20.010 Scope.
Except for personnel matters, legal determinations, and as expressly otherwise provided to the contrary in this code, any interested person may appeal the final decision of any officer, board, committee, commission or department subordinate to the hearing officer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 334 § 1, 1991)

2.20.020 Filing of appeal.
A. To be sufficient for filing, the written appeal must be delivered to the City Clerk, together with the fee established by resolution and any other amount due pursuant to PMC 2.20.050, within 10 calendar days following the decision for which a review is sought. If the day falls on Saturday, Sunday or other day when City Hall is closed, the deadline shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. of the next working day.

The appeal must be legible and set forth:

1. The appellant’s full name, address and phone number;

2. The subordinate entity;

3. The date of the determination;

4. The determination for which review is sought;

5. The appellant’s interest in the appealed determination;

6. Each reason why the appellant appeals the determination including, if applicable, the Poway Municipal Code sections that are to be appealed; and

7. Be accompanied by the appeal fee established by resolution.

B. An insufficient appeal shall be returned to the appellant.

C. If the appeal is sufficient, the City Clerk shall set the matter for consideration by the hearing officer to be held in accordance with PMC 2.20.070.

D. The City Clerk shall mail the appeal document to the applicant, if appropriate, or other real party in interest, with notice of the time, date and location of the hearing and notice of the opportunity to submit a written response to the appeal request at least 14 calendar days prior to the initial consideration by the hearing officer. The City reserves the right to reschedule the hearing date as needed. In such cases, notice of the change will immediately be communicated to the appellant.

E. The City Clerk shall deliver a copy of the appeal document to the appropriate City department which will prepare a City response to the request for the appeal. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 492 § 1, 1998; Ord. 334 § 1, 1991)

2.20.030 City response.
The City’s response to the appeal document and any written position submitted by the applicant or real party in interest shall be made available to the public, at City Hall, no less than seven calendar days prior to the date set for consideration by the hearing officer if received by the City Clerk by that date. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 334 § 1, 1991)

2.20.040 Conduct of hearing.
The hearing officer shall hear all facts and testimony deemed appropriate and consider the appeal, the written position of the applicant or real party in interest, the City response, and any other written or oral comments from members of the public. No noticed public hearing shall be required unless specifically required by this code. The appeal hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and constitutional due process. The hearing officer may grant in whole or in part or may deny the appeal. The determination of the hearing officer shall constitute a final decision. The hearing officer’s decision shall be issued in writing within 60 days of the hearing. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 334 § 1, 1991)

2.20.050 Deposits.
A. The request for hearing shall be accompanied by a deposit in the full amount of any required or past due fee or fine. Any deposit shall be refunded within 10 days of a determination, after a hearing, that the responsible person charged was not responsible for the amount due as charged in the final decision.

B. Upon the submittal of a hardship waiver affidavit by a responsible person within the appeal period requesting a waiver of any fee or fine, the City Manager shall issue a letter granting or denying the request. If waiver is denied, the appeal shall be dismissed unless the full amount of the fine is deposited and unless any outstanding fees and fines are paid within five days of the date of the letter. The determination of the City Manager shall be final and shall not be subject to appeal or judicial review. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019)

2.20.060 Hearing officer.
The Poway City Manager shall designate the hearing officer for the appeal hearing. The compensation of the hearing officer, if any, shall be paid by the City in accordance with the adopted master fee schedule. Compensation shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon whether or not appeals are upheld by the hearing officer.

Any person, firm or corporation designated to serve as a hearing officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest, or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 170.1. The appellant may challenge the hearing officer’s impartiality prior to the hearing by filing a statement with the City Manager objecting to the hearing before the hearing officer and setting forth the grounds for disqualification. The question of disqualification shall be heard and determined in writing by the City Manager within 10 days following the date on which the disqualification statement is filed. If a disqualification statement is filed, all time periods set forth in PMC 2.20.070 and 2.20.080 shall be extended by 10 days. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019)

2.20.070 Hearing procedure.
A. No appeal hearing before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until an appeal request has been completed and submitted in accordance with PMC 2.20.020, and the deposit has been made pursuant to PMC 2.20.050 or hardship waiver granted.

B. A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not sooner than 15 and not more than 90 days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The appellant shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing, and the name of the hearing officer, at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.

C. The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to the matters on appeal. Courtroom rules of evidence shall not apply. Relevant hearsay evidence and written reports may be admitted whether or not the speaker or author is present to testify on condition that the hearing officer determines that the evidence is reliable. Admission of evidence and the conduct of the hearing shall be controlled by the hearing officer in accordance with the fundamentals of due process.

D. The appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation. The City’s case shall be presented by the Development Services Director or designee, an enforcement officer or by the City Attorney. The appellant may be represented by counsel, but the City shall be notified in writing of such representation at least seven days prior to the appeal hearing.

E. The failure of the appellant to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of appeal rights described in this chapter and the appellant will forfeit the deposit described in PMC 2.20.050 as payment associated with the final decision. Upon a showing of good cause by the appellant in writing to the hearing officer and prior to the hearing, the hearing officer may excuse the offender’s failure to appear at the hearing and reschedule the hearing. Under no circumstances shall the hearing be rescheduled more than one time. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to mean the offender is excused from the requirement of paying the fees and/or fines or appearing at a hearing.

F. Any documents prepared by the City in connection with the final decision shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

G. If the appellant submits to the City a written request, the City shall provide to the appellant copies of all documents that it intends to introduce at the hearing. Such copies shall be provided to the appellant within five days prior to the hearing or a lesser period upon a showing of cause. If, after copies of documents have been provided to appellant, the City determines to submit to the hearing officer additional documents then, whenever possible, a copy of such documents shall be provided to the appellant prior to the hearing.

H. The hearing is intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of the California Evidence Code and discovery shall not apply, except that irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded at the hearing officer’s discretion.

I. Each party shall have the opportunity to offer testimony and evidence and cross-examine witnesses in support of his or her case.

J. The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019)

2.20.080 Hearing officer’s decision.
A. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer may announce a decision orally, but, in any event, shall prepare a written decision. The decision shall be provided to the parties within 10 days of the hearing and shall either affirm, amend or dismiss the final decision. The decision shall briefly state the reasons for the conclusion of the hearing officer. The City shall serve the decision on the appellant in accordance with PMC 1.10.040.

B. If the hearing officer upholds the citation issuance, then the deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. If a hardship waiver was granted, the decision shall set forth a payment schedule for the fine.

C. If the hearing officer dismisses the final decision, then the City shall promptly refund the deposit or fees as applicable to the final decision. This shall not include other fines or fees that were not directly associated with the appeal.

D. The hearing officer shall not have the power to reduce fees or the fine. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019)

2.20.090 Right to judicial review.
Either the City or the appellant aggrieved by a decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the decision by filing a petition for review with the San Diego Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4(b). Said procedure shall be available for all judicial review under this chapter, notwithstanding that the term or condition being enforced pursuant to this chapter may not be a matter covered by Section 53069.4(a). Judicial review of a citation shall not be available without first participating in a hearing as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019)

Chapter 2.21
REHEARING
Sections:

2.21.010    Scope.

2.21.020    Filing of request for rehearing.

2.21.030    Filing fee.

2.21.040    City response.

2.21.050    Notice of hearing.

2.21.060    Conduct of hearing.

2.21.010 Scope.
The City Council’s action to approve or deny is final. The City Council may rehear and reconsider its action if there is new and different evidence not available at the previous hearing. (Ord. 492 § 2, 1998)

2.21.020 Filing of request for rehearing.
The applicant or any other interested person adversely affected by the action may file a written request for a rehearing along with the new and different evidence with the City Council. Any such request must be filed in writing within 10 calendar days after the action which is the subject of the request. (Ord. 492 § 2, 1998)

2.21.030 Filing fee.
The written request shall be accompanied by a fee to be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 492 § 2, 1998)

2.21.040 City response.
Upon receipt of the request and filing fee, the City Clerk shall submit the matter to the City Council as soon as possible, but in no case later than 30 days. At that meeting the City Council may, at its discretion, either take no further action on the request or set the matter for another public hearing which shall be held within 30 days after the Council accepted the request for a rehearing unless the applicant consents to a continuance. (Ord. 492 § 2, 1998)

2.21.050 Notice of hearing.
If the City Council accepts the request for a rehearing, notice shall be given not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City. Notice shall also be mailed to all those who received notice of the original hearing. (Ord. 492 § 2, 1998)

2.21.060 Conduct of hearing.
The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 2.18 PMC and constitutional due process. The determination of the City Council at the rehearing shall constitute a final decision. (Ord. 492 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 2.24
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Sections:

2.24.010    Date of elections.

2.24.020    Repealed.

2.24.010 Date of elections.
Pursuant to Section 36503.5 of the State Government Code, the general election for the City shall be held on the same day as the day of the statewide general election. (Ord. 86 § 1, 1983)

2.24.020 Vacancies – Special election to fill after a term of temporary appointee.
Repealed by Ord. 690. (Ord. 366 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 2.28
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES
Sections:

2.28.010    Intent and purpose.

2.28.020    Definitions.

2.28.030    Limitations.

2.28.040    Identification of expenditures by independent committees.

2.28.050    Election campaign accounts.

2.28.060    Statements generally.

2.28.070    Reporting threshold amount.

2.28.080    Media exemptions.

2.28.090    Suppliers of goods and services – Disclosure of records required.

2.28.100    Late filing of campaign statement.

2.28.110    Enforcement.

2.28.120    Violation – Penalty.

2.28.130    Civil liability and penalties.

2.28.140    Officeholder accounts prohibited.

2.28.150    Application of Government Code Section 83116.5.

2.28.010 Intent and purpose.
It is the intent of the City Council in enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter to place realistic and enforceable limits on the amount individuals may contribute to political campaigns in municipal elections, as well as to supplement the requirements of State law with regard to the making and reporting of campaign contributions and expenditures, for the purpose of preventing the exercise by campaign contributors of potential undue or improper influence over elected officials and to inform the public of the sources and objects of campaign contributions and expenditures. The City Council finds that municipal elections are municipal affairs and that the regulation of campaign expenditures and contributions in municipal elections is not preempted by general State law and is the proper subject of municipal regulation under authority granted to cities by Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and Government Code Section 81013. The contribution limitations of this chapter shall not apply to ballot measure elections or to that portion of a recall election in which the electorate determines whether or not to recall an officeholder, but shall apply to all candidate elections, including the candidate election portion of a consolidated recall election. It is the intent of the City Council that this chapter be interpreted in a manner consistent with Constitutional requirements. Should any provision of this chapter be determined to be invalid for any reason, the remainder shall be severed therefrom and shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended, Government Code Sections 82000 et seq., except as follows:

A. “Charitable organization” shall mean any bona fide charitable, educational, civic, religious, or similar tax exempt nonprofit organization.

B. “Committee” shall have the meaning set forth in Government Code Section 82013 as amended from time to time, except that all dollar limits set forth therein shall be “$100.00 or more.”

C. “Contribution” shall have the meaning set forth in Government Code Section 82015, as amended from time to time, except that the exclusion set forth therein for costs of a meeting or fund-raising event in the home or office of the occupant shall be limited to costs of “$100.00 or less.”

D. “Election” means any City general, special, initiative, referendum or recall election.

E. “Entity” means any corporation, company, association, or other organization other than an individual or a political party.

F. “Independent committee” means any committee which receives contributions or makes expenditures for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence a City election which is neither controlled by a candidate nor coordinates its expenditures with the expenditures of a candidate or a committee controlled by a candidate.

G. “Individual” means a sole human being.

H. “Political party” means any organization qualified to participate in any primary election in the State of California as set forth in California Elections Code Section 5100, or such law as may replace Section 5100. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.030 Limitations.
A. Contributions Generally.

1. Except as expressly provided in this section, no individual or political party (including any controlled committee or independent committee) shall make, nor shall any person solicit or accept, any contribution in aid of and/or in opposition to the nomination or election of a candidate which will cause the total amount contributed to (a) the candidate and any controlled committee of such candidate, or to (b) any independent committee, by such person in a single election to exceed $100.00.

2. The prohibition of subsection (A)(1) of this section shall not apply to any independent committee which receives contributions to be expended in the elections of more than one city.

3. The $100.00 limitation of subsection (A)(1) of this section is not a limitation upon expenditures and shall not limit the expenditures by any candidate or any committee.

4. Spouses are two separate individuals for purposes of the contribution limitation of subsection (A)(1) of this section.

5. a. Joint funding of campaign expenditures by two or more committees shall not be deemed a contribution by any such committee to any candidate; provided, that each such committee contributes equal amounts to each such expenditure.

b. Any such joint expenditure shall cause any theretofore independent committee participating therein to be deemed a controlled committee of any and all candidates for whose benefit such joint expenditure is made.

c. Any independent committee which becomes a controlled committee by reason of subsection (A)(5)(b) of this section shall be deemed a controlled committee for purposes of the $100.00 limitation on contributions to the committee, effective retroactive to the date upon which the first contribution to such committee was received by such committee.

6. The $100.00 limitation of subsection (A)(1) of this section shall not apply to a candidate in aid of himself or herself, or to any committee which makes expenditures solely for the purpose of advocating the adoption or defeat of a ballot measure or to any committee advocating or opposing the recall of an officeholder. Said limitation shall apply to the candidate election portion of a recall.

7. Subject to subsections (A)(5)(b) and (c) of this section, the $100.00 limitation of subsection (A)(1) of this section shall not apply to any independent committee composed solely of:

a. One individual; or

b. One other person organized principally for a purpose other than participating in or influencing an election or elections.

8. No person shall make a contribution anonymously or under an assumed name. No person shall make a contribution on behalf of another person, whether as agent, intermediary, or otherwise.

9. Contributions are not permitted to be retained by a candidate or any committee when received from anonymous sources or from persons who do not consent to having their name made known. Any such contributions shall be refunded to the donor (if known) or (if unknown) shall be turned over to the City Clerk and deposited to the City’s treasury, in any event within 72 hours of receipt.

10. No committee shall make any expenditures to influence or attempt to influence the voters in a City election if such committee has not complied with the contribution limitations imposed by this chapter upon such committees’ receipt of funds.

B. Prohibited Activities.

1. No person or entity, other than an individual or political party, shall make a contribution to any candidate or committee; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to contributions made to a committee which is organized solely for the purpose of supporting or opposing the qualification for the ballot or adoption of one or more City measures.

2. No officer, employee, agent or attorney or other representative of a person covered by this subsection shall aid, abet, advise, or participate in a violation of this section.

3. No person shall knowingly accept a payment or contribution made in a violation of this section.

4. If a committee treasurer is offered a contribution which would be in excess of the limitation, the treasurer must refuse the contribution. If, however, a contribution is deposited into the campaign trust account which is in violation of this section, the treasurer shall report in writing within five days of learning of the illegal nature of the contribution to the City Clerk the facts surrounding such contribution. Any such contribution so deposited shall be paid promptly, from available campaign funds, if any, to the City, and shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.040 Identification of expenditures by independent committees.
Independent committees which make expenditures for or against a candidate shall indicate clearly on any material published, displayed or broadcast the name of the independent committee and the fact that the material was paid for by an independent committee, and the true name of any person on whose behalf the expenditure is made if made as the agent or intermediary of another. Every independent committee shall comply with all of the reporting requirements imposed on candidates and committees by this chapter, including both the contributions and the expenditures made by such committee. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.050 Election campaign accounts.
A. Election Campaign Account. Each candidate’s campaign treasurer and every committee, whether composed of the candidate alone, another single individual, or otherwise, that receives or expends more than $200.00, shall open a checking account at a State or Federally chartered bank or savings and loan association. The account shall be identified as the election campaign account. The account number of each such account shall be provided to the City Clerk in writing within 10 days of the opening of such account. Any committee that receives or expends more than $200.00 shall file with the City Clerk a statement of organization in substantially the form required by State law not later than 10 days following the opening of the election campaign account.

B. Deposit of Contributions. All campaign contributions accepted by a campaign treasurer or committee shall be deposited within five days of receipt into the election campaign account by the campaign treasurer, committee or authorized agent thereof.

C. Expenditures. Campaign expenditures made after a checking account is required to be opened shall be made only by checks drawn against the election campaign account by the campaign treasurer, committee, or authorized agent.

1. No campaign treasurer, committee, or authorized agent shall draw checks against the election campaign account by the campaign treasurer, committee, or authorized agent.

2. Funds in the election campaign account shall not be considered for any purpose to be personal funds of a candidate, campaign treasurer, or any other person. The funds shall be held in trust.

3. For purposes of this section, an expenditure shall be deemed made by check drawn against the election campaign account if, (a) the maker of the expenditures is reimbursed by such check, and (b) the expenditure is reported by the candidate or committee, both within the time limits required for reporting as provided in PMC 2.28.060(A).

D. Access to Records by City Clerk. The City Clerk shall have full access during business hours to the bank’s or savings and loan association’s records concerning all election campaign accounts.

E. Disbursements of Unexpended Campaign Funds. If the final campaign statement for a candidate or any committee discloses an unexpended surplus, the candidate or committee shall before the end of the post-election reporting period, which is:

June 30 for elections held between January 1 and June 30,

December 31 for elections held between July 1 and December 31

disburse the whole of the surplus to a charitable organization; provided, however, that the candidate or committee shall not claim the donation as a deduction from income for tax purposes. The candidate or committee, or authorized agent thereof, shall file a campaign statement with the City Clerk before the end of the post-election reporting period, verifying the closure and listing the donees of all disbursements authorized by this section and the dollar amounts given to each donee. If the deadline is not met, the campaign funds will become “surplus” at the end of the post-election reporting period and may not be used to run for office.

F. Retention of Records. The candidate, committee or authorized agent thereof shall retain all campaign records for a period of four years after the election. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.060 Statements generally.
A. Required. Subject to Government Code Section 81009.5, each candidate and each committee, including all independent committees, shall file as a public record with the City Clerk campaign statements showing the amounts of contributions received and expenditures made with respect to such election at the time required by the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended. The statements are to be completed on campaign statement forms required to be filed by State law. Such statements shall contain a declaration by the candidate or committee chairperson that the candidate or committee has neither accepted nor solicited any campaign contribution in excess of the limitations of or in contravention of PMC 2.28.030. All such statements filed by independent committees shall, in addition to all other requirements, identify each candidate or measure for or against whom each reported expenditure was made. Statements filed by independent committees shall be required to report only those expenditures in connection with communications that expressly advocate the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate or ballot measure.

B. Contributions. Each campaign statement shall show the total cumulative amount of contributions received during the period covered by the statement from persons who have given $25.00 or less and the total cumulative amount of contributions received during the period covered by the statement from persons who have given a total of more than $25.00. Each person who has contributed more than $25.00 shall be listed by name, address, occupation, employer and amount contributed. The total amount received from anonymous sources and for persons who have not consented to publication shall be listed. In the event that any portion of the contributions was received in connection with a fundraiser event, then the statement shall list the gross receipts, the date and location of each event.

C. Expenditures Generally. Each campaign statement shall show the total amount of expenditures made during the period covered by the statement to persons who have received $25.00. Each person who has received a total of more than $25.00 shall be listed by name and address, together with a brief description of the purpose of the expenditures. Any expenditure made on behalf of another person, whether as agent or intermediary or otherwise, shall be reported as such, including the true name of the individual on whose behalf the expenditure was made.

D. Exemption. Nothing in this section shall impose upon any committee which participates in elections in jurisdictions in addition to the City any filing requirements additional to or different from those set forth in Chapter 4 of the Political Reform Act of 1974, so long as Government Code Section 81009.5(b) prohibits the imposition of such different or additional requirements on such committees. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.070 Reporting threshold amount.
A candidate or committee need not file a campaign statement if neither the cumulative receipts nor the cumulative expenditures exceed $200.00. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.080 Media exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any publication or broadcast or to any news story, commentary or editorial distributed through the facilities of a broadcasting station or bona fide newspaper, magazine or other periodical publication. A news story, commentary or editorial is not considered to be distributed through a bona fide newspaper, magazine, or other periodical publication if:

A. Such publication is primarily for distribution to individuals affiliated by membership or stock ownership with the person (other than an individual) distributing it or causing it to be distributed; or

B. Such publication is not primarily for purchase by the public at newsstands or paid by subscription; or

C. The news story, commentary or editorial is distributed by a person (other than an individual) who devotes a substantial part of his activities to attempting to influence the outcome of City elections, or to influence public opinion with respect to matters of City policy or concern. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.090 Suppliers of goods and services – Disclosure of records required.
No person who supplies goods or services, or both goods and services, to a candidate or committee for use in connection with the campaign of the candidate or for or against a measure shall refuse to divulge or disclose to the enforcement authority the record of any expenditures made by the candidate or committee in payment for such goods or services, or both. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.100 Late filing of campaign statement.
A. If any person files a campaign statement after any deadline imposed by this chapter, he or she shall, in addition to any other penalties or remedies established in this chapter, be liable to the City Clerk in amounts as set forth by State guidelines until the statement is filed.

B. The City Clerk shall deposit any funds received under this section into the general fund of the City to defray the cost of municipal elections. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.110 Enforcement.
A. The City Attorney shall not investigate or prosecute any alleged violation of this chapter, but shall defend the constitutionality and legality of this chapter in any civil proceeding in which the City or the City Council is a party.

B. Review of complaints of violation of this chapter and criminal prosecution thereof shall be commenced only by special counsel who shall be the District Attorney, the Attorney General, or such other qualified and independent special counsel or combination of the foregoing as may be appointed by the City Attorney. Such special counsel shall also commence and prosecute civil litigation to compel compliance with this chapter or to enjoin conduct in violation of this chapter. At least 90 days prior to a City election, a special counsel shall be appointed for that election. Should the appointment of additional special counsel become necessary or appropriate, the City Attorney shall appoint such additional special counsel as may be required. No enforcement or prosecution or action of special counsel shall be subject to the review or control of the City Council or the City Attorney.

C. Any person residing in the City who believes that a violation of this chapter has occurred may file a written complaint requesting investigation of such violation by the special counsel. If the special counsel determines that there is reason to believe a violation of this chapter has occurred, it shall conduct an investigation and may commence such administrative, civil or criminal legal action as it deems necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. Special counsel shall decline to investigate any alleged violation hereof which is also an alleged violation of State law and is the subject of a complaint filed with the Fair Political Practices Commission, until the investigation of that complaint is complete.

D. The special counsel shall have such investigative powers as are necessary for the performance of duties described in this chapter and may demand and be furnished records of campaign contributions and expenditures of any person or committee at any time. In the event that production of such records is refused, the special counsel may commence civil litigation to complete such production.

E. The special counsel shall be immune to liability for its enforcement of this chapter.

F. Any action alleging violation of this chapter must be commenced within two years of the time the alleged violation occurred. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.120 Violation – Penalty.
A. Any knowing or wilful violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted, either as an infraction or as a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the prosecutor. The maximum fine which may be imposed for each misdemeanor conviction shall be $1,000. The chairperson and treasurer of any committee shall be both criminally and civilly responsible for any violation of this chapter by the committee. In addition, the candidate shall be both criminally and civilly responsible for any violation of this chapter by the committee. In addition, the candidate shall be both criminally and civilly responsible for any violation by a committee controlled by the candidate.

B. If a candidate is convicted of a wilful violation of PMC 2.28.030, the election to office of such candidate shall be void and such office shall immediately become vacant. In such event the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the procedures as set forth in the Government Code. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.130 Civil liability and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action brought by the special counsel for an amount up to $1,000. In addition thereto, such person shall be liable for the reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred by the special counsel in any civil proceeding filed to enforce the provisions hereof.

B. Enforcement of this chapter through civil action may be filed as an alternative to criminal enforcement pursuant to PMC 2.28.120. Civil enforcement shall not require that the violation be knowing or wilful. All discovery provisions of State law shall be available to the special counsel in the civil enforcement of this chapter. Special counsel shall have the power to subpoena documents and other materials as may be necessary to conduct the investigation. No civil action alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed against a person pursuant to this section if the special counsel is maintaining a criminal action against that person pursuant to PMC 2.28.120.

C. Each violation of this chapter shall be a separate offense subject to the civil penalty provided in subsection A of this section.

D. The special counsel is authorized to settle any civil enforcement hereof prior or subsequent to the filing of a civil action by the imposition of a civil penalty in an amount which does not exceed the potential civil liability, including attorney’s fees, set forth in subsection A of this section. Upon payment in full of such civil penalty, the special counsel shall agree to forbear from filing civil or criminal action or, if action has already been filed, shall agree to dismiss such action. The imposition of all civil penalties shall be made a matter of public record.

E. All civil fines shall be deposited into the general fund. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.140 Officeholder accounts prohibited.
Pursuant to the authority of Government Code Sections 81013 and 85706, and notwithstanding the permissive provisions of Government Code Section 85313, the City Council finds that officeholder accounts are unnecessary in the City, and have the potential in such a small jurisdiction to provide incumbent officeholders with unfair political advantage and give a corrupt appearance to the political process. Officeholder accounts are prohibited. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

2.28.150 Application of Government Code Section 83116.5.
To the greatest extent permitted by law, Government Code Section 83116.5 shall not be applied to any person who is an employee or under contract to the City and is giving advice interpreting the campaign, disclosure, or conflict of interest provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974 or of this chapter as part of that person’s government contract or employment. (Ord. 737 § 2, 2012)

Chapter 2.30
MUNICIPAL ELECTION PETITION CIRCULATION
(Repealed by Ord. 830)

Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:

3.04    Assessor and City Tax Collector

3.08    Real Property Transfer Tax

3.12    Sales and Use Tax

3.16    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.20    Fire Protection Special Tax

3.24    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund

3.25    Law Enforcement Forfeited Property and Assets Program

3.28    Purchasing

Chapter 3.04
ASSESSOR AND CITY TAX COLLECTOR
Sections:

3.04.010    Transfer of duties.

3.04.010 Transfer of duties.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the State Government Code, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the City Assessor and Tax Collector are transferred to the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County. (Ord. 4 § 1, 1980)

Chapter 3.08
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Sections:

3.08.010    Title.

3.08.020    Imposition of tax.

3.08.030    Payment.

3.08.040    Exemptions.

3.08.050    Administration by County Recorder.

3.08.060    Claims for refund.

3.08.070    Copies on file.

3.08.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Poway.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7, commencing with Section 11901, of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State. (Ord. 3 § 1, 1980)

3.08.020 Imposition of tax.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or, the purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale, exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 3 § 2, 1980)

3.08.030 Payment.
Any tax imposed pursuant to PMC 3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 3 § 3, 1980)

3.08.040 Exemptions.
The uniform real property transfer tax shall not apply to those exemptions set forth in California Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 6.7, Chapter 3, commencing with Section 11921. (Ord. 106 § 1(B), 1983; Ord. 3 § 4, 1980)

3.08.050 Administration by County Recorder.
The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 106 § 1(C), 1983; Ord. 3 § 5, 1980)

3.08.060 Claims for refund.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 1.18 PMC. (Ord. 548 § 2, 2001; Ord. 106 § 1(C), 1983; Ord. 3 § 6, 1980)

3.08.070 Copies on file.
Upon its adoption, the City Clerk shall file two copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the County Recorder. (Ord. 106 § 1(C), 1983; Ord. 3 § 8, 1980)

Chapter 3.12
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.12.010    Short title.

3.12.020    Purpose.

3.12.030    Rate.

3.12.040    Operative date.

3.12.050    Contract with State.

3.12.060    Sales tax.

3.12.070    Place of sale.

3.12.080    Use tax.

3.12.090    Adoption of provisions of State law.

3.12.100    Limitations on adoption of State law.

3.12.110    Permit not required.

3.12.120    Exclusions and exemptions.

3.12.125    Exclusions and exemptions.

3.12.126    Operative dates of certain provisions.

3.12.130    Amendments.

3.12.140    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.12.010 Short title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.” (Ord. 2 § 1, 1980)

3.12.020 Purpose.
The City Council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

D. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 4, 1980)

3.12.030 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 2 § 2, 1980)

3.12.040 Operative date.
The operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is January 1, 1981. (Ord. 2 § 3, 1980)

3.12.050 Contract with State.
Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 4, 1980)

3.12.060 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in PMC 3.12.030 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the City on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 4, 1980)

3.12.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 2 § 7, 1980)

3.12.080 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in the City at the rate stated in PMC 3.12.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 2 § 8, 1980)

3.12.090 Adoption of provisions of State law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 9, 1980)

3.12.100 Limitations on adoption of State law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State. The substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. The substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code. The substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 2 § 10, 1980)

3.12.110 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 11, 1980)

3.12.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
A. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

B. The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government.

D. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 118 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2 § 12, 1980)

3.12.125 Exclusions and exemptions.
A. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

B. The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

D. The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

E. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government.

F. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 118 § 2, 1983; Ord. 2 § 12, 1980)

3.12.126 Operative dates of certain provisions.
A. PMC 3.12.120 shall be operative January 1, 1984.

B. PMC 3.12.125 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from City sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those sections read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 118 §§ 2, 3, 4, 1983)

3.12.130 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 13, 1980)

3.12.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 2 § 14, 1980)

Chapter 3.16
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

3.16.010    Title.

3.16.020    Definitions.

3.16.030    Tax imposed.

3.16.031    Additional tax imposed.

3.16.040    Exemptions.

3.16.050    Operator’s duties.

3.16.060    Registration.

3.16.070    Reporting and remitting.

3.16.080    Penalties and interest.

3.16.090    Failure to collect and report tax – Determination of tax by City Treasurer.

3.16.110    Records.

3.16.120    Refunds.

3.16.130    Actions to collect.

3.16.140    Violation – Penalty.

3.16.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “uniform tourist ordinance of the City.” (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.201)

3.16.020 Definitions.
Except where the content otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

A. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. Hotel does not mean any of the following: any hospital, convalescent home, sanitarium, medical clinic, rest home, home for aged people, foster home, or other similar facility operated for the care or treatment of human beings; any asylum, jail, prison, orphanage or other facility in which human beings are detained and housed under legal restraint; any housing owned or controlled by any educational institution and used exclusively to house students, faculty or other employees, and any fraternity or sorority house or similar facility occupied exclusively by students and employees of such educational institutions, and officially recognized or approved by it; any housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes by any organization having qualifications for exemption from property taxes under the laws of the State; any housing owned by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for governmental purposes; any camp as defined in the Labor Code or other housing furnished by an employer exclusively for employees, any camp as defined in the Insurance Code, whether profit or nonprofit, offering recreational activities and operated exclusively for minors under the age of 16.

B. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.

C. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or by the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

D. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, religious group, or any group or combination acting as a unit.

E. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any dedication therefrom whatsoever.

F. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any person who in fact exercises occupancy or in fact is entitled to occupancy for a period of 31 days or more, counting portions of calendar days as full days, shall be deemed not to have been a transient with respect to the first 30 days of occupancy or entitlement to occupancy.

G. “Treasurer” means the City Treasurer of the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.202)

3.16.030 Tax imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the City Treasurer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the City Treasurer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.203)

3.16.031 Additional tax imposed.
In addition to the tax imposed by PMC 3.16.030 for the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay an additional tax in the amount of four percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the City Treasurer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the City Treasurer. (Ord. 559 § 2, 2002; Ord. 431 § 1, 1994)

3.16.040 Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed:

A. Upon any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

B. Upon any Federal or State officer or employee when on official business;

C. Upon any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provisions of Federal law or international treaty;

D. Where the rent is at the rate of $4.00 per day or less;

E. Upon any person who receives a free or complimentary room where the only consideration provided within the definition of rent in PMC 3.16.020(E) is publicity value for the hotel. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.204)

3.16.050 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.205)

3.16.060 Registration.
A. Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the City Treasurer and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

1. The name of the operator;

2. The address of the hotel;

3. The date upon which the certificate was issued;

4. The following:

This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Tourist Tax Ordinance by registering with the City Treasurer for the purpose of collecting from transients the Tourist Tax and remitting said tax to the City Treasurer. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.

(Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.206)

3.16.070 Reporting and remitting.
A. Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the City Treasurer, make a return to the City Treasurer, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City Treasurer.

B. Returns filed or taxes remitted and actually received by the City Treasurer on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter shall be deemed timely filed or remitted. Returns filed or taxes remitted by mail shall be deemed timely filed only if the envelope or similar container enclosing the returns or taxes is addressed to the City Treasurer, has sufficient postage and bears a United States postmark or a postage meter imprint prior to midnight on the last day for reporting or remitting without penalty. If such envelope or the container bears a postage meter imprint as well as a United States post office cancellation mark, the latter shall govern in determining whether the filing or remittance is timely. The City Treasurer may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the City Treasurer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.207)

3.16.080 Penalties and interest.
A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of five percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before the first day of the next calendar month following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of five percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the five percent penalty first imposed.

C. Fraud. If the City Treasurer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required in this chapter to be paid.

F. Audit Deficiency. If, upon audit by the City, an operator is found to be deficient in his return or his remittance or both, the City Treasurer shall immediately notify the operator of the net deficiency and any delinquency penalties if applicable. If the operator fails or refuses to pay the deficient amount and applicable penalties within 14 days after the date of the City Treasurer’s notice, the penalties prescribed in subsection B of this section shall apply, using the fifteenth day after the date of the City Treasurer’s notice as the date when the continued delinquency penalty first applies. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.208)

3.16.090 Failure to collect and report tax – Determination of tax by City Treasurer.
A. If any operator fails or refuses to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter or if such operator maintains records which are inadequate to show the amount of tax due, the City Treasurer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due.

B. As soon as the City Treasurer procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter.

C. In case such determination is made, the City Treasurer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address.

D. Such operator may within 14 days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the City Treasurer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the City Treasurer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the City Treasurer shall give not less than five days’ notice written in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties.

E. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed.

F. After such hearing the City Treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties.

G. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 14 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in PMC 3.16.100. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.209)

3.16.110 Records.
A. It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City including but not limited to all business records, bank statements and copies of Federal and State income tax returns filed by the operator with the State or the United States, which records the Auditor and City Treasurer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.

B. All returns and payments submitted by each operator shall be treated as confidential by the City Treasurer and shall not be released by him except upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction or to an officer or agent of the United States, the State, the County or any city in the County for official use only. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.111)

3.16.120 Refunds.
A. Erroneously or Illegally Collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed in accordance with Chapter 1.18 PMC.

B. Credit Against Taxes. An operator may claim a refund or take a credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the City Treasurer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the person from whom the tax was collected or credited to rent subsequently payable by that person to the operator.

C. Repayment to Transient. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the City Treasurer, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the City Treasurer that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D. Records Required. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 548 § 3, 2001; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.212)

3.16.130 Actions to collect.
A. Responsibility. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City of Poway for the recovery of such amount.

B. Recording Certificate – Lien. If any amount required to be paid to the City under this chapter is not paid when due, the City Treasurer may, within three years after the amount is due, file for record in the office of the County Recorder a certificate specifying the amount of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address as it appears on the records of the City Treasurer of the operator liable for the same and the fact that the City Treasurer has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be paid. From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be paid together with penalties and interest constitutes a lien upon all real property in the City owned by the operator or afterwards and before the lien expires acquired by him. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for 10 years from the time of filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged.

C. Priority and Lien of Tax. The amounts required to be paid by any operator under this chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases:

1. Whenever the person is insolvent;

2. Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his assets;

3. Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors, administrators, or heirs is insufficient to pay all debts due from the deceased;

4. Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or absent person required to pay any amount under this chapter are levied upon by process of law. This chapter does not give the City a preference over any recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a lien.

The preference given to the City by this section shall be subordinate to the preference given to claims for personal services by Sections 1204 and 1206 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

D. Warrant for Collection of Tax. At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the payment of any amount required in this chapter to be paid or within three years after the last recording of a certificate of lien under subsection B of this section, the City Treasurer may issue a warrant for the enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be paid to the City under this chapter. The warrant shall be directed to any Chief of Police, Marshal or Constable and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner and with the same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution. The City Treasurer may pay or advance to the Chief of Police, Marshal or Constable, the same fees, commissions and expenses for his services as are provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of execution. The City Treasurer, and not the court, shall approve the fees for publication in a newspaper.

E. Seizure and Sale. At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the payment of any amount, the City Treasurer may forthwith collect the amount in the following manner: The City Treasurer shall seize any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect taxes due shall be only of property of the operator not exempt from execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.

F. Successor’s Liability – Withholding by Purchaser. If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successor or assignee shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the City Treasurer showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due.

G. Liability of Purchaser – Release. If the purchaser of a hotel fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or within 30 days from the date the former owner’s records are made available for audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than 60 days after receiving the request, the City Treasurer shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the City Treasurer of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the City Treasurer to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold from the purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of the successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.213)

3.16.140 Violation – Penalty.
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the City Treasurer, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of an infraction, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made is guilty of an infraction and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 22.215)

Chapter 3.20
FIRE PROTECTION SPECIAL TAX
Sections:

3.20.010    Title.

3.20.020    Purpose.

3.20.030    Tax imposed.

3.20.040    Schedule of fire flow points.

3.20.050    Determination of use and flow.

3.20.060    Calculation of tax.

3.20.070    Procedures for levying tax and setting appeal hearing.

3.20.080    Changes due to lot status change.

3.20.090    Deposit of tax proceeds into special fund.

3.20.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as “Fire Protection Special Tax Ordinance of the City.” (Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

3.20.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of imposing the tax hereinafter set forth to levy a non ad valorem special property tax as an excise tax against all parcels of property located within the City in order to provide an equitable method of paying for a portion of the costs of fire protection within the City. The terrain of the City and its vulnerability to wildland fires exposes the City to extraordinary danger from fires. To meet the needs of fire protection services in Poway, a fire protection fee was established and in 1982 amended to provide for the collection of revenue for fire protection services in accordance with a formula not based on the assessed value of property but upon the relative fire flow needed to provide fire protection to various types of property. The adoption of Proposition 218 in 1996 invalidated the fire protection fee. It is the purpose of this chapter to replace the fire protection fee with a special tax calculated in accordance with the fire flow formula previously used to calculate the fire protection fee. It is intended that this chapter not be an ad valorem special tax. It is intended that adopting the fee as a tax will not result in an increase in the amount paid by taxpayers. It is intended that this chapter require two-thirds approval of the voters of the City and be amended only by subsequent voter approval. The people find that the imposition of the tax based upon the schedule of points for fire flow necessary to service a parcel is a fair and reasonable method of apportioning the tax according to the use of the parcel, and not the value. (Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

3.20.030 Tax imposed.
There is imposed on each parcel of real property in the City in accordance with the formula hereafter set forth, a special non ad valorem property tax to be collected by the County on the property tax bill, deposited into a special fund of the City and used only for fire protection purposes, including, but not limited to, the acquisition of equipment and the payment of personnel costs. (Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

3.20.040 Schedule of fire flow points.
Points shall be assigned, as set forth in the following schedule, to each tax parcel in the City based upon the use of the parcel and fire flow required to serve the parcel in accordance with the Fire Suppression Rating Schedule of the Insurance Services Office (ISO), 1980 Edition:

Residential parcels (includes apartments, mobile homes)

10 points per each dwelling unit on each parcel

Commercial, industrial, institutional parcels

20 points per 1,000 GPM required fire flow (minimum 500 GPM, maximum 12,000 GPM per building)

Irrigated farmland (each parcel)

4 points per acre – (maximum 10 acres)

Vacant parcel (each parcel)

2 points per acre – (maximum 10 acres)

On residential lots of more than two acres, the per acre unit charge for either irrigated or vacant land, shall be added to the residential charge. (Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

3.20.050 Determination of use and flow.
A. The Director of Safety Services shall determine the use of the parcel and calculate the fire flow, and maintain a record of the calculation for all commercial, institutional, irrigated and vacant acreage subject to the fire protection special tax. These records shall be made available to the property owner, lessee, or resident of the property upon request. If a dispute exists regarding the calculation, the Director of Safety Services shall investigate and render a final written decision which shall be mailed to, or otherwise made available to, the person requesting the investigation.

B. If as a result of the investigation of the Director of Safety Services it is determined that the calculation was incorrect, the Director of Finance shall adjust the current year’s tax for the property.

C. For the purpose of this tax, all single-family residences, mobile home units, and apartment dwelling units shall be considered equal and shall not be subject to a separate calculation, except as expressly provided herein.

D. The determination of use or flow may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 2.20 PMC. (Ord. 811 § 1, 2017; Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

3.20.060 Calculation of tax.
The Director of Finance shall cause to be calculated the tax on each parcel by multiplying the number of fire flow points assigned to the parcel by the tax rate. The tax rate shall be $3.12 per point. (Ord. 811 § 2, 2017; Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

3.20.070 Procedures for levying tax and setting appeal hearing.
The Director of Safety Services shall cause to be prepared and annually filed with the Director of Finance a written report containing a description of each lot or parcel of property subject to the fire protection special tax for each fiscal year. The Finance Department shall calculate the amount of the fire protection tax to be levied on each parcel. The amount of the tax along with the description of each parcel shall then be filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall set a time and place for a public hearing to be held regarding the annual levy of the fire protection tax, and publish and notice said hearing in accordance with the Government Code. Following approval of the tax by City Council, the Council shall confirm the calculation and levy of the tax and provide for placement of the tax upon the assessment rolls and for collection in accordance with law. (Ord. 811 § 3, 2017; Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

3.20.080 Changes due to lot status change.
Any time a parcel changes status during the year which would change its point designation the Director of Department of Development Services shall notify the Director of Safety Services and the Director of Safety Services shall redetermine the fire flow points assigned to the parcel for the calculation of the tax for the current fiscal year. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

3.20.090 Deposit of tax proceeds into special fund.
Upon collection of the tax by the Tax Collector of San Diego County and receipt of the proceeds by the City, the proceeds shall be placed in a special fund and used only for fire protection purposes, including, but not limited to, the acquisition of equipment and the payment of personnel costs. (Ord. 476 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 3.24
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Sections:

3.24.010    Establishment.

3.24.020    Deposit.

3.24.030    Expenditures.

3.24.010 Establishment.
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code and to avail itself of its benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 thereof, there is created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Ord. 6 § 1, 1980)

3.24.020 Deposit.
All moneys received by the City from the State under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for or for engineering or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets and highways by the City shall be paid into the fund. (Ord. 6 § 2, 1980)

3.24.030 Expenditures.
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 6 § 3, 1980)

Chapter 3.25
LAW ENFORCEMENT FORFEITED PROPERTY AND ASSETS PROGRAM
Sections:

3.25.010    Establishment of law enforcement forfeited property and assets program.

3.25.020    Establishment of fund and use thereof.

3.25.030    Title to and accounting of fund assets.

3.25.040    Annual report.

3.25.010 Establishment of law enforcement forfeited property and assets program.
A. Notwithstanding other City ordinances relating to similar issues, this chapter establishes a law enforcement forfeited property and assets program, whereby the City may receive forfeited property and assets transferred to it from the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department in accordance with Section 8 of the Agreement for General Law and Traffic Enforcement Services and other pertinent authority such as the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 (21 U.S. Code Section 873 et seq.), the United States Attorney General’s Guidelines on Seized and Forfeited Property (paragraph III D.3e), and the California Health and Safety Code (Sections 11470 – 11493).

B. Such property and assets are those which have been seized or collected by contracted law enforcement personnel during the investigation of criminal activities, subsequently forfeited by judicial or administrative decision, and transferred to the City as a result of participation by contracted law enforcement personnel. The program’s purpose shall be to provide an added incentive to the City to assist contracted law enforcement personnel in the fight against crime, especially illegal drug trafficking. (Ord. 309, 1990)

3.25.020 Establishment of fund and use thereof.
The moneys received by the forfeited property and assets program established by this chapter, the moneys received from the sale of any forfeited tangible property or other asset covered by this chapter, and any interest thereon shall be deposited into a law enforcement forfeited property and asset fund. The fund shall be used by the City exclusively for law enforcement purposes. (Ord. 309, 1990)

3.25.030 Title to and accounting of fund assets.
Title to all property/assets received pursuant to this program shall be taken in the name of the City and shall vest in the City. Upon receipt of any transferred property/asset, the City Manager shall immediately notify the Director of Finance of the acquisition. The Director, or his/her designee, shall make the necessary entries in the City’s inventory and accounting records, using the property’s/asset’s fair market value on the date of acquisition, as determined by the City’s purchasing agent. Whenever the City deems it necessary or expedient to sell forfeited noncash property/assets received, the proceeds shall be deposited in the law enforcement forfeited property and asset fund. (Ord. 811 § 4, 2017; Ord. 309, 1990)

3.25.040 Annual report.
The City Manager shall establish regular accounting and reporting procedures in connection with the law enforcement forfeited property and assets program with strict accountability. A report shall be provided by the City Manager on no less than an annual basis detailing all moneys and tangible assets received, all deposits, and all disbursements. (Ord. 309, 1990)

Chapter 3.28
PURCHASING
Sections:

3.28.010    Adoption.

3.28.020    Establishment of Centralized Purchasing Division.

3.28.030    Exceptions to centralized purchasing.

3.28.040    Repealed.

3.28.050    Unauthorized purchases.

3.28.060    Formal bidding procedure – Public works projects.

3.28.070    Formal bidding procedure.

3.28.080    Exceptions to bidding requirements.

3.28.090    Local vendor preference.

3.28.100    Professional services.

3.28.110    Cooperative purchasing.

3.28.120    Award and execution of contracts.

3.28.125    Amendments to contracts.

3.28.130    Insurance and licensing.

3.28.140    Procurement of recycled products.

3.28.010 Adoption.
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, equipment, materials and services; to secure the same for the City at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needed; to exercise positive financial control over purchases; and to ensure that purchases are consistent with the City’s adopted budget; a purchasing system is adopted. (Ord. 675 § 1, 2008; Ord. 55 § 1, 1982)

3.28.020 Establishment of Centralized Purchasing Division.
There is created a Centralized Purchasing Division under the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee in which is vested the authority for the purchase of supplies, equipment and services. (Ord. 675 § 2, 2008; Ord. 55 § 2, 1982)

3.28.030 Exceptions to centralized purchasing.
The Director of Finance or designee may, when authorized by the City Manager in writing, authorize a department or division to purchase supplies and equipment when such purchases may be made more advantageously or expeditiously by the respective department or division. (Ord. 811 § 5, 2017; Ord. 675 § 3, 2008; Ord. 260 § 1, 1988; Ord. 55 § 3, 1982)

3.28.040 Purchase order – Encumbrance of funds.
Repealed by Ord. 675. (Ord. 260 § 2, 1988; Ord. 55 § 4, 1982)

3.28.050 Unauthorized purchases.
No City department head, division head or other employee shall make or order the purchase of any supplies, equipment, materials or services or make any contract without the prior approval, in writing, of the Director of Finance. (Ord. 811 § 6, 2017; Ord. 675 § 5, 2008; Ord. 260 § 1, 1988; Ord. 55 § 5, 1982)

3.28.060 Formal bidding procedure – Public works projects.
Contracts for public projects shall be administered in the manner provided by Section 20160 et seq. of the Public Contracts Code as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 55 § 6, 1992)

3.28.070 Formal bidding procedure.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any purchase which exceeds $50,000 in value for supplies, services, and equipment, or the amount established by Public Contracts Code Section 20162 and succeeding amendments for contracts on public works projects, will be by formal bid.

A. Notices inviting sealed bids shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, the first time being 10 days before the date of the opening of the bids, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, or they shall be posted in at least three places in the City that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices.

B. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, where bid forms and specifications may be obtained, and the time, date and place for the opening of bids.

C. When deemed necessary by the Director of Finance, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit the bid security upon the bidder’s refusal or failure to execute the contract within 10 days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed. The City Council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the City Council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the City to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. If the City Council rejects all bids presented, due to the failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, and readvertises, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security may be used to offset the cost of receiving new bids and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

D. Sealed bids together with bidder’s security shall be submitted to the Director of Finance or designee. The bid shall be so identified on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the date, time and place stated in the public notices inviting the bids. Any bid received after the scheduled time of the bid opening shall be returned to the bidder unopened. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening.

E. At its sole discretion, the City Council may reject any and all bids presented and readvertise for bids pursuant to the procedure prescribed above. In the event no bids are received or all bids are rejected, the City Council may, in accordance with Public Contracts Code Section 20167, and any amendments thereto, direct the Director of Finance or designee to proceed pursuant to paragraphs relating to open market procedure or competitive negotiations.

F. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the City Council may at its discretion accept the bid it chooses with or without further negotiations with the tie bidders.

G. The City shall have authority to require performance and labor and materials security before entering a contract in such amount as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. If the City requires security, the form and the amount of the security shall be described in the notice inviting bids. The notice inviting bids may provide that security may be posted in the form of a surety bond, a letter of credit drawn on an institution located in San Diego County and approved by the City Attorney, or a cash deposit. (Ord. 811 § 7, 2017; Ord. 675 § 6, 2008; Ord. 260 §§ 1, 3, 1988; Ord. 188 § 1, 1986; Ord. 55 § 7, 1982)

3.28.080 Exceptions to bidding requirements.
Where otherwise required by this chapter, formal or informal bidding procedures may be waived, at the discretion of the City Manager or his or her designee, when:

A. An emergency requires that the supplies, services or equipment be acquired from the nearest available source or vendor.

B. The supplies, services or equipment can be obtained from only one vendor or source.

C. The supplies or equipment are required to match or be compatible with other supplies or equipment previously purchased by the City.

D. The City Manager or City Council has established a standardized type or make of supplies or equipment for the City.

E. The City Manager, or his or her designee, determines that competitive bidding is impossible, or not in the public’s interest.

F. Services, other than a public project, as defined by Public Contracts Code Section 20161, are to be performed entirely by City forces.

G. For public projects, as defined by Public Contracts Code Section 20161, no bids are received, or the City Council has rejected all bids pursuant to Public Contracts Code Section 20167, and any amendments thereto.

H. The value of the supplies, services or equipment to be purchased does not exceed $10,000.

Open market purchases for supplies or equipment shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. The lowest responsible bidder will be the individual or firm who submits a responsible bid based on total cost, and which is determined to be the most advantageous to the City. (Ord. 810 § 2, 2017)

3.28.090 Local vendor preference.
For the purposes of this section, a local vendor is a business that is located in and licensed to provide goods and/or supplies within the City limits of Poway, and reports sales taxes to the State of California. The purchase of taxable goods by the City of Poway in any solicitation of bids or quotes for goods or services and any solicitation for work involving the supply of materials or goods as a part of the bid or quote is subject to the application of a local vendor preference. When calculating bids or quotes based on the lowest responsible bid, and which involves the purchase of taxable goods in whole or in part, the preference to be granted to the price bid or quoted by a local vendor shall be one percent, which is equal to the portion of sales tax the City receives. If the bid or quote is a mixture of taxable and nontaxable items, the one percent preference will only apply to the taxable portion of the bid or quote. If the bid or quoted price after the preference is granted makes the local vendor the lowest responsible bidder, the City shall make the purchase from the local vendor at the bid or quoted price. (Ord. 735, 2012)

3.28.100 Professional services.
The selection of a firm for professional services will be made by qualification-based selection. In order to implement this method of selection when contracting for architectural, professional engineering, land surveying, construction management and other professional services, the City must be sure that selection is made on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications for the types of services to be performed and at fair and reasonable prices. Whenever possible, at least three proposals shall be required for the professional services needed. The requirement for multiple proposals may be waived if only one firm or individual can provide the service. It is the policy of the City to give prime consideration to consultants and other professionals whose offices are located within the City of Poway, but the final selection shall still be made based on demonstrated competence and professional qualifications first and agreed-upon financial agreement second. (Ord. 361 § 3, 1992)

3.28.110 Cooperative purchasing.
Purchase of supplies, services and equipment by contract, arrangement and agreement for the cooperative purchasing programs with the State, the County and any other public or municipal corporation of the State may be made by the Director of Finance when the administering agency has made their purchase in a competitive manner. (Ord. 811 § 8, 2017; Ord. 675 § 9, 2008; Ord. 260 § 1, 1988; Ord. 55 § 11, 1982)

3.28.120 Award and execution of contracts.
Except in emergency situations, all contracts for supplies, services and equipment in an estimated amount of $50,000 or more and public works projects in an estimated amount of $5,000 or more shall be awarded by the City Council. Contracts for supplies, services and equipment in an amount less than $50,000 shall be executed by the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee. No contract shall be approved by the City Council or City Manager unless the expenditure is consistent with the City’s adopted budget. (Ord. 675 § 10, 2008; Ord. 55 § 12, 1982)

3.28.125 Amendments to contracts.
Approval of amendments to contracts for supplies, services or equipment, other than contracts for public works projects, shall be consistent with the authority limits set forth in PMC 3.28.120. The authority to approve an amendment shall be determined based on the total cost of the contract, including the amendment. (Ord. 675 § 11, 2008)

3.28.130 Insurance and licensing.
When contracting for services of any kind, no matter what the value of the contract is, the contractor must have:

A. A policy of general liability insurance covering the contractor for claims and judgments arising from their products or activities for the City. The policy shall be for a minimum of $1,000,000 and extended by endorsement naming the City as additional insured. The $1,000,000 limit may be adjusted up or down by the Director of Human Resources and Risk Management or designee in conjunction with the City Attorney based upon the type of contract or service being considered and the potential liability exposure.

B. The contractor, when required by law, must be licensed to perform work in the State of California, and the license must be current and properly classified. (Ord. 811 § 9, 2017; Ord. 675 § 12, 2008; Ord. 361 § 4, 1992)

3.28.140 Procurement of recycled products.
When purchasing recycled products of any kind these are the basic requirements:

A. Specification for the supplies and equipment should not require the use of products manufactured from virgin materials or exclude the use of recycled products, reusable products or products designed to be recycled unless it can be demonstrated that these recycled products would not achieve the necessary performance standard.

B. The City will purchase acceptable supplies and equipment that use products with recycled content. Such recycled content shall include post consumer waste of the highest content possible. Reasonable performance shall not be sacrificed for recycled content.

C. Manufacturers, distributors and contractors will be encouraged to provide and use recycled products, reusable products or products designed to be recycled.

D. Wherever possible, recycled products purchased by the City will be labeled as such to promote the program.

E. The City will participate in cooperative purchasing efforts with other government agencies in buying recycled products. (Ord. 413, 1993)

Title 4
(Reserved)
Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapters:

5.02    Business Certificates

5.04    Uniform Licensing Procedure

5.08    Amusement Devices and Establishments

5.12    Dances and Dancehalls

5.16    Entertainment License

5.20    Repealed

5.22    Regulation of Sidewalk Vendors

5.24    Solicitations

5.28    Junk, Automobile Wrecking and Nonoperating Vehicle Storage Yards

5.32    Secondhand Dealers

5.36    Repealed

5.40    Circuses, Carnivals and Amusement Centers

5.44    Repealed

5.48    Firearm Sales

5.52    Repealed

5.56    Inspection of Avocados Being Transported

5.60    Cable Communication or Cable Television Systems

5.61    Regulation of State Video Franchise Holders

5.64    Consumer Commodities Price Marking

5.66    Repealed

5.68    Massage Establishments

5.72    Bingo and Other Games

Chapter 5.02
BUSINESS CERTIFICATES
Sections:

5.02.010    Purpose.

5.02.020    Definitions.

5.02.030    Certificates – Required.

5.02.040    Certificates – Required for branch offices and businesses doing business in same location.

5.02.050    Evidence of doing business – Designated.

5.02.060    Businesses or organizations exempt.

5.02.070    Exemption to fees.

5.02.080    Certificate – Application – Contents.

5.02.090    Certificate – Fee.

5.02.100    Certificate – Issuance.

5.02.110    Certificate – Term.

5.02.120    Certificate – Nontransferable or nonrefundable.

5.02.130    Certificate – Duplicate.

5.02.140    Certificate – Denial.

5.02.150    Certificate – Appeal of denial.

5.02.160    Investigation and inspection procedure.

5.02.170    Constitutional apportionment.

5.02.180    Posting and keeping.

5.02.190    Right to revoke.

5.02.200    Grounds for denial or revocation.

5.02.210    Penalties for failure to apply for certificate or not having current certificate.

5.02.220    Effect of chapter on existing businesses.

5.02.230    Violation – Penalty.

5.02.010 Purpose.
A. The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted for the purpose of protecting the public interest, health, welfare and safety by providing a means to ensure that all new and existing businesses in the City are made aware of and conform to all City zoning, fire and public safety ordinances, rules and regulations by requiring them to register and procure a certificate from the City.

B. This chapter is also intended to protect the interests of legitimate businesses in the City from unfair competition with businesses operating in violation of Federal, State and local laws.

C. This chapter is not intended to impose any form of taxation on the business community nor to collect in fees more money than is necessary to recover the administrative costs of processing an application for the issuance or renewal of a business certificate. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1983)

5.02.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

A. “Business” means professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for a profit.

B. “Civic groups, service clubs and social organizations” means a group, club or organization that is not engaged in any profession, trade calling or occupation but is organized to provide civic, service or social activities in the City. Examples of such organizations may include, but are not limited to, the Green Valley Civic Association; Soroptomists; Kiwanis; Lions; Rotary; American Legion; children and adult athletic organizations; and similar types of groups, clubs or organizations.

C. “Occasional” means less than once each quarter of a year.

D. “Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnership of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts trusts, business trust or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City.

E. “Profession” means doctors, dentists, attorneys, accountants, real estate licensees, beauticians, barbers or any other occupation or calling requiring a specialized knowledge and a license to practice their profession.

F. “Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 116 § 24, 1983)

5.02.030 Certificates – Required.
It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation within the City without first having procured a certificate from the City to do so, or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 116 § 2, 1983)

5.02.040 Certificates – Required for branch offices and businesses doing business in same location.
A separate certificate must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location. Each certificate shall authorize the holder to transact and carry on only the business certified at a given location. Any changes in the type or character of the business will require the certificate holder to submit an application for a new certificate. (Ord. 116 § 3, 1983)

5.02.050 Evidence of doing business – Designated.
When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, or newspaper, advertise or otherwise represent that the person is in business in the City, or when any person holds an active certificate or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that the person is in business in the City, and such person fails to deny on a sworn statement provided by the City that the person is not conducting business in the City, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that the person is conducting a business in the City and a certificate will be required unless the business is excluded in PMC 5.02.060. (Ord. 116 § 4, 1983)

5.02.060 Businesses or organizations exempt.
A. This chapter shall not require that churches, civic groups, service clubs or social organizations, day care centers, apartments and similar property management businesses that do not operate out of a fixed office, casual workers such as babysitters, tutors, piano teachers or the like be required to obtain a certificate.

B. Businesses that are required to obtain a solicitor’s permit or that are required to obtain a home occupation permit are also exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 116 § 5, 1983)

5.02.070 Exemption to fees.
A. Charitable Organizations. Charitable organizations meeting the conditions listed below shall be exempt from the payment of the certificate fee but are still required to obtain a business registration certificate. The payment of the certificate fee imposed in accordance with this chapter will not be required:

1. To conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or occupation;

2. For the occasional conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the City, whenever the receipts of any such event are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose by a tax exempt nonprofit organization;

3. For the conducting of any occasional entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal education, Federal, State, County, or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose for which such organization or association was formed, and from which a profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by an individual, firm, or corporation.

However, nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any person, association or organization, institution, firm, or corporation from complying with the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance of the City requiring that a certificate, license, or permit be obtained to conduct, manage, or carry on any profession, trade, calling, or occupation.

B. Constitution or Statutes of the United States or of the State. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the State from the payment of fees to a municipal corporation. Nor will a certificate be required of any such business.

C. Active-Duty Military – Honorably Discharged or Relieved Veterans.

1. Every person who is serving on active duty in the military, naval, or air service of the United States, and every spouse or registered domestic partner of a person who is serving on active duty in the military, naval, or air service of the United States, may conduct a business with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter without payment of any fee.

2. Every person who is honorably discharged or honorably relieved from the military, naval, or air service of the United States may conduct a business with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter without payment of any fee.

D. Claim for Exemption. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to subsection A or B of this section shall file a verified statement, on a form provided by the City, stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to subsection C of this section shall (at the time of application for the certificate) produce to the City his or her military identification, or military dependent identification, or a copy of his or her DD Form 214, or a copy of that person’s certificate of honorable discharge or honorable relief from duty.

E. Certificate. The City shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, military identification or proof of qualifying veteran’s status, issue a certificate to such person claiming an exemption under subsection A or C of this section, without payment of any fee. (Ord. 753 § 2, 2013)

5.02.080 Certificate – Application – Contents.
A. Every person, association, organization, institution, firm or corporation required to have a certificate under the provisions of this chapter shall make application to the City on a form provided by the City. The minimal information required on the application form shall be:

1. The name of the person to whom the certificate is to be issued;

2. The name of the business;

3. The specific type of business to be conducted;

4. The mailing address of the business;

5. The place where the business is to be transacted and carried on;

6. The name, telephone number and address of the person to notify in the event of an emergency;

7. Whether hazardous materials or chemicals will be stored at the business location to the extent permitted within the hazardous materials ordinance; and

8. The business State Board of Equalization Resale License number if a resale license is required by the State Board of Equalization.

B. The information requested by subsections (A)(6) and (8) of this section shall be considered confidential and shall not be made available to the public. (Ord. 116 § 7, 1983)

5.02.090 Certificate – Fee.
A. At the time of application for a business certificate, the City shall require the applicant to pay a fee for the processing of said certificate. No portion of this fee shall include the cost of any inspections, investigations or other functions required prior to the original enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

1. New Certificate Application Fee. A person applying for a certificate for a new business, whether the business is new to the City, or an existing business which has changed location, ownership, or type of business, shall be required to pay a fee as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, which is intended to recover the cost of processing the application.

2. Renewal of Certificate. A person who is applying for the renewal of an existing certificate, and the business has not changed in ownership, location or type of business, shall be required to pay a fee as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, which is intended to recover the cost of processing the application.

3. Exemption for Secondary Professional Operating from a Primary Business. A beautician, barber, accountant, real estate licensee, doctor, dentist or similar type of professional person who is in business for themselves, and uses space in a business office area that has been issued a certificate for the primary business conducting the same type of business shall not be required to have a separate certificate. However, any time that it is necessary to revise the primary business by:

a. Structurally modifying the interior or exterior of the building that would require the issuance of a building permit;

b. Changing the name of the business; or

c. The signage to provide for the secondary businesses operation, the holder of the primary certificate must apply for a new certificate. No additional fees shall be charged for the new certificate. (Ord. 683 § 1, 2008; Ord. 116 § 8, 1983)

5.02.100 Certificate – Issuance.
A. No certificate shall be issued until an application for a certificate has been completed and filed with the City, all certificate fees are paid, and all City officers or departments required to investigate the application or inspect the premises or facilities to be occupied or used, have approved of such issuance. However, the City shall make every attempt practicable to complete any investigation or inspection within 10 working days of receipt of the application. If a certificate is not issued within 10 working days of the receipt of the application, the applicant shall be informed to the reason or reasons why the certificate has not yet been issued or will not be issued.

B. The issuance of a certificate shall not be deemed as evidence that a person, association, organization, institution, firm or corporation operating a business in the City is in fact in compliance with all ordinance rules or regulations of the City or that they have applied for or have been issued all permits or licenses which otherwise may be required. (Ord. 116 § 10, 1983)

5.02.110 Certificate – Term.
A. Certificates for New Businesses. Certificates for new businesses, whether new to the City or resulting from a change of ownership, location or type of business, shall be issued for a maximum term of 24 months.

B. Renewal of Existing Certificate. All certificates which are renewed shall be valid for a 24-month term unless otherwise revoked. Certificates shall be required to be renewed before the expiration date shown on the business certificate.

The City shall notify all businesses at least 30 calendar days prior to the date of the renewal. (Ord. 740 § 1, 2012; Ord. 116 § 14, 1983)

5.02.120 Certificate – Nontransferable or nonrefundable.
No certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or refundable. (Ord. 116 § 15, 1983)

5.02.130 Certificate – Duplicate.
A duplicate certificate may be issued by the City to replace any certificate previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed, upon the certificate holder filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing such affidavit, paying a duplicate certificate fee equal to the fee established for a certificate renewal. (Ord. 116 § 16, 1983)

5.02.140 Certificate – Denial.
Any person denied a certificate shall be fully advised, in writing of the grounds for such denial. (Ord. 116 § 12, 1983)

5.02.150 Certificate – Appeal of denial.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a certificate, may appeal that decision to the City Manager within 30 calendar days of the date of the denial or the date of the issuance of the certificate. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the City Clerk. Following the filing of an appeal, the City Manager or designee must notify the appellant of a time and place for a hearing to review the appeal. The hearing shall be held within 10 working days of the date of filing of the appeal. Following the hearing the City Manager must notify the appellant of the decision in writing within 15 calendar days.

B. If the person is not satisfied with the decision of the City Manager, the person may appeal to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.20 PMC. (Ord. 334 § 3, 1991; Ord. 116 § 13, 1983)

5.02.160 Investigation and inspection procedure.
All applications for a certificate shall be investigated and certified in accordance with the following guidelines:

A. Applications for New Certificates. Each application for a new certificate shall be investigated and certified as noted below. The City shall make every attempt practicable to complete all required investigations within 10 working days of the receipt of an application.

1. The Department of Development Services must certify that:

a. The business and its location comply with the zoning development of the City;

b. The business and its location is a lawful use under the laws of the State; and

c. All buildings of the business have been issued certificates of occupancy.

2. The Fire Prevention Division of the Department of Safety Services must certify that the structures of the business are lawfully constructed pursuant to the fire, zoning and land use ordinance of the City.

B. Applications for Renewal of an Existing Certificate. Each application for renewal of a certificate shall be processed as follows: The Customer Services Division of the Finance Department shall receive the application and review it to determine if any changes exist which may require the review of any other department agency or official. If a review is felt necessary, the application shall be forwarded to the appropriate department agency and/or officials for their review. (Ord. 811 § 10, 2017; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 116 § 11, 1983)

5.02.170 Constitutional apportionment.
A. None of the fees imposed by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States and the State.

B. In any case where a fee imposed by this chapter is believed by a certificate holder or applicant for a certificate to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, the applicant may apply to the City Council for an adjustment of the fee. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed fee. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 116 § 9, 1983)

5.02.180 Posting and keeping.
All certificates must be kept and posted in the following manner:

A. Any certificate holder transacting or carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep the certificate posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on or must have the certificate immediately available for inspection upon request;

B. Any certificate holder transacting or carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business shall keep the certificate immediately available at all times while transacting and carrying on business within the City. (Ord. 116 § 17, 1983)

5.02.190 Right to revoke.
A. Every certificate granted under this chapter is granted and accepted by all parties with the express understanding that the City Council may revoke the certificate if it is in the best interest of the health, welfare and safety of the public to do so and grounds for such revocation exist as noted in PMC 5.02.200.

B. Before a certificate may be revoked, the City Council must hold a public hearing with the notice of the time and place of the public hearing and the reason or reasons for the hearing given to the certificate holder. (Ord. 116 § 20, 1983)

5.02.200 Grounds for denial or revocation.
A certificate required by this chapter may be denied or revoked pursuant to this chapter, only upon one or more of the following grounds:

A. Proper application as prescribed in this chapter has not been made or information submitted has been falsified; or

B. The prescribed fee for such certificate has not been paid; or

C. Delinquent certificate fees have not been paid; or

D. The conduct of the business is contrary to local, State or Federal law. (Ord. 116 § 21, 1983)

5.02.210 Penalties for failure to apply for certificate or not having current certificate.
Any person who fails to apply for and receive a certificate prior to the start of business, or has not applied for the renewal of an existing certificate prior to expiration of the certificate shall be assessed a penalty fee not to exceed $250.00. (Ord. 116 § 18, 1983)

5.02.220 Effect of chapter on existing businesses.
This chapter is not intended to apply to any business that is operating from a permanent location in the City, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, until the year 1985. Each business that was operating from a permanent location, on the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter will be required to have obtained a certificate by the date noted below:

First Letter in Business Name

 

Certificate Renewal Date

 

A to F

January 1, 1985

G to L

April 1, 1985

M to R

July 1, 1985

S to Z

October 1, 1985

(Ord. 116 § 22, 1983)

5.02.230 Violation – Penalty.
If a person fails to file for a certificate as provided in this chapter within 30 calendar days after being informed to do so, or fails to pay the fee noted in PMC 5.02.090, or violates any of the other provisions of this chapter, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresents any material facts to any officer or employee of the City in procuring the certificate provided in this chapter, or continues to operate a business after the business registration certificate has been revoked, the person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by confinement in jail not to exceed six months or by both such fine and confinement. (Ord. 116 § 19, 1983)

Chapter 5.04
UNIFORM LICENSING PROCEDURE
Sections:

5.04.010    License – Required.

5.04.020    Issuing Officer.

5.04.030    Licensing procedure – Application.

5.04.040    License – Not transferable.

5.04.050    License – Fee.

5.04.060    License – Renewal.

5.04.070    License – Posting.

5.04.080    Application – Investigation.

5.04.090    Application – Denial.

5.04.100    License suspension or revocation.

5.04.110    Hearings – Issuing Officer.

5.04.120    Stay of suspension or revocation.

5.04.130    Exception to hearing procedure.

5.04.010 License – Required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in, conduct, manage, or carry on any of the following businesses, practices, professions, or occupations within the City without first having obtained a license therefor in accordance with the uniform licensing procedure:

A. Amusement establishment and devices;

B. Bingo;

C. Carnivals and go-cart centers;

D. Dances and dancehalls;

E. Dances, teenage;

F. Entertainment;

G. Firearms, sale of;

H. Junk, automotive wrecking, nonoperating vehicle storage yards;

I. Massage establishments, except for those exempted by Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.;

J. Massage technicians, except for those exempted by Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.;

K. Secondhand dealers;

L. Shooting ranges;

M. Solicitors:

1. License,

2. Identification card;

N. Street patrols. (Ord. 691 § 1, 2009; Ord. 683 § 2, 2008; Ord. 123 § 2, 1984; Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 1, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.101)

5.04.020 Issuing Officer.
All licenses issued shall be issued by the Issuing Officer, who shall be the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee. (Ord. 691 § 2, 2009; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.102)

5.04.030 Licensing procedure – Application.
Application for a license shall be made to the Issuing Officer on forms provided by the Issuing Officer. Said application shall contain a provision by which the applicant consents to having all required notices, unless otherwise specified, sent by mail to applicant’s address on the application by depositing the same in the United States mail postage prepaid. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.103)

5.04.040 License – Not transferable.
Such license shall not be transferable from person to person nor place to place. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.104)

5.04.050 License – Fee.
The fee established for any license shall defray the cost of investigation and issuance of the license. In the event said license is for any reason whatsoever denied or in any event not obtained by the applicant, the fee paid shall not be refunded to the applicant. Fees shall be reviewed annually so as not to be excessive. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.105)

5.04.060 License – Renewal.
Unless otherwise specified any license issued shall expire a year from the date of issue and may be renewed by filing a renewal application not less than 30 days prior to expiration date. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.106)

5.04.070 License – Posting.
All licenses issued for business establishments must be posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.107)

5.04.080 Application – Investigation.
A. Upon the receipt of an application for a license the Issuing Officer may send copies of such application to any office or department which the

Issuing Officer may deem appropriate in order to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant or his proposed business.

B. Every officer or department to which an application for a license is referred may request from the Issuing Officer that additional information be obtained from the applicant relating to the proposed license as such officer or department deems necessary.

C. The Issuing Officer and every officer or department to which an application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in the application, the character of the applicant as it relates to doing business under said license and may examine the premises proposed to be used for said business.

D. Upon receipt of an application the Issuing Officer shall post for a period of 10 days the name and business address of the applicant, the type of license applied for, whether the application is for a new license or for the renewal of an existing license, and the fact that any interested member of the general public can submit information regarding the issuance of the license. Such information shall be delivered to the office of the Issuing Officer within five days of the last day of posting. The names and business addresses of applicants shall be posted in the office of the Issuing Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.108)

5.04.090 Application – Denial.
A. The Issuing Officer may deny an application for a license, if he finds the applicant or any agent or representative thereof has:

1. Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be filed under this chapter; or

2. Violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any provisions of any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating said business or occupation; or

3. Been convicted of a crime, the nature of which indicates the appellant’s unfitness to operate the proposed business. A plea or verdict of guilty, a finding of guilty by a court in a trial without a jury, a plea of nolo contendere, or a forfeiture of bail is deemed a conviction.

B. If after investigation the Issuing Officer determines that the application should be denied he shall prepare a notice of denial of application setting forth the reasons for such denial of application. Such notice shall be either sent by mail to the applicant’s last address provided in the application or be personally delivered. Any person who has had an application for a license denied may request a hearing from the Issuing Officer. Such request must be made in writing and filed with the Issuing Officer within 10 days of personal delivery of the notice of denial. If the notice of denial is mailed, the applicant has an additional five days to request a hearing. The Issuing Officer shall notify the applicant of the time and place of such hearing and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The applicant shall also be entitled to the appeal provisions of this chapter following the hearing before the Issuing Officer.

C. If the license is granted the name and business address of the licensee shall be available to any interested member of the general public for the duration of the license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.109)

5.04.100 License suspension or revocation.
A. In the event that any person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter violates or causes or permits to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or any provisions of any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating said business or occupation, or shall conduct or carry on such business or occupation in an unlawful manner, or for any reason for which the license application could have been denied, the Issuing Officer may, in addition to other penalties provided by ordinance, suspend or revoke the license after the licensee has been given the opportunity for a hearing as provided for in this chapter.

B. The Issuing Officer shall post for a period of 10 days the name and business address of any person receiving a notice of suspension or revocation along with the fact that any interested member of the general public can submit information regarding the proposed suspension or revocation. Such information shall be submitted in writing and shall be delivered to the office of the Issuing Officer within five days of the last day of posting. The names and business addresses shall be posted in the office of the Issuing Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.110)

5.04.110 Hearings – Issuing Officer.
A. In any case where the Issuing Officer determines that a license issued pursuant to this chapter should be suspended or revoked, the Issuing Officer shall prepare a written notice or suspension or revocation, which includes a statement of the proposed action, a concise explanation of the reasons for the proposed action, the statutory basis relied upon for such proposed action, and an explanation of the licensee’s right to request a hearing from the Issuing Officer. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the licensee’s last address provided in the application or be personally delivered, at least 10 days prior to the effective date of such action. If within five days after receipt of such mailing or delivery the licensee or an authorized representative requests in writing a hearing from the Issuing Officer, the Issuing Officer shall immediately set a hearing and shall set forth in writing and send to the licensee by means of the mail or hand delivery, notice of the time, date and place of such hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date of receipt of said request for hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the Issuing Officer. The person designated as hearing officer shall not have been connected in any manner in the decision to take the proposed action which is the subject of such hearing. No hearings shall be continued except upon a showing of good cause.

B. The hearing shall be conducted to determine the existence of any facts which constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license. The licensee may have the assistance of counsel or may appear by counsel and shall have the right to present evidence. In the event that the licensee, or counsel representing the licensee fails to appear at the hearing, the evidence of the existence of facts which constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license shall be considered unrebutted. The decision of the hearing officer shall be based solely on the evidence presented at the hearing. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer will give a verbal decision; provided, however, that in the discretion of the hearing officer, the decision may be delayed and given in writing within two days. In any case where a verbal decision is given at the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall confirm that decision in writing within two days. The written decision shall set forth the findings of fact and the reasons for the decision and a copy mailed to the licensee or an authorized representative. The decision of the hearing officer shall be posted in the office of the Issuing Officer for a period of five days along with the available procedures for appeal. A hearing held under this section or the failure of the licensee to request such a hearing or to appear at the scheduled time for such hearing in no way deprives the licensee of the right to appeal as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.111)

5.04.120 Stay of suspension or revocation.
The effect of a decision of the hearing officer to suspend or revoke a license shall be stayed while an appeal to the City Council is pending or until the time for filing such appeal has expired. There shall be no stay of the effect of the decision of the hearing officer upholding the denial of any license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.112)

5.04.130 Exception to hearing procedure.
A. When, in the opinion of the Issuing Officer, there is an immediate threat to the public health, welfare or safety, the officer may suspend a license without a hearing. The Issuing Officer shall prepare a written notice of suspension, which includes a statement of the action, a concise explanation of the reasons for the action, the statutory basis relied upon for such action, and an explanation of the licensee’s right to request a hearing from the Issuing Officer. Such notice shall be either sent by certified mail to the licensee’s last address provided in the application or be personally delivered. The licensee may request a hearing from the Issuing Officer within five days of receipt of notification that the license has been suspended. The Issuing Officer shall notify the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this chapter.

B. The hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date of receipt of said request for hearing. Following the hearing the person affected may appeal the decision in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The decision shall not be stayed during pendency of such hearing or appeal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 16.113)

Chapter 5.08
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

5.08.010    Definitions.

5.08.020    License – Requirements – Denial, suspension and revocation.

5.08.030    Alcoholic beverages prohibited.

5.08.040    Persons intoxicated or under the influence of drugs prohibited.

5.08.050    Gambling prohibited.

5.08.060    Operation of establishment.

5.08.070    License fee.

5.08.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words are defined:

A. “Amusement device” includes any machine, device or apparatus, the operation or use of which is permitted, controlled, allowed or made possible by the deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disk, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any fee or fees, for the use as a game, contest or amusement of any description, or which may be used for any such game, contest or amusement, and the use or possession of which is not prohibited by any law of the State.

B. “Amusement establishment” means any commercially operated establishment having five or more amusement devices. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC §§ 21.101, 21.102)

5.08.020 License – Requirements – Denial, suspension and revocation.
A. The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a license is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. In addition to the reasons for denial listed in the uniform licensing procedure, the Issuing Officer may deny an application or suspend or revoke a license for the following reasons:

1. If the applicant is not a fit or proper person to conduct an amusement establishment;

2. If the premises is not a suitable or proper place therefor;

3. If the health, welfare or public morals of the community warrant such denial.

B. The Issuing Officer may issue the license upon such conditions as he determines would eliminate the situations which would otherwise result in denial of such license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.103)

5.08.030 Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
It is unlawful for the proprietor, manager, or employee or any amusement establishment to permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverage in an amusement establishment. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.104)

5.08.040 Persons intoxicated or under the influence of drugs prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person who is intoxicated or under the influence of any drug to be in any establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter. A person who conducts or assists in conducting any such establishment shall not permit any intoxicated person or person under the influence of any drug to be or remain at such place. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.105)

5.08.050 Gambling prohibited.
It is unlawful for the proprietor, manager or employer of any amusement establishment to permit any gambling of any kind, or permit any betting or wagering with money or anything of value upon the result of any game. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.106)

5.08.060 Operation of establishment.
The proprietor, manager or employee of any licensed amusement establishment shall ensure that the operation of amusement devices is orderly and quiet and shall not permit any boisterous, offensive, indecent, vulgar, abusive or obscene language within the premises. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.107)

5.08.070 License fee.
The license fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 3, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.108)

Chapter 5.12
DANCES AND DANCEHALLS
Sections:

Article I. Dances and Dancehalls

5.12.010    Definitions.

5.12.020    Exception to application of article.

5.12.030    License – Procedure.

5.12.040    License – Required for each location.

5.12.050    License – Classifications.

5.12.060    License – Denial – Additional reasons.

5.12.070    License – Expiration.

5.12.080    License – Fees.

5.12.090    Size of dance floor.

5.12.100    Management change reported.

5.12.110    Minors prohibited if liquor present.

5.12.120    Minors under 18.

5.12.130    Misrepresenting minor’s age unlawful.

5.12.140    Persons to be excluded from premises.

5.12.150    Obscenity prohibited.

5.12.160    Restricted hours for music and dancing.

5.12.170    Sanitation requirements.

5.12.180    Enforcing agent required on premises.

5.12.190    Admittance of peace officers.

5.12.200    Revocation of license.

Article II. Teenage Dances

5.12.210    Legislative intent.

5.12.220    Definitions.

5.12.230    Permit.

5.12.240    Permit – Classifications.

5.12.250    Permit – Fees.

5.12.260    Exception.

5.12.270    Additional reasons for denial of application.

5.12.280    Expiration and renewal.

5.12.290    Supervision and lighting of hall.

5.12.300    Lighting of parking area.

5.12.310    Attendance.

5.12.320    Use of alcoholic beverages prohibited.

5.12.330    Time limit for dances.

5.12.340    Obscenity prohibited.

5.12.350    Participation of adults prohibited.

5.12.360    Loitering.

5.12.370    Inspection.

5.12.380    Employment of police.

5.12.390    Police exceptions.

5.12.400    Advertising.

5.12.410    Rules and regulations.

Article I. Dances and Dancehalls

5.12.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Alcoholic beverage” means an alcoholic beverage, or beverages, as that term is defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, California Statutes of 1935, page 1123, as amended.

B. “Public dance” means any such dance held or given in any place not a private residence or home.

C. “Public dancehall” means any room, place, or space, except a private residence or home, where dancing is carried on or permitted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.201)

5.12.020 Exception to application of article.
The requirements of this article are not applicable to any City park which closes at or before 9:00 p.m. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.201.5)

5.12.030 License – Procedure.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this article, in obtaining a license is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.202)

5.12.040 License – Required for each location.
No license issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall authorize the conducting, operating or carrying on of the licensed business save at a single location and upon individual premises as described in said license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.203)

5.12.050 License – Classifications.
For the licensing purposes of this article, premises or establishments whereon or wherein any public dancehall or public dance is maintained, conducted, carried on or permitted, are classified and required to be licensed as follows:

A. A class “A” license shall be required where there is daily or nightly dancing.

B. A class “B” license shall be required where there is dancing not to exceed three days or nights in any calendar week.

C. A class “C” license shall be required when dancing is conducted one night or one day only.

D. A class “D” license shall be required where dancing is conducted in a bona fide club; the term “club” as used in this subsection means and includes only corporations or associations created by competent authority, which are the owners, lessees or occupants of premises operated solely for objects of national, social, fraternal, patriotic, political, or athletic nature, membership in which is by application, and for which regular dues are charged, and the advantages of which said club belong to all members, and the operation of which is not primarily for pecuniary gain. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.204)

5.12.060 License – Denial – Additional reasons.
In addition to the reasons stated in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC, the Issuing Officer shall have the power to deny any application if it appears that the applicant, or the person to have direct management of the premises, is not a suitable or proper person to carry on the business for which the license is sought, or if the premises proposed to be used in the conduct of the business to be licensed shall be deemed not to be a suitable or proper place therefor, or if the protests and objections of private residents in the immediate vicinity of the premises proposed to be licensed, or if the health, welfare or public morals of the community, warrant such denial. The Issuing Officer may allow the license upon such conditions as he determines would cure the situations which would otherwise result in denial of the license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.209)

5.12.070 License – Expiration.
All class “C” licenses shall expire at 2:00 a.m. of the calendar day following the date of issue. Applicants may state in their applications the date on which they desire to have the license issued. Such license shall not be renewed, but a new application must be filed with the Issuing Officer to obtain a new license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.211)

5.12.080 License – Fees.
The fees for licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall be payable in advance, and for several types of classes of license provided in this article the fees shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 4, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.212)

5.12.090 Size of dance floor.
It is unlawful for any person to carry on, or conduct, or assist in carrying on, maintaining or conducting any public dancehall or dance in connection with any business or place where alcoholic beverages are sold or served, in any room, place or space which does not contain a floor space allocated to dancing. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.215)

5.12.100 Management change reported.
In the event that any licensee desires to change the individual designated in the license as the person to have direct management of the licensed premises he shall forthwith notify the Licensing Officer, proposing the name of the person to be substituted in the management and control of the licensed premises. The person so proposed shall be investigated by the Licensing Officer. If such a person is of satisfactory character, the Licensing Officer may consent to such changes. In the event that such person is not of satisfactory character, the license may be suspended by the Licensing Officer, in his discretion, pending the proposal of some other person of satisfactory character. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.216)

5.12.110 Minors prohibited if liquor present.
It is unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager, or the person in charge of any place licensed under the provisions of this article, or for any employee of such place at any time when alcoholic beverages are actually on sale or are being offered free in said place, to harbor, admit, receive or permit to be in, or remain in or about such place during the time when dancing is actually being carried on or conducted or permitted, any person under the age of 21 years unless such person is accompanied by his or her parent, spouse, or legal guardian; provided, however, that the forgoing provisions shall not prohibit the entry of such persons into any dining room located in or upon premises occupied by an inn or hotel of 20 or more rooms and actually maintained and operated as a bona fide part of such hotel business; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prevent minors from attending any public dance or being in any public dancehall or place where alcoholic beverages are not sold or given away, and; provided further, that nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the holder of any license issued under this article from closing his bar and permitting minors to dance in such hall or place during such time as no alcoholic beverages are on sale or offered without charge therein. In the event that any place or hall licensed under this article is used for a public dance at which minors are allowed to attend, all alcoholic beverages must be under lock and key so that no person except the owner or his agent shall have access thereto. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.217)

5.12.120 Minors under 18.
Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 5.12.110 or any other provisions of this code, no person under the age of 18 years shall attend any place or hall licensed under this article to be used for a public dance unless said person is accompanied by his or her parent, spouse, or legal guardian. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.217.1)

5.12.130 Misrepresenting minor’s age unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years falsely to represent himself or herself as being of the age of 21 years or more for the purpose of obtaining admission to any premises licensed under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.218)

5.12.140 Persons to be excluded from premises.
A. It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any place licensed under this provisions of this article, or for any employee of such place, to harbor, admit, receive, or permit to be on or remain in or about such place, any intoxicated or boisterous person, or any person whose presence or conduct tends to corrupt the morals of any other persons present, or whose conduct or presence tends to create a violation of any of the provisions of this article.

B. It is unlawful for any of the following persons to be or remain in or about any place licensed under the provisions of this article:

1. Any lewd or dissolute person of either sex;

2. Any drunken or boisterous person or any person whose conduct while present in said place tends to create violation of any of the provisions of this code, or of any law of the State, or which tends in any way to corrupt the good morals of any person or persons attending said dancehall, or in any way interferes with the proper management and control of said dancehall. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.219)

5.12.150 Obscenity prohibited.
Boisterous conduct and profanity is unlawful in dancehalls, in the hallways leading thereto, and in the immediate vicinity of the premises licensed under the provisions of this article. It is unlawful for any person in such dancehalls to engage in any dance of an immoral, obscene or vulgar character or to conduct himself or herself in an immoral, obscene or vulgar manner in such dancehalls. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.220)

5.12.160 Restricted hours for music and dancing.
It is unlawful to provide or permit any music, dancing, or entertainment in or about any premises licensed under the provisions of this article between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.222)

5.12.170 Sanitation requirements.
No license shall be granted under the provisions of this article unless the hall or place in which said dance is to be held shall comply with this code and regulations of the City. The holder of such license shall keep such dancehall, hallways leading thereto, and the immediate vicinity in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and have all stairways, hallways, other passages, and rooms connected with such dancehall at all times open, adequately lighted and properly ventilated. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.223)

5.12.180 Enforcing agent required on premises.
It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee, proprietor, manager or occupant of any hall, room, building or place licensed under the provisions of this article to have present at all times, when dancing is carried on in such hall, room, building or place, a qualified person or persons whose duty it shall be to see that the provisions of this article are lawfully carried out; provided, that the foregoing shall not apply where dancing is carried on or permitted under a class “D” license as defined in this article, and where no alcoholic beverage is sold, served or consumed on the premises so licensed. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.224)

5.12.190 Admittance of peace officers.
Any peace officer of the City or the State, or any officer of the United States Government charged with the duty of enforcing the public laws of the United States Government, shall have free access at all times to any dancehall licensed under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.225)

5.12.200 Revocation of license.
For any violations of the provisions of this article or for any cause by it deemed sufficient, the Licensing Officer may at any time, by resolution, suspend or revoke any license under the terms of this article. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.226)

Article II. Teenage Dances

5.12.210 Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the City Council in enacting this article to prescribe the exclusive procedure for the licensing of public dances attended by persons 14 or more years of age but under 19 years of age. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.250)

5.12.220 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this article:

A. “Adult” means any person 21 years of age or over.

B. “Adult sponsoring group” means a nonprofit organization, one of whose objectives is to sponsor, regulate and control youth activities and child welfare, and which assumes full and complete responsibility for the direction of a teenage dance.

C. “Police” or “policeman” includes any private police officer, any peace officer, whether on-duty or off-duty, reserve deputy or special deputy, employed by any public agency or political subdivision.

D. “Private teenage dance” means a closed dance for members of an organization and their invited guests.

E. “Teenage” means any person 14 or more years of age but under 19 years of age.

F. “Teenage dance” means a dance attended by a teenage person unaccompanied by his parent or guardian.

G. “Youth service organization” includes any bona fide organization whose primary purpose is to provide moral or spiritual development, education, or recreation for teenagers. (Ord. 123 § 2, 1984; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.251)

5.12.230 Permit.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this article, in obtaining a permit is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.252)

5.12.240 Permit – Classifications.
The Issuing Officer may issue the following classes of teenage dance permits:

A. A class “A” permit which is issued for a period of one calendar year.

B. A class “B” permit which is issued for one day or one night only. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.253)

5.12.250 Permit – Fees.
The fees for permits issued under this article shall be payable to the Issuing Officer in advance, and for the several classes of permits provided in this section the fees shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 5, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.255)

5.12.260 Exception.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any teenage dance conducted or sponsored:

A. By any agency or department of any City, political subdivision, school district, or other governmental agency;

B. In a private home;

C. By any recognized youth service organization for its members and guests only; provided, that the guests shall not exceed the number of members present. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.256)

5.12.270 Additional reasons for denial of application.
In addition to the reasons stated in the uniform licensing procedure, the Issuing Officer shall not issue a permit if the applicant has had a permit revoked within one year prior to the date of application; or if the place or premises where the teenage dance is to be held do not violate this code or the ordinances of the City, or the laws of the State and that the dance will not be contrary to the public health, morals, peace, welfare or safety. The Issuing Officer may issue a permit under any conditions which it deems reasonably necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare, morals or safety. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.257)

5.12.280 Expiration and renewal.
A permit issued pursuant to PMC 5.12.240(B) shall expire at midnight of the date for which issued. Such permit shall not be renewed, but a new application must be filed with the Issuing Officer to obtain a new permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.259)

5.12.290 Supervision and lighting of hall.
All places where teenage dances are held shall be adequately chaperoned and supervised and adequately lighted at all times when open for dancing and the intensity of illumination shall not be less than one foot-candle in all parts of the building and premises accessible to participants. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.261)

5.12.300 Lighting of parking area.
All off-street parking facilities made available for participants of a teenage dance shall be adequately lighted and supervised. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.262)

5.12.310 Attendance.
No minor admitted to a teenage dance shall be permitted to leave and thereafter reenter the dancing premises during the course of the dance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.263)

5.12.320 Use of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, consumed or be available on the premises, in or about which any teenage dance is held. Admission to a teenage dance shall be denied to any person who is or has been drinking any alcoholic beverages or who has any alcoholic beverage on his person. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.264)

5.12.330 Time limit for dances.
All teenage dances shall be closed and premises cleared of participants on or before the hour of 12:00 midnight. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.265)

5.12.340 Obscenity prohibited.
Boisterous conduct and profanity is unlawful in the premises where the teenage dance is held, in the hallways leading thereto, and in the immediate vicinity of such premises. It is unlawful for any person at such teenage dance to engage in any dance of an immoral, obscene or vulgar character or to conduct himself or herself in an immoral, obscene or vulgar manner. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.266)

5.12.350 Participation of adults prohibited.
A person of 19 years of age or over shall not attend any teenage dance as a participant except that a male of 19 years of age may accompany a female teenager to a teenage dance and participate in such dance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.267)

5.12.360 Loitering.
No person, other than a participant at a teenage dance or member or employee of the sponsoring group, shall loiter around or about the premises at which a teenage dance is being conducted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.268)

5.12.370 Inspection.
Any peace officer of the City or any member of a Fire Department charged with the duty of law enforcement shall have free access at all times to any teenage dance issued a permit under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.269)

5.12.380 Employment of police.
The permittee shall employ, and there shall be on duty at all times during any teenage dance at least one policeman for every 100 participants with a minimum of one policeman for every exit and entrance. One police matron shall also be in attendance. The matron shall not be counted as fulfilling the requirement for any policeman. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.270)

5.12.390 Police exceptions.
Adult sponsoring groups raising funds for use by their organization to promote youth activities, may at the discretion of the Issuing Officer, dispense with the employment of police, where it can furnish proof of having present a sufficient number of adult persons to maintain order. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.271)

5.12.400 Advertising.
No teenage dance shall be advertised by use of any media of public advertising prior to the issuance of the teenage dance permit authorizing such dance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.272)

5.12.410 Rules and regulations.
The City Council shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.273)

Chapter 5.16
ENTERTAINMENT LICENSE
Sections:

5.16.010    Definitions.

5.16.020    Class I entertainment license fee.

5.16.030    Class II entertainment license fee.

5.16.040    Class III entertainment license fee.

5.16.050    Exemption from fee.

5.16.060    Procedures.

5.16.070    Additional reasons for denial of application.

5.16.080    Mandatory denial.

5.16.090    Noise abatement.

5.16.100    Hours.

5.16.110    Private club.

5.16.120    Minors.

5.16.130    Persons intoxicated or under the influence of drugs.

5.16.140    Exits.

5.16.150    Visibility from the street.

5.16.160    Solicitation of drinks.

5.16.170    Gambling.

5.16.180    Solicitation of trade.

5.16.190    Indecent performance.

5.16.200    Lighting.

5.16.210    Parking lot.

5.16.220    Number of employees.

5.16.230    Miscellaneous rules.

5.16.240    Deputies – Inspection.

5.16.250    Chief of Police – Admission.

5.16.260    Applicability.

5.16.270    Additional grounds for suspension or revocation.

5.16.280    Regulation of signs.

5.16.290    Entrance sign.

5.16.300    Attire.

5.16.310    Manager.

5.16.320    Repealed.

5.16.330    Additional data.

5.16.340    Repealed.

5.16.350    Additional reasons for denial of registration.

5.16.360    Motion pictures prohibited.

5.16.370    Multiple license waiver.

5.16.380    Going business – Extension of time.

5.16.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words are defined:

A. “Entertainment” means:

1. Any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, song, dance act, song and dance act, or poetry recitation, conducted or participated in by any professional entertainer in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted. Entertainment also includes a fashion or style show, except when conducted by a bona fide nonprofit club or organization, and when conducted solely as a fundraising activity for charitable purposes. The term “professional entertainer,” as used in this subsection, means a person or persons who engage for livelihood or gain in the presentation of entertainment. Entertainment does not include:

a. Mechanical music alone;

b. Instrumental music alone, except between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:30 a.m. when the provisions of PMC 5.16.100 shall apply; or

c. Dancing participated in only by customers; however, this subdivision does not exempt exhibition dancing by a person receiving compensation for such exhibition dancing.

2. Entertainment also includes the act of any female, while visible to any customer, exposing any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that both nipples and all portions of both breasts which have a different pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts are below such straight line, or the wearing of any type of clothing so that such may be observed.

B. “Informal entertainment” means any act, play, review, pantomime scene, song, dance act, song and dance act, or poetry recitation, conducted or participated in by any nonprofessional person or persons in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC §§ 21.280.1, 21.280.2, 21.280.3)

5.16.020 Class I entertainment license fee.
The annual fee for a class I entertainment license shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 6, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.280.5)

5.16.030 Class II entertainment license fee.
A. The annual fee for a class II entertainment license shall be:

1. The fees set forth in PMC 5.16.020; and

2. An additional fee as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time.

B. Wherever the fees for a class II entertainment license have been paid by an applicant, no additional fee is required of the same applicant for a class I or class II entertainment license for the same location covered by the class II entertainment license. (Ord. 683 § 7, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.280.6)

5.16.040 Class III entertainment license fee.
The annual fee for a class III entertainment license shall be $80.00 for the first year, and $40.00 for each annual renewal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.280.7)

5.16.050 Exemption from fee.
No fee is required for a license for an entertainment at which no alcoholic beverage is sold or consumed where such entertainment is conducted by a bona fide charitable, religious, benevolent, patriotic, or educational organization, or by the United Service Organization. Any determination as to the exempt status of any applicant shall be made by the Issuing Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.280.8)

5.16.060 Procedures.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a license is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.280.9)

5.16.070 Additional reasons for denial of application.
In addition to the reasons stated in the uniform licensing procedure, the Issuing Officer shall have the power to deny any application if it appears that the applicant, or the person to have direct management of the premises, is not a suitable or proper person to have direct management of the premises, is not a suitable or proper person to carry on the business for which the license is sought, or if the premises proposed to be used in the conduct of the business to be licensed shall be deemed not to be a suitable or proper place therefor, or if the health, welfare or public morals of the community, warrant such denial. The Issuing Officer may issue the license upon such conditions as he determines would eliminate the situations which would otherwise result in denial of the license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.281.5)

5.16.080 Mandatory denial.
In any case where an applicant knowingly or deliberately makes any material false statement on an application for a license, such application shall be denied. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.281.9)

5.16.090 Noise abatement.
Whenever, after a hearing notice of which must be given 10 days prior thereto, it is determined that noise from any establishment licensed under this chapter interferes with the right of persons dwelling in the vicinity of such establishment to the peaceful and quiet use and enjoyment of their property, the Council may require that the premises be soundproofed in a manner that in the judgment of the Council will be effective to eliminate the noise or reduce it to a reasonable level. In taking any action under this section, the Council must balance all of the interests of the respective parties, as well as the hardship which will result from any order. If the Council finds that the noise complained of is of minimum or inconsequential degree, no action shall be taken under this section. If a licensee fails, within a reasonable time and after having been ordered to do so pursuant to this section, to take such steps as were ordered to abate any noise, his license shall be suspended after a second hearing, 10 days’ notice of which must be given, until such time as he complies with the order. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.282.3)

5.16.100 Hours.
No entertainment other than mechanical music of any sort may be conducted in an establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.282.4)

5.16.110 Private club.
No establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter may allow the premises to be used for the purpose of conducting a private club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:30 a.m. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.282.5)

5.16.120 Minors.
No person under 21 years of age shall enter, be, or remain in or on any premises on or in which any “topless” entertainment, as defined in PMC 5.16.010(A)(2), is presented. A licensee shall not permit such a person to enter, be, or remain in or on such premises. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.282.6)

5.16.130 Persons intoxicated or under the influence of drugs.
It is unlawful for any person who is intoxicated or under the influence of any drug to appear in or be in any establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter. A person who conducts or assists in conducting any such establishment shall not permit any intoxicated person or person who is under the influence of any drug to appear, be, or remain at such place. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.282.7)

5.16.140 Exits.
No entertainment shall be permitted in any establishment where a license is required which does not provide unlocked doors with free and easy egress while patrons are in the establishment. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.282.8)

5.16.150 Visibility from the street.
There shall be no entertainment of any kind where an entertainment license is required which is visible at any time from the street, sidewalk or highway. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.282.9)

5.16.160 Solicitation of drinks.
No entertainment may be conducted in establishments where a license is required where employees solicit or accept drinks of alcoholic beverages from customers. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.283.1)

5.16.170 Gambling.
No entertainment may be conducted in any establishment where a license is required in which gambling in any form is permitted or tolerated, or in which there is kept any machine or machines or other device designed or commonly used for the purpose of gambling in any form. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.283.2)

5.16.180 Solicitation of trade.
No entertainment may be conducted in any establishment where a license is required at which solicitation of trade is made at or near the entrance, either by personal solicitation or otherwise, by means of any device whereby the voice of the person soliciting can be heard at or near the residence. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1983; CC § 21.283.3)

5.16.190 Indecent performance.
No entertainment may be conducted where an entertainment license is required in which any person participating directly or indirectly sings or speaks any obscene or indecent words, or performs any lewd or indecent acts. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.283.4)

5.16.200 Lighting.
Every establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be lighted throughout to an intensity of not less than three foot-candles during all hours of operation except while the floor show is in progress. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.283.5)

5.16.210 Parking lot.
Every person operating an establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter, who owns, operates, or controls any parking lot adjacent to such establishment and used in connection therewith, shall adequately and uniformly light such parking lot to an intensity of not less than two foot-candles. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.283.6)

5.16.220 Number of employees.
At every establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter having a capacity of not less than 200 persons, not less than one employee for the first 200 persons, and one additional employee for each additional 100 persons who could be accommodated, whether actually present or not, shall be constantly in attendance during the entire time that any entertainment is in progress, and shall devote their entire time and attention to the keeping of order, the checking of the admission of minors, and seeing to it that all provisions of this chapter are complied with. The Issuing Officer may require such additional employees or guards on an individual basis as the Issuing Officer deems in the public interest. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1983; CC § 21.283.7)

5.16.230 Miscellaneous rules.
No professional entertainer or employee may dance, unnecessarily converse, or associate with any customer during any entertainment period, and not at all except in a formal manner; provided, however, that a regularly scheduled audience participation type of entertainment may be presented during the time stated and in the manner described in an advertisement posted at the premises and appearing in a regularly printed program; provided further, that a copy of said advertisement shall be received by the Issuing Officer 24 hours prior to the conducting of said audience participation entertainment. This section shall not apply to establishments having a class III entertainment license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.283.8)

5.16.240 Deputies – Inspection.
The deputies of the City, in addition to their several other duties, shall inspect any and all establishments licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.283.9)

5.16.250 Chief of Police – Admission.
The Chief of Police and/or his deputies shall be permitted by every licensee to enter free of charge any establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of inspection. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.284.1)

5.16.260 Applicability.
The provisions of PMC 5.16.270 and 5.16.280 shall apply only to those establishments required to have a class II entertainment license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.284.2)

5.16.270 Additional grounds for suspension or revocation.
In addition to the grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the provisions of Section 24200 of the Business and Professions Code of California are hereby made applicable to licenses under this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.284.3)

5.16.280 Regulation of signs.
A. Signs shall be in conformance with regulations in PMC Title 17.

B. No sign or signs which in whole or in part depict the human form or any portion or portions thereof, whether clothed or unclothed, shall be maintained erected, used, or placed upon or adjacent to the outside of any building or in connection with any premises therein licensed pursuant to this chapter.

C. No sign or signs which in whole or in part advertise any “topless” entertainment, using the word “girls” or words of like or similar import, except the words “topless entertainment,” shall be maintained, erected, used, or placed upon or adjacent to the outside of any building or in connection with any premises therein licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 123 § 3, 1984; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC §§ 21.284.4, 21.284.5, 21.284.6)

5.16.290 Entrance sign.
A. Every establishment licensed pursuant to PMC 5.16.010(A)(2) shall place at or near the entrance to the licensed establishment a sign of not more than 225 square inches and not less than 144 square inches upon which is written:

WARNING: This establishment offers “topless” entertainment. If you would be offended, do not enter.

B. Such sign shall be illuminated to an intensity of not less than 10 foot-candles, and shall be clearly visible to any person entering the licensed establishment before such person enters the area where entertainment is conducted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.284.7)

5.16.300 Attire.
No person shall enter, be, or remain in any establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter or required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter, except when attired in such a manner that the pubic area, private parts and the crease of the buttocks are completely covered and are not visible to the human eye. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.284.8)

5.16.310 Manager.
All establishments licensed or required to be licensed under this chapter shall have a manager on the premises at all times when entertainment is being conducted. Such manager shall be registered with and approved by the Issuing Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.284.9)

5.16.320 Registration of female entertainers.
Repealed by Ord. 691. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.285.1)

5.16.330 Additional data.
Any person registering under PMC 5.16.320 shall, in addition to the information required thereby, provide the Issuing Officer with a recent photograph, which photograph may be taken by the Issuing Officer, and a complete set of such person’s fingerprints. The fingerprints required under this section will be taken by the Chief of Police and forwarded to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, for search. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1983; CC § 21.285.2)

5.16.340 Registration required before employment.
Repealed by Ord. 691. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.285.3)

5.16.350 Additional reasons for denial of registration.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided, in obtaining registration is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. In addition to the reasons stated in the uniform licensing procedure, the Issuing Officer may deny a registration when:

A. The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct; including, but not limited to, Sections 311.6, 314, 315, 316, 318 or subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the Penal Code.

B. The applicant has been convicted of a crime which required the applicant to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.285.4)

5.16.360 Motion pictures prohibited.
No person or persons licensed pursuant to this chapter or required to be licensed under this chapter shall show, project or permit to be shown or provided in any establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter or required to be so licensed, any motion picture, still picture, or slide, the main subject of which is the depiction of the human body, or any portion thereof, whether clothed or unclothed, unless and until the license of such establishment is specifically endorsed by the Issuing Officer to permit such showing. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.285.5)

5.16.370 Multiple license waiver.
In any case where a licensee is required to have both a class II entertainment license and a class I or class III entertainment license, the Issuing Officer may waive the requirements of PMC 5.16.370. Any such waiver must be endorsed by the license affected thereby. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.285.6)

5.16.380 Going business – Extension of time.
Any person who on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is conducting, permitting or assisting in conducting or permitting any entertainment as defined in PMC 5.16.010 to be shown, staged, exhibited or produced in any premises to which the public is admitted may continue operation but shall within 60 days from said date make application pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.285.7)

Chapter 5.20
TAXICABS AND TAXICAB OPERATORS
(Repealed by Ord. 683)

Chapter 5.22
REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS
Sections:

5.22.010    Purpose.

5.22.020    Definitions.

5.22.030    Permit required.

5.22.040    Issuance of permit.

5.22.050    Operating conditions.

5.22.060    Prohibited activities and locations.

5.22.070    Penalties.

5.22.080    Appeals.

5.22.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a permitting and regulatory program for sidewalk vendors that complies with Senate Bill 946 (Chapter 459, Statutes 2018), codified as Government Code Section 51036 et seq. The provisions of this chapter allow the City to encourage small business activities by removing total prohibitions on portable food stands and certain forms of solicitation while still permitting regulation and enforcement of unpermitted sidewalk vending activities to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare.

B. The City Council hereby finds that to promote the public’s health, safety and welfare, restrictions on sidewalk vending are necessary to:

1. Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any residence, public building, or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles;

2. Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, pathways, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, firefighting apparatus and mailboxes, as well as access to locations used for public transportation services;

3. Reduce exposure to the City for personal injury or property damage claims and litigation; and

4. Ensure sidewalk vending activities occur only in locations where such activities would not restrict sidewalk and pathway access, including impeding access by individuals with disabilities. (Ord. 826 § 1, 2019)

5.22.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise. If a term or phrase is not defined in this section, or elsewhere in this code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.

A. “Alcoholic beverage” shall have the same meaning as defined in PMC 9.54.020(B), or any successor section.

B. “Cannabis” shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. “Cannabis” also means “cannabis products” and “cannabis accessories,” as defined by Sections 11018.1 and 11018.2 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time. The term “cannabis” shall also have the same meaning as set forth in Section 19300.5(f) of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended from time to time.

C. “Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter.

D. “Curb face” means the vertical or sloping surface on the roadway side of the curb.

E. “Emergency vehicle access” means the roadway path or other surface that provides police or fire safety vehicular access from the dispatched point of origin to a facility, building, parcel, park or portion thereof. Emergency vehicle access includes, but is not limited to, fire lanes, public and private streets, parking lot lanes, access roadways, and walkways.

F. “Food” means any item provided in Health and Safety Code Section 113781, or any successor section.

G. “Hearing officer” means an individual designated by the City Manager to determine appeals pursuant to and in accordance with PMC 5.22.080.

H. “Heating element” means any device used to create heat for food preparation.

I. “Merchandise” means any item(s) that can be sold and immediately obtained from a sidewalk vendor which is not considered food. Items for rent shall not be considered merchandise.

J. “Park” means any area dedicated or established as a public park, including, without limitation, active and passive parks.

K. “Pedestrian pathway” or “pathway” means a paved path or walkway developed primarily for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk.

L. “Person” means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City.

M. “Public property” means all property owned or controlled by the City, including, but not limited to, alleys, parks, pathways, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and walking trails.

N. “Residential” means any area zoned exclusively as residential in PMC Title 17, including without limitation the City’s RR-A through RR-C, RS-1 through RS-7, RC and RA zoning districts.

O. “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

P. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

Q. “Sidewalk vending receptacle” means a pushcart, stand, display, wagon, showcase, rack, or nonmotorized conveyance used for sidewalk vending activities. “Sidewalk vending receptacle” shall not include pedal-driven carts.

R. “Sidewalk vendor” or “vendor” means a person(s) who sells food or merchandise from a sidewalk vending receptacle or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or pathway.

S. “Sidewalk vendor activities” or “sidewalk vending activity” means actions that qualify a person as a sidewalk vendor or actions done in anticipation of becoming a sidewalk vendor such as, but not limited to, installation, placement, or maintenance of any sidewalk vendor receptacles.

T. “Special event” means any temporary permitted event approved by the City.

U. “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

V. “Street” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained, within City public right-of-way, and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

W. “Swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter.

X. “Temporary use permit” means any permit issued by the City of Poway for temporary uses (e.g., special event permits, temporary use permits, film permits, park or facility reservations).

Y. “Tobacco product” shall have the same meaning as defined in PMC 8.05.020, or any successor section. (Ord. 826 § 1, 2019)

5.22.030 Permit required.
A. Permit Required. No person, either for himself/herself or any other person, shall engage in any sidewalk vendor activities within the City without first applying for and receiving a permit from the City Manager, or his or her designee, in accordance with this chapter.

B. Application. A written application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be filed with the City Manager, or his or her designee, on a form provided by the City and shall contain the following information:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying to become a sidewalk vendor;

2. A copy of a California driver’s license or identification card (or other photo identification deemed acceptable by the City), as well as a California driver’s license or identification card number, individual taxpayer identification number, or municipal identification number (which shall not be available to the public for inspection, is confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the permit or comply with a State law or State or Federal court order);

3. The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of any roaming sidewalk vendors, sidewalk vending activity and/or be responsible for the person(s) working at the sidewalk vending receptacle;

4. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that will be employed as roaming sidewalk vendors or at a sidewalk vending receptacle;

5. The number of sidewalk vending receptacles the sidewalk vendor will operate within the City under the permit;

6. Whether the vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;

7. The day(s) and hours of operation the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate at such location(s);

8. The location(s) in the City where the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate;

9. The dimensions of the sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle(s), including a picture of each sidewalk vending receptacle operating under the permit;

10. Whether the sidewalk vendor will be selling food, merchandise, or both;

11. If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, a description of the type of food to be sold, whether such foods are prepared on site, and whether the vendor requires a heating element to prepare the food;

12. If the vendor is selling merchandise, a description of the merchandise to be sold;

13. A copy of the health permit required for any sidewalk vendors selling food, as required by the County of San Diego, PMC Title 8, or any successor chapter;

14. Proof of his or her possession of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit, which shall be maintained during the pendency of the sidewalk vendor’s permit;

15. A statement disclosing whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any criminal offense(s) and an agreement to submit to a criminal background check, including Live Scan fingerprinting;

16. An acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all other generally applicable local, State, and Federal laws;

17. A certification that, to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained within the application is true and correct;

18. An agreement by the sidewalk vendor to defend, indemnify, release and hold harmless the City, its City Council, boards, commissions, officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, obligations, damages, actions, causes of action, suits, losses, judgments, fines, penalties, liabilities, costs and expenses (including, without limitation, attorney’s fees, disbursements and court costs) of every kind and nature whatsoever which may arise from or in any manner relating (directly or indirectly) to the permit or the vendor’s sidewalk vending activities. This indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, damages awarded against the City, if any, costs of suit, attorneys’ fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with such claim, action, or proceeding whether incurred by the permittee, City, and/or the parties initiating or bringing such proceeding;

19. An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor’s use of public property is at their own risk, the City does not take any steps to ensure public property is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities, and the sidewalk vendor uses public property at his or her own risk;

20. An acknowledgment by the sidewalk vendor that he or she will obtain, and at all times during the duration of the permit maintain, any insurance of such types and in such amounts as required by the City’s Risk Manager; and

21. Any other relevant information required by the City Manager.

C. Application and Permit Fees. Each application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by resolution of the City Council. The application and permit are only applicable to the individual(s) named on the application. If said permit is approved, it shall not be necessary for the permittee to obtain a City business certificate to carry on the activities authorized by said permit, unless such permittee maintains a permanent place of business within the City. (Ord. 826 § 1, 2019)

5.22.040 Issuance of permit.
A. Within 30 calendar days of receiving a complete application, the City Manager may issue a sidewalk vendor permit, with appropriate conditions, as provided for herein, if he or she finds based on all of the relevant information that:

1. The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement (specifically including but not limited to complying with PMC Title 15 pedestrian clearances), or tend to interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of nearby residents to the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare;

2. The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the vendor;

3. The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not constitute a fire hazard, and all proper safety precautions will be taken;

4. The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not require the diversion of law enforcement personnel to properly police the area of such activity as to interfere with normal police protection for other areas of the City;

5. The sidewalk vendor has paid all previous administrative fines, completed all community service, and completed any other alternative disposition associated in any way with a previous violation of this chapter;

6. The sidewalk vendor has not had a permit revoked within the same calendar year;

7. The sidewalk vendor’s application contains all required information;

8. The sidewalk vendor has not made a materially false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact to the City in the application process;

9. The sidewalk vendor has satisfied all the requirements of this chapter;

10. The sidewalk vendor has paid all applicable fees as set by City Council resolution;

11. The sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle and proposed activities conform to the requirements of this chapter;

12. The sidewalk vendor has adequate insurance to protect the City from liability associated with the sidewalk vendor’s activities, including the naming of the City as an additional insured, as determined by the City’s Risk Manager; and

13. The vendor has satisfactorily provided all information requested by the City Manager to consider the vendor’s application.

B. A sidewalk vendor permit is nontransferable. Any change in ownership or operation of a sidewalk vendor or sidewalk vending receptacle requires a new permit under this chapter.

C. All permits issued under this chapter, regardless of when issued, expire on December 31st of the year in which they were issued. (Ord. 826 § 1, 2019)

5.22.050 Operating conditions.
All sidewalk vendors are subject to the following operating conditions when conducting sidewalk vending activities:

A. All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property. If affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle, the overall space taken up by the sidewalk vendor receptacle shall not exceed the size requirements provided in this section.

B. The sidewalk vendor permit shall be displayed conspicuously at all times on the sidewalk vending receptacle or the sidewalk vendor’s person. If multiple sidewalk vendors are staffing a sidewalk vendor receptacle or working as roaming sidewalk vendors, each person shall wear their permit on their person in a conspicuous manner.

C. Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities. Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not be stored on public property and shall be removed when not in active use by a vendor.

D. All sidewalk vendors shall allow any law enforcement official, firefighter, life safety services officer, or code enforcement officer, at any time, to inspect their sidewalk vending receptacle for compliance with the size requirements of this chapter and to ensure the safe operation of any heating elements used to prepare food.

E. Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not exceed a total height of three feet, a total width of three feet, and a total length of three feet.

F. No sidewalk vending receptacle shall be motorized or pedal-driven.

G. If a sidewalk vending receptacle requires more than one person to conduct the sidewalk vending activity, all sidewalk vendors associated with the sidewalk vending receptacle shall be within five feet of the sidewalk vending receptacle when conducting sidewalk vending activities.

H. Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall maintain a trash container in or on their sidewalk vending receptacle and shall not empty their trash into public trashcans. The size of the vendor’s trash container shall be taken into account when assessing the total size limit of a sidewalk vending receptacle.

I. Sidewalk vendors shall maintain sanitary conditions in the 10-foot radius around and within the vicinity of the vendor and shall not leave any location without returning the location to the condition when the sidewalk vendor first arrived at the location, by, including, but not limited to, picking up, removing, and disposing of all food, grease or other fluid, item, trash or refuse from their operation. Any disposal activities must comply with Chapter 13.09 PMC and all other applicable stormwater law, rules and regulations, as well as all applicable law, rules and regulations relating to public health and safety.

J. Sidewalk vendors shall maintain a minimum four-foot clear accessible path free from obstructions, including sidewalk vending receptacles and customer queuing area.

K. Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the noise standards provided in Chapter 8.08 PMC, and any successor sections. Additionally, all use of sound amplification, music, live entertainment, bells, whistles, and horns is prohibited when vending in residential areas.

L. Sidewalk vendors shall not approach persons to sell food or merchandise and shall not interfere, in any way, with anyone engaged in an activity to sell food or merchandise.

M. Sidewalk vendors shall not vend to or otherwise conduct transactions with persons in moving vehicles or vehicles parked or stopped.

N. No freestanding commercial signs are permitted, as set forth in Chapter 17.40 PMC. Sidewalk vendors shall not affix, employ or otherwise use a light display of any kind in connection with sidewalk vending activities, specifically including but not limited to flashing or animated lights. (Ord. 826 § 1, 2019)

5.22.060 Prohibited activities and locations.
A. Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all operating conditions, including those conditions set forth in PMC 5.22.050.

B. Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:

1. Renting merchandise to customers.

2. Displaying merchandise or food that is not available for immediate sale.

3. Selling, processing, cultivating, distributing and/or delivering adult-oriented material, tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, drugs of any kind, pharmaceuticals, or cannabis, including medical and recreational marijuana and related merchandise or paraphernalia.

4. Using an open flame on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle.

5. All sidewalk vendors, regardless of whether a roaming sidewalk vendor or stationary sidewalk vendor, are prohibited from conducting sidewalk vending activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily. In parks, sidewalk vending activities will end at 10:00 p.m. or one hour before park closure, whichever is earlier. In residential areas, all stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited. In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vending activity is prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, and 9:00 a.m. of the following day, Monday through Saturday, inclusive, and all day on Sundays and Federal holidays.

6. Continuing to offer food or merchandise for sale, following, or accompanying any person who has been offered food or merchandise after the person has asked the vendor to leave or after the person has declined the offer to purchase food or merchandise.

7. Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the course of offering food or merchandise for sale.

8. Blocking or impeding the path of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase.

9. Making any statements, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase would perceive to be a threat and which has a reasonable likelihood to produce in the person(s) a fear that the threat will be carried out.

10. Touching the person(s) being offered to purchase food or merchandise without that person(s)’ consent.

11. Selling of animals of any kind.

C. Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities at the following locations:

1. Within 12 inches of any curb face on all roads.

2. Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit to a building, structure or facility.

3. On any designated emergency vehicle accessway.

4. Any public property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk including without limitation any alley, courtyard, unpaved trail, street, roadway or parking lot.

5. Within 200 feet of an area designated for a temporary special permit issued by the City, during the limited duration of the temporary special permit. If the City provides any notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights to affected businesses or property owners under the City’s temporary special permit, such notice will also be provided to any sidewalk vendors specifically permitted to operate in the area, if applicable.

6. Within 200 feet of the Poway Center for the Performing Arts, located at 15498 Espola Road, from the time period commencing two hours before any ticketed event (including without limitation any play, performance, or concert) at the Poway Center for the Performing Arts is scheduled to begin, until two hours after that event has ended.

7. At the Blue Sky Ecological Reserve or Iron Mountain trailhead, specifically including but not limited to all associated parking lots, both of which were created and are maintained to allow residents and visitors to enjoy the natural landscape and habitat of myriad species of flora and fauna. Permitting any commercial sidewalk vending in the reserve would not only diminish the public’s use and enjoyment of natural resources and recreational activities, such sidewalk vending activity will create an undue concentration of commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character of the reserve.

8. On any private property without the express written consent of the owner or lessee of the property.

9. Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within 50 feet of another sidewalk vendor.

10. Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within 100 feet of the property line of a school, a place of worship, or a child day care facility.

11. Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within 200 feet of a permitted certified farmers’ market or swap meet during the limited operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or swap meet.

12. Stationary sidewalk vending activities shall only occur on sidewalks or pathways with a minimum width of eight feet or larger.

13. Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within 25 feet of a:

a. Fire hydrant;

b. Curb which has been designated as yellow or red zone, or a bus zone;

c. Automated teller machine;

d. Driveway, alley, or street corner;

e. Trash or recycling receptacles, bike racks, benches, bus stops or similar public use items; and

f. Public art objects, items, and displays.

14. Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities that would violate provisions of this code relating to visibility requirements for streets, alleys, driveways, and intersections.

15. Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not sell food or merchandise or engage in any sidewalk vending activities at any park where the City has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire.

16. On any sidewalk with a gradient in excess of 10 percent.

17. Within 200 feet of any public safety facility, including without limitation police stations and fire stations.

18. Within 24 inches of a parallel parking space.

19. On any sidewalk not adjacent to a State highway where vending equipment and queuing patrons would reduce clearance to less than four feet.

20. On any sidewalk adjacent to a State highway where vending equipment and queuing patrons would reduce clearance to less than five feet, with temporary restrictions of no less than three feet.

21. On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would restrict access requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act.

22. On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would jeopardize the fire or life safety of any person.

D. Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to, lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans, or traffic barriers. (Ord. 826 § 1, 2019)

5.22.070 Penalties.
A. Violations of this chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors and shall only be punished by the following administrative fine and rescission provisions.

B. Any violation of this chapter may be punished by:

1. An administrative fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

2. An administrative fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and

3. An administrative fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

C. If a sidewalk vendor violates any portion of this chapter and cannot present the citing officer with a proof of a valid permit, the sidewalk vendor may be punished by:

1. An administrative fine not exceeding $250.00 for a first violation;

2. An administrative fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and

3. An administrative fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

D. Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the City, the administrative fines set forth in subsection C of this section shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in subsection B of this section, or any successor sections.

E. The City Manager, or his or her designee, may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations. (Ord. 826 § 1, 2019)

5.22.080 Appeals.
A. Decisions to deny an application for a permit or to impose administrative fines may be appealed by any interested person. Appeals shall be heard and determined by the hearing officer.

B. Appeals shall be initiated within 10 calendar days of the decision or imposition of administrative fine. If the tenth day falls on Saturday, Sunday, or another day when City Hall is closed, the deadline shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. of the next working day. Appeals of a decision to deny an application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the City Council. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person appealing an administrative fine is not required to pay the administrative fine as a prerequisite to filing an appeal.

C. Appeals of decisions or administrative fines shall be made in writing to the hearing officer. The appeal must be legible and set forth:

1. The appellant’s full name, address and phone number;

2. The subordinate entity;

3. The date of the determination;

4. The determination for which review is sought;

5. The appellant’s interest in the appealed determination; and

6. Each reason why the appellant appeals the determination.

D. Decisions regarding administrative fines that are appealed shall not become effective until the appeal is resolved.

E. An insufficient appeal shall be returned to the appellant.

F. If the appeal is sufficient, the City Clerk shall set the appeal for a hearing before the hearing officer within 30 calendar days of the filing of the appeal unless both the appellant and the hearing officer consent to a later date.

G. The hearing officer shall give notice in writing to the appellant of the time and location of the appeal hearing. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall review the record of the decision or administrative fine and hear testimony of the appellant, if any, the applicant and any other interested party. The appeal shall be reviewed and determined on a de novo basis.

1. If an administrative fine is the subject of an appeal, the hearing officer shall take into consideration the person’s ability to pay the fine. The hearing officer shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may request an ability-to-pay determination at or before the hearing or while the administrative fine remains unpaid.

2. If the person meets the criteria described in Government Code Section 68632(a) or (b), or any successor section, the hearing officer shall accept, in full satisfaction, 20 percent of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter.

3. The hearing officer may allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or may offer an alternative disposition.

H. After the hearing, the hearing officer shall affirm, modify or reverse the original decision or administrative fine. When a decision or administrative fine is modified or reversed, the hearing officer shall state the specific reasons for modification or reversal. Decisions on appeals shall be rendered within 30 calendar days of the close of the hearing. The hearing officer shall mail notice of a decision to the appellant. Such notice shall be mailed within five working days after the date of the decision to the appellant. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 826 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 5.24
SOLICITATIONS
Sections:

Article I. Solicitations Generally

5.24.010    Definitions.

5.24.020    Employing or engaging solicitors.

5.24.030    Terms of license and fees.

5.24.040    Contents of license or identification card application.

5.24.050    Additional reasons for application denial, suspension or revocation.

5.24.060    Issuance of solicitor’s license or identification card.

5.24.070    Exemptions.

5.24.080    Exemptions from fees.

5.24.090    Identification card exhibited at all times.

5.24.100    Hours of business.

5.24.110    Prohibited vending.

Article II. Charitable Solicitations

5.24.120    Purpose.

5.24.130    Definitions.

5.24.140    Completed solicitation.

5.24.150    Solicitation requirements.

5.24.160    Initial solicitation without direct personal contact.

5.24.170    Registration required.

5.24.180    Financial records.

5.24.190    Inapplicability of article.

Article I. Solicitations Generally

5.24.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Established place of business” means a fixed place, location or building, owned or leased or rented on a yearly or monthly basis, by the person who uses such place, location or building as his permanent place of business. Established place of business does not include a residence unless such person possesses a State retail sales tax license indicating the residence as the business address.

B. “Goods” means goods, wares, merchandise, products, chattels of any description, magazines, periodicals or other publications or subscriptions therefor; regularly published newspapers as defined in this article excepted.

C. “House” means any structure, building or dwelling which has walls on all sides and is covered by a roof. House includes the land area surrounding it.

D. “Identification card” means a solicitor’s identification card issued to a person who possesses a valid solicitor’s license or who is employed or engaged to solicit by a person licensed to do business as a solicitor within the City.

E. “Interviewer” means any person who goes to a house or upon any public place for interviewing persons or soliciting answers to questions for marketing research, opinion, research, attitude surveys or for any other pool or information gathering service for compensation or other business enterprise. Interviewer does not include persons representing governmental entities, political parties, newspapers, radio or television stations, or persons circulating petitions for initiative, referendum or other political purpose.

F. “License” means a license which is issued to a person who is doing business as a solicitor in the City.

G. “Newspaper” means a publication appearing at regular intervals at short periods of time, as daily, weekly, biweekly, usually in sheet form and containing news that is reports of recent occurrences, political, social, moral, sporting events and items of varied character, both local and foreign, intended for the information of the general reader and has reference to the natural, plain and ordinary significance of the word newspaper and does not refer to or comprehend magazines or periodicals. Newspaper does not include regular or periodic advertising circulars, certificates, papers, coupons, books, or pamphlets.

H. “Public place” means any place to which anyone may have access without trespassing.

I. “Retail business” means sales of goods for any purpose other than resale in the regular course of business. Retail business includes retailer.

J. “Services” means any act performed for the benefit of another under some arrangement or agreement whereby such act was to have been performed.

K. “Solicitor” includes peddlers, hawkers, transient dealers, salespersons or other itinerant vendors, or an interviewer as defined in this article or any person who sets up a temporary stand or goes to a house or dwelling or upon any public place for the purpose of selling services, or offers to sell, or selling by sample, or take orders for, give away or otherwise dispose of any goods, or anything of value, or who offers to distribute or delivers any coupon, certificate, handbill, ticket, token card, paper, circulars, chance coupon, magazine, or other items which in turn are redeemable for goods.

L. “Temporary stand” means any stand, table, handcart, motor vehicle or other portable or mobile device whereby goods are displayed or dispensed.

M. “Wholesale business” means the selling of goods in gross to retail businesses and not by the small quantity or parcels to consumers thereof. Wholesale business includes wholesaler. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.501)

5.24.020 Employing or engaging solicitors.
An individual licensed to do business as a solicitor within the City and who employs or engages others to function or perform as solicitors shall furnish the Issuing Officer with the name and address, temporary and permanent, of all such persons employed or engaged in solicitations. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.502)

5.24.030 Terms of license and fees.
A. The terms of a solicitor’s license or identification card shall be one year; however, at the discretion of the Issuing Officer or at the request of the applicant the term may be for a lesser period. Thereafter the license or identification card may be renewed for a period of one year any time within 30 days prior to the expiration date of said license or identification card upon application therefor.

B. The fee for a new solicitor’s license shall be for a period of one year or less and shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. The fee for a license renewal shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time.

C. The fee for a new solicitor’s identification card or card renewal shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. One identification card shall be issued without charge to the applicant who has paid the fee for a solicitor’s license.

D. The appropriate fee shall accompany each application and is nonrefundable. The fees referenced in this section are not for revenue purposes but shall be used to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 683 § 9, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.503)

5.24.040 Contents of license or identification card application.
A. The applicant for a license and/or identification card shall apply to the Issuing Officer on forms prescribed by the Issuing Officer and may be required to furnish the following information about himself and his proposed activity:

1. Name;

2. Physical description and three photographs;

3. Fingerprints;

4. Local address;

5. Permanent address;

6. Description of the nature of his business;

7. Description of the nature of his goods or services to be offered;

8. Name and address of employer and a description of the relationship between the applicant and such employer;

9. The length of time for which such license is desired;

10. A statement of all convictions for all misdemeanors and felonies;

11. Such other information as the Issuing Officer shall deem necessary and relevant to a determination of whether a license should be issued pursuant to this chapter.

B. Upon receipt of an application for a license and/or identification card, the Issuing Officer may send copies of such application to any officer or department which the Issuing Officer deems essential in order to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant. The Issuing Officer may forward fingerprints to the California Bureau of Identification for research. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.504)

5.24.050 Additional reasons for application denial, suspension or revocation.
A. The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a license or identification card is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. In addition to the reasons stated the Issuing Officer may deny, suspend or revoke any application if he finds that the applicant, his agent, representative or employee:

1. Is convicted of any misdemeanor involving violation of any statute or ordinance regulating or taxing any business; or

2. Is convicted of any crime involving any of the offenses described under California Penal Code Section 290; or

3. Is convicted of any crime, the nature of which indicated the applicant’s unfitness to act as a solicitor; or

4. Who has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or

5. Who makes any false statement of misrepresentations in his application for such license and/or identification card.

B. For purposes of this section a plea of nolo contendere, or a plea or verdict of guilty, or a finding of guilt by a court, or a forfeiture of bail is deemed to be a conviction whether probation is granted or not. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.505)

5.24.060 Issuance of solicitor’s license or identification card.
A. After completing his investigation of the applicant and application, and within 30 days from receipt of such application, the Issuing Officer shall approve or deny the issuance of the license and/or identification card pursuant to the provisions of the uniform licensing procedure.

B. Upon approval by this Issuing Officer, the license and/or identification card issued to the applicant shall show the physical description of the licensee, his name and address, both temporary and permanent, and with the name of his principal if other than the licensee, and the nature of the business for which the license shall have been issued. The identification card shall show the expiration date of the license and shall contain a photograph of the licensee.

C. The license shall also contain a statement that the license does not constitute an endorsement by the City or any of its employees, of the purpose of persons conducting the solicitations. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.506)

5.24.070 Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to:

A. Students from an elementary school or a junior high school, or a high school, or public junior or community college, or public college or public university or any private educational institution listed in Education Code Section 29003, but only while such students are engaged in activity associated with academic or scholastic functions sponsored by and authorized by such schools;

B. Wholesalers, their representatives, agents of employees calling upon retail businesses, nor to retail businesses when such sales are made in the regular course of business and at the established place of business;

C. Sales by a farmer or rancher for products produced within the City by such farmer or rancher;

D. Persons who sell their goods at the rented stall of a lawfully operated swap meet licensed pursuant to Chapter 5.52 PMC*;

E. A newspaper as defined in this article and its employees; and

F. Mobile food vendors participating in permitted events in City of Poway Community Services facilities. (Ord. 787 § 2, 2016)

*    Code reviser’s note: Chapter 5.52 PMC was repealed in 2008.

 

5.24.080 Exemptions from fees.
Applicants for a solicitor’s license or solicitor’s identification card as described in this section shall be exempt from the appropriate fees.

A. Veterans of the army, navy, marines or air force as defined in Section 16102 of the Business and Professions Code of the State. Before any such veteran is licensed under this chapter, such veteran shall submit to the Issuing Officer proof of release from active duty under honorable conditions or his honorable discharge from the United States Service or a certified copy thereof.

B. Solicitors who are engaged exclusively in soliciting orders as an agent or representative of any person or persons engaged in interstate commerce which have their place or places of business outside of the State. Before any such agent or representative is licensed under this chapter, he shall submit to the Issuing Officer satisfactory identification and interstate commerce credentials from the person represented, and also comply with the requirements of PMC 5.24.040. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.508)

5.24.090 Identification card exhibited at all times.
Every person licensed under this article while engaged in the business for which licensed shall display on the front of his person his identification card in a manner and at a location allowing such identification card to be easily seen and read by any other person and upon demand by any peace officer shall exhibit such identification card. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.509)

5.24.100 Hours of business.
No person shall do business as a solicitor from 8:00 p.m. until 8:00 a.m. local time except by appointment. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.510)

5.24.110 Prohibited vending.
A. No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any occupant of any house or dwelling where the owner or occupant of the house or dwelling has posted at the front of the house or dwelling, printed with letters not less than one inch in height, and at a location which is unobstructed and clearly visible from the normal entrance way to such house or dwelling, a sign or placard prohibiting such soliciting.

B. No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any member of the public on any private commercial property which is normally open to the private commercial property where the owner or legal occupant thereof has posted at all entrances thereto, and printed with letters not less than one inch in height, and at a location which is unobstructed and clearly visible by all persons entering such property, a sign or placard prohibiting such soliciting. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.511)

Article II. Charitable Solicitations

5.24.120 Purpose.
The City Council declares that the purpose of this article is to safeguard the public against fraud, deceit and imposition, and to foster and encourage fair solicitations or sales solicitations for charitable purposes, wherein the person being solicited will know what portion of the money will actually be utilized for charitable purposes. (Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 2, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.513)

5.24.130 Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Charity” includes any nonprofit community organization, fraternal, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, or service organization, governmental employee organization, any person who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for charitable purposes, and any person who holds any assets for charitable purposes.

B. “Sale” includes a gift made with the hope or expectation of monetary compensation.

C. “Sales solicitation for charitable purposes” means the sale of, offer to sell, or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon device, magazine subscription, membership, merchandise, ticket of admission or any other thing or service in connection with which:

1. Any appeal is made for charitable purposes; or

2. The name of any charity, philanthropic or charitable organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement for making any such sale; or

3. Any statement is made to the effect that the whole or any part of the proceeds from such sale will go to or be used for any charitable purpose or organization.

D. “Solicitation for charitable purposes” means any request, plea, entreaty, demand, or invitation, or attempt thereof, to give money or property, in connection with which:

1. Any appeal is made for charitable purposes; or

2. The name of any charity, philanthropic or charitable organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement for making any such gift; or

3. Any statement is made to the effect that such gift or any part thereof will go to or be used for any charitable purpose or organization.

A solicitation for charitable purposes, or a sale, offer or attempt to sell for charitable purposes, includes the making or disseminating or causing to be made or disseminated before the public in this State, in any newspaper or other publication, or any advertising device, or by public outcry or proclamation, or in any other manner or means whatsoever any such solicitation. (Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 2, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.514)

5.24.140 Completed solicitation.
A solicitation is completed whether or not the person making or receiving the solicitation receives or makes any contribution or makes any sale or purchase referenced to in this article. (Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 2, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.515)

5.24.150 Solicitation requirements.
A. Prior to any solicitation or sales solicitation for charitable purposes, the solicitor or seller shall exhibit to the prospective donor or purchaser a card entitled “Solicitation or Sale for Charitable Purposes Card.” The card shall be signed and dated under penalty of perjury by an individual who is a principal, staff member, or officer of the soliciting organization. The card shall give the name and address of the soliciting organization or the person who signed the card and the name and business address of the paid individual who is doing the actual soliciting.

B. In lieu of exhibiting a card, the solicitor or seller may distribute during the course of the solicitation any printed material, such as a solicitation brochure, provided such material complies with the standards set forth below, and; provided, that the solicitor or seller informs the prospective donor or purchaser that such information as required below is contained in the printed material.

C. Information on the card or printed material shall be presented in at least 10-point type and shall include the following:

1. The name and address of the combined campaign, each organization, or fund on behalf of which all or any part of the money collected will be utilized for charitable purposes;

2. If there is no organization or fund, the manner in which the money collected will be utilized for charitable purposes;

3. The amount, stated as a percentage of the total gift or purchase price, that will be used for direct fund raising expenses. If paid fund raisers are paid a set fee rather than a percentage of the total amount raised, the card shall show the total cost that is estimated will be used for direct fund raising expenses. If the solicitation is not a sale solicitation, the card may state, in place of the amount of fund raising expenses, that an audited financial statement of such expenses may be obtained by contacting the organization at the address disclosed;

4. The non-tax-exempt status of the organization or fund, if the organization or fund for which the money or funds are being solicited does not have a charitable tax exemption under both Federal and State law;

5. The percentage of the total gift or purchase price which may be deducted as a charitable contribution under both Federal and State law. If no portion is so deductible, the card shall state that “This contribution is not tax deductible.”

D. Knowing and wilful noncompliance by any individual volunteer who receives no compensation of any type from, or in connection with, a solicitation by any charitable organization shall subject the solicitor or seller to the penalties of this article.

E. When the solicitation is not a sales solicitation, any individual volunteer who receives no compensation of any type from, or in connection with, a solicitation by any charitable organization, may comply with the disclosure provisions by providing the name and address of the charitable organization on behalf of which all or any part of the money collected will be utilized for charitable purposes, by stating the charitable purposes for which the solicitation is made, and by stating to the person solicited that information about revenues and expenses of such organization, including its administration and fund raising costs, may be obtained by contacting the organization’s office at the address disclosed. Such organization shall provide such information to the person solicited within seven days after receipt of the request. If the volunteer is 10 years of age or younger, he is not required to make any disclosures. (Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 2, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.516)

5.24.160 Initial solicitation without direct personal contact.
If the initial solicitation or sales solicitation is made by radio, television, letter, telephone or any other means not involving direct personal contact with the person solicited, this solicitation shall clearly disclose the information required by PMC 5.24.150. This disclosure requirement shall not apply to any radio or television solicitation of 60 seconds or less. If the gift is subsequently made or the sale is subsequently consummated the solicitation or sale for charitable purposes card shall be mailed to or otherwise delivered to the donor, or to the buyer with the item or items purchased. (Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 2, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.517)

5.24.170 Registration required.
Any person or organization engaging in any regulated activity set forth in PMC 5.24.150 and 5.24.160 shall register with the Issuing Officer. Registration shall be done on a form prescribed by the Issuing Officer and shall be deemed completed once the following information is provided:

A. The full name, mailing address and telephone number of the person or organization sponsoring, promoting or conducting the proposed solicitations;

B. The full name, mailing address and telephone number of the individual person or persons who will have supervision of and responsibility for the proposed solicitations;

C. The subject matter of the proposed solicitations, and the purpose thereof;

D. A description of the proposed solicitation indicating the type of communication to be involved; and

E. The dates and hours which the solicitations are proposed to begin, and the expected duration of the proposed solicitations. (Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 2, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.518)

5.24.180 Financial records.
The financial records of a soliciting organization shall be maintained on the basis of generally accepted accounting principles as defined by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the Financial Accounting Standards Board. (Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 2, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.519)

5.24.190 Inapplicability of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply to solicitations, sales, offers, or attempts to sell within the membership of a charitable organization or upon its regular occupied premises, nor shall it apply to funds raised as authorized by Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 73 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6408 § 2, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.520)

Chapter 5.28
JUNK, AUTOMOBILE WRECKING AND NONOPERATING VEHICLE STORAGE YARDS
Sections:

5.28.010    Definitions.

5.28.020    License – Application.

5.28.030    License – Procedure.

5.28.040    Regulations.

5.28.050    Exception to fence requirement.

5.28.060    Records of dealer.

5.28.070    Records of Chief of Police.

5.28.080    Retention of goods period.

5.28.090    Goods not to be altered.

5.28.100    Goods released by Chief of Police.

5.28.110    Hold-order by Chief of Police.

5.28.120    Application denial – License suspension and/or revocation.

5.28.010 Definitions.
Words used in this chapter that are defined in the zoning ordinance but not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the same meaning as is given to them in the zoning ordinance. Whenever the following words are used in this chapter they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Dealer” means any person who engages in the business of automobile wrecking, storing nonoperating vehicles, or operating a junkyard.

B. “Nonoperating vehicle storage yard” means any lot or parcel of land on which are kept five or more vehicles which for a period exceeding 30 days have not been capable of operating under their own power, and from which no parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.601)

5.28.020 License – Application.
Application for a junk, automobile wrecking, or nonoperating vehicle storage yard license shall be made to the Issuing Officer on forms provided by the Issuing Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.603)

5.28.030 License – Procedure.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a license is that set forth in uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. The fee for a license shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 10, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.605)

5.28.040 Regulations.
It is unlawful for any person to carry on, maintain or conduct a junkyard, motor vehicle wrecking yard for the storage of nonoperating motor vehicles in the City, unless such establishment is carried on, maintained or conducted in compliance with the following regulations:

A. Such establishment shall be carried on, maintained or conducted entirely inside an enclosed building or buildings, or on premises entirely enclosed by a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height and constructed according to the requirements of this code.

B. Such fence or wall shall be or has been sold, bartered or given away, shall be placed or be maintained in a neat, substantial, safe condition and shall be painted, unless of masonry or rustproof metals.

C. No sign, picture, transparency, advertisement or mechanical device which is used for the purpose of, or which does advertise or bring to notice any person or persons, or article or articles of merchandise, or any business or profession, or anything that is to be or has been sold, bartered or given away, shall be placed or be maintained, or caused to be maintained, upon the outward face of such fence or wall; except that a business carried on, maintained or conducted within such fenced or walled enclosure and in accordance with applicable zoning regulations may be advertised by use of a space not exceeding six feet in height and 15 feet in length on each side of such enclosure.

D. Gates for access to the premises shall swing inwardly, and such gates shall be kept closed when the premises are not open for business.

E. No junk or secondhand article shall be piled, or permitted to be piled, in excess of the height of the enclosing fence or wall or nearer than two feet thereto.

F. All gasoline, oil or other inflammable liquid and all gas shall be drained and removed from any unregistered motor vehicle or other junk or secondhand article located in said building, buildings or premises.

G. The material located in or on the premises shall be so arranged that reasonable inspection or access to all parts of the premises can be had at any time by the proper fire, health, police and building authorities.

H. The Director of Development Services shall at least annually inspect all licensed establishments for compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.607)

5.28.050 Exception to fence requirement.
An exception to the fence requirement of PMC 5.28.040 may be granted to authorize the fencing of less than all sides of the premises for which a license is sought, upon a finding that the topographical configuration of such premises is such that the fencing of all sides thereof is not necessary to prevent ingress to or egress from the premises other than through the gate or door designed to provide access to the premises. The procedures for application, consideration, and granting or denial of an exception shall be those established by the zoning ordinance for a special use permit. The application for an exception shall be $40.00, except that if the application for an exception is made in conjunction with an application for the permit mentioned above only the application fee applicable to such permit shall be charged. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.608)

5.28.060 Records of dealer.
At the end of each week every dealer shall file with the Chief of Police properly completed “buy form” records for all property received during each week by such dealer. Such “buy form” records shall be on forms furnished by the Chief of Police. The “buy form” records shall be made in triplicate, written, printed or typed in a legible manner. The “buy form” shall contain the following:

A. The name of the person from whom the goods were purchased, together with the address and description of the person from whom such goods were purchased and the license number and description of the vehicle in which the goods were delivered to the dealer;

B. A description of the thing or things purchased by the name of the article, the name of the manufacturer, if known, and serial number or numbers and initials or identifying marks or inscriptions if the article is one which is identified by such numbers, initials, marks or inscriptions;

C. Such other information required by the Chief of Police which may assist in the detection of stolen property;

D. A copy of each “buy form” record shall be kept on file at the place of business of the licensee for a period of two years, and shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police or any of his deputies, or any peace officer of this State at all reasonable times;

E. This section shall not apply to secondhand motor vehicles the transfer of ownership of which is required to be made a matter of record with the California Motor Vehicle Department pursuant to the Vehicle Code, except that the records of dealers of purchases and sales of such articles made within the City shall be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.609)

5.28.070 Records of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall maintain a file of all records received pursuant to the terms of this chapter for a period of two years and such records shall be open to inspection by any peace officer of this State. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.610)

5.28.080 Retention of goods period.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:

A. Every dealer shall retain in his possession for a period of 10 days after acquisition by him all merchandise except that defined in PMC 5.28.060(E) prior to any sale or disposal.

B. The 10-day holding period shall commence with the date that the “buy form” report of its acquisition is filed with the Chief of Police by the dealer. Under such conditions as he may require, the Chief of Police may for good cause authorize prior disposition of any such property in lieu of holding the property for the prescribed 10 days. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.611)

5.28.090 Goods not to be altered.
A junk, automobile wrecking, or nonoperating vehicle storage yard dealer shall not allow any property pledged to or purchased by him to be cleaned, altered, repaired, painted or otherwise changed in appearance until such property has been held for the time required by this chapter or unless released by the Chief of Police, except that property reported under PMC 5.28.060(E). Such property shall be exposed to public view during business hours for the duration of the holding period or until released by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.612)

5.28.100 Goods released by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police may release any property required to be held by this chapter, if after an inspection he is satisfied that such property is in the lawful possession of the junk, automobile wrecking, or nonoperating vehicle storage yard dealer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.613)

5.28.110 Hold-order by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police may place a hold-order for a period of 30 days upon any property acquired by the junk, automobile wrecking, or nonoperating vehicle storage yard dealer in the course of his business and upon release of such property, the Chief of Police may require the junk, automobile wrecking, or nonoperating vehicle storage yard dealer to keep a true record of such property and include therewith the true name and address of the person to whom such property was sold, or a record of any other method of disposition. The junk, automobile wrecking, or nonoperating vehicle storage yard dealer shall keep for two years any record required under this section. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.614)

5.28.120 Application denial – License suspension and/or revocation.
The Issuing Officer may deny the application for license or suspend for 30 days or less or revoke the license of any junk, automobile wrecking, or nonoperating vehicle storage yard dealer if the health, welfare or public morals of the community warrant such denial, suspension or revocation or if the applicant or licensee or any employee, agent or representative thereof has:

A. Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be filed under this chapter; or

B. Violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any statute related to the doing of business regulated by this chapter; or

C. A bad moral character, or a bad reputation for truth, honesty or integrity; or

D. Committed any unlawful fraudulent deception or dangerous act in the course of doing business regulated by this chapter; or

E. Demonstrated that he is unfit to be trusted with the privileges granted by a license for doing business as a junk, automobile wrecking, or nonoperating vehicle storage yard dealer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.615)

Chapter 5.32
SECONDHAND DEALERS
Sections:

5.32.010    Findings.

5.32.020    Intent.

5.32.030    Definitions.

5.32.040    License.

5.32.050    Records of dealer.

5.32.060    Records of Chief of Police.

5.32.070    Retention of goods period.

5.32.080    Goods not to be altered.

5.32.090    Goods released by Chief of Police.

5.32.100    Hold-order by Chief of Police.

5.32.110    Export.

5.32.120    Compliance with zoning ordinance.

5.32.130    Exceptions.

5.32.010 Findings.
The City Council finds that secondhand businesses provide a means of disposing of stolen goods. Investigation by police agencies reveals that new, used and stolen property are acquired and sold by secondhand businesses. Because secondhand businesses can be ready vehicles of the disposal of stolen goods, such businesses should be subject to controls which will decrease the potential traffic in such stolen goods. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.700)

5.32.020 Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to preclude secondhand businesses from being depositories for stolen goods by providing control over the goods purchased and sold by secondhand businesses, especially such goods that are subject to theft and subsequent disposal by way of sale. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.701)

5.32.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Antique” means objects of art, bric-a-brac, curios or household furniture or furnishings offered for sale upon the basis, express or implied, that the value of property, in whole or in substantial part, is derived from its age or from its historical associations. All references to secondhand personal property or secondhand property in this chapter include antiques.

B. “Antique dealer” means any person who engages in the business of buying and selling, trading or accepting for sale on consignment antiques. All references to secondhand dealer in this chapter include antique dealer.

C. “Dealer” means either an antique or secondhand dealer.

D. “Doing business” means engaging in the business of an antique or secondhand dealer in the City.

E. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

F. “Secondhand dealer” means any person who engages in the business of buying and selling, trading or accepting for sale on consignment secondhand property.

G. “Secondhand property” means personal property of which prior use has been made. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.702)

5.32.040 License.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a license is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. The fee for a license shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 11, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.706)

5.32.050 Records of dealer.
At the end of each week every dealer shall file with the Chief of Police properly completed “buy form” records for all property received during such week by such dealer. Such “buy form” records shall be on forms furnished by the Chief of Police. The “buy form” records shall be made in triplicate, written, printed or typed in a legible manner. The “buy form” shall contain the following information:

A. The name of the person from whom the goods were purchased, together with the address, and description of the person from whom such goods were purchased and the license number and description of the vehicle in which the goods were delivered to the dealer;

B. A description of the thing or things purchased by the name of the article, the name of the manufacturer, if known, and serial number or numbers, and initials or identifying marks or inscriptions if the article is one which is identified by such numbers, initials, marks or inscriptions;

C. Such other information required by the Chief of Police which may assist in the detection of stolen property;

D. A copy of each “buy form” record shall be kept on file at the place of business of the licensee for a period of two years, and shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police or any of his deputies, or any peace officer of this State, at all reasonable times.

E. This section shall not apply to antiques or secondhand property which a dealer has acquired from another person who under the applicable State and/or local laws shall have previously reported such antiques or secondhand property to the appropriate police agency. The dealer acquiring such property shall upon demand by the Chief of Police present satisfactory records of such prior reporting. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.708)

5.32.060 Records of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall maintain a file of all records received pursuant to the terms of this chapter for a period of two years and such records shall be open to inspection by any peace officer of this State. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.709)

5.32.070 Retention of goods period.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:

A. Every dealer shall retain in his possession for a period of 10 days after acquisition by him all antiques and/or secondhand personal property prior to any sale or disposal.

B. The 10-day holding period shall commence with the date that the “buy form” report of its acquisition is filed with the Chief of Police by the dealer. Under such conditions as he may require, the Chief of Police may for good cause authorize prior disposition of any such property in lieu of holding the property for the prescribed 10 days.

C. This section shall not apply to antiques or secondhand property which a dealer has acquired from another person who under applicable State and/or local laws shall have previously held such antiques or secondhand property for the period prescribed by such laws. The dealer acquiring such property shall upon demand by the Chief of Police present satisfactory records that such antiques or secondhand property shall have been held for such required period. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.710)

5.32.080 Goods not to be altered.
A secondhand dealer shall not allow any secondhand property pledged to or purchased by him to be cleaned, altered, repaired, painted or otherwise changed in appearance until such secondhand property has been held for the time required by this chapter or unless released by the Chief of Police. Such secondhand property shall be exposed to public view during business hours for the duration of the holding period or until released by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.711)

5.32.090 Goods released by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police may release any property required to be held by this chapter, if after an inspection he is satisfied that such property is in the lawful possession of the secondhand dealer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.712)

5.32.100 Hold-order by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police may place a hold-order for a period of 30 days upon any property acquired by the secondhand dealer in the course of his business and upon release of such property the Chief of Police may require the secondhand dealer to keep a true record of such property and include therewith the true name and address of the person to whom such property was sold, or a record of any other method of disposition. The secondhand dealer shall keep for two years any record required under this section. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.713)

5.32.110 Export.
A secondhand dealer shall not export from this City any secondhand property pledged to or received by such secondhand dealer in his capacity as secondhand dealer until the Chief of Police has inspected and released such property. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.714)

5.32.120 Compliance with zoning ordinance.
No secondhand businesses may be carried on where prohibited by the zoning ordinance or within a structure which does not comply with applicable building code regulations. Any application denied or any license suspended or revoked because of violation of the terms of this section shall be final and there shall be no right of appeal from such denial of application or revocation or suspension of license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.719)

5.32.130 Exceptions.
The following are excluded from the operation of this chapter:

A. Secondhand motor vehicles the transfer of ownership of which is required to be made a matter of record with the California Motor Vehicle Department pursuant to the Vehicle Code, except that the records of dealers of purchases and sales of such articles made within the City shall be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police.

B. Receipt or sale of a secondhand article by any person that received such secondhand article as part payment of a new article, if such person is the authorized representative or agent of the manufacturer of or regularly deals in the new article sold. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.720)

Chapter 5.36
AIRCRAFT TICKET BROKERS
(Repealed by Ord. 683)

Chapter 5.40
CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS
Sections:

5.40.010    Permit – Generally.

5.40.020    Permit – Operation on City property.

5.40.030    Permit – Operation on private property.

5.40.040    Fee.

5.40.050    Renewal fee.

5.40.060    Insurance.

5.40.010 Permit – Generally.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a permit is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1001)

5.40.020 Permit – Operation on City property.
Upon receipt of an application to operate or exhibit such carnival or go-cart center on City property with no paid admissions, the Issuing Officer shall issue a permit for the entire term thereof upon determination that such use will not be in violation of any zoning ordinance of the City, that the location and type of equipment are approved by the Department of Development Services, that a current certificate of inspection has been issued by the State for each amusement ride to be operated within the carnival or go-cart center and that the applicant has the insurance required by PMC 5.40.060. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1003)

5.40.030 Permit – Operation on private property.
Upon receipt of an application to operate or exhibit such carnival or go-cart center on private property the Issuing Officer shall determine if said carnival or go-cart center complies with the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the insurance requirements of PMC 5.40.060 and that a current certificate of inspection has been issued by the State for each amusement ride to be operated within the carnival or go-cart center. If it is found to so comply, the Issuing Officer shall issue a permit for the entire term thereof or for one year, whichever is the lesser period of time. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1004)

5.40.040 Fee.
A fee, as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, shall be paid to the City through the Issuing Officer upon the filing of each application for a permit to operate a carnival or go-cart center. (Ord. 683 § 13, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1005)

5.40.050 Renewal fee.
The fee for renewal shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 14, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1006)

5.40.060 Insurance.
Every operator of such carnival or go-cart center shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect public liability insurance in the sum of $50,000 for death or injury to one person and $200,000 for the death or injury to more than one person in the same accident or occurrence. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1007)

Chapter 5.44
DISTRIBUTION OF COUPON BOOKS
(Repealed by Ord. 691)

Chapter 5.48
FIREARM SALES
Sections:

5.48.010    License – Generally.

5.48.020    Limitation on buildings.

5.48.030    Records – Secondhand weapons.

5.48.040    Delivery of firearms.

5.48.050    Advertising or display.

5.48.060    Breach of conditions.

5.48.010 License – Generally.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a license is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. The applicant shall pay as a fee for said license an amount as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, and this fee shall be paid at the time application for the license is made. The fee for renewal shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 16, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1203)

5.48.020 Limitation on buildings.
The business licensed by this chapter shall be carried on only in the building designated in the license. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1205)

5.48.030 Records – Secondhand weapons.
A. If a dealer, licensed by this chapter to sell firearms, has offered to him for purchase or for acceptance in trade a used or secondhand concealable weapon, he shall first obtain from the person offering such weapon the following information:

1. Name, address, and physical description of such person;

2. The description and license number of the vehicle, if any, being driven by such person;

3. The caliber, manufacturer’s name, description, serial number or numbers, initials or other identifying marks of the weapon;

4. Such other information which may be required by the Chief of Police.

B. This information shall be recorded on forms furnished by the Chief of Police. At the end of each week such dealer shall file with the Chief of Police such completed form with respect to each secondhand concealable weapon purchased or taken in trade during such week by such dealer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1206.1)

5.48.040 Delivery of firearms.
A. No concealable weapon shall be delivered:

1. Within 15 days of the application for the purchase thereof; nor

2. Unless the purchaser either is personally known to the seller or shall present clear evidence of his identity.

B. When delivered, such concealable weapon shall be unloaded and securely wrapped. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1207)

5.48.050 Advertising or display.
No pistol or revolver, or imitation thereof, or placard advertising the sale or other transfer, shall be displayed in any part of the premises where it can readily be seen from the outside. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1208)

5.48.060 Breach of conditions.
Upon the breach of any of the above-stated conditions any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to forfeiture. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1209)

Chapter 5.52
SWAP MEETS AND SWAP LOTS
(Repealed by Ord. 683)

Chapter 5.56
INSPECTION OF AVOCADOS BEING TRANSPORTED
Sections:

5.56.010    Purpose and intent.

5.56.020    Definitions.

5.56.030    Statement of ownership.

5.56.040    Obtaining and retaining the statement of ownership.

5.56.050    Presentation of statement of ownership.

5.56.060    Seizure and impoundment.

5.56.070    Investigation and release to rightful owner.

5.56.080    Disposition by sale.

5.56.090    Exemption.

5.56.100    Violation – Penalty.

5.56.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a means of identifying the owner of each commercial quantity of avocados so as to provide a means of controlling the alarming incidence of thefts of avocados within the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1501)

5.56.020 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used, they shall mean:

A. “Chief of Police” means the Chief of Police of the City or any of his duly appointed deputies.

B. “Commercial quantity of avocados” means any quantity of avocados in excess of 40 pounds exclusive of the container.

C. “Handler” means any person, or authorized agent thereof, who grows, distributes or retails avocados, including but not limited to the following: grower, packer, and wholesale or retail fruitstand.

D. “To transport” means the movement or conveyance by any means whatsoever of a commercial quantity of avocados over any road, street or highway within the City. (Ord. 106 § 3, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1502)

5.56.030 Statement of ownership.
A. Every person who transports a commercial quantity of avocados shall:

1. Cause a statement of ownership to be prepared and retained in his personal possession at all times while transporting said avocados; and

2. Deliver a copy of such statement to each handler of the avocados being transported.

B. Such statement of ownership shall contain the following information:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of each person who transports the avocados;

2. The name, address, and telephone number of each handler of the avocados;

3. The date transportation of the avocados begins and estimated time of delivery;

4. The kind and quantity of avocados being transported;

5. Points of origin and destination. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1503)

5.56.040 Obtaining and retaining the statement of ownership.
Every handler who delivers or receives a commercial quantity of avocados shall obtain a copy of the statement of ownership from the person transporting said avocados. The person transporting said avocados and each handler shall retain a copy of each statement of ownership for one year following the date of the transportation of said avocados begins and shall maintain the same for inspection and review at any reasonable time by the Chief of Police upon his request. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1504)

5.56.050 Presentation of statement of ownership.
Any peace officer, upon probable cause to believe a person is transporting a commercial quantity of avocados, may stop such person and inspect such avocados, whereupon, the statement of ownership described in PMC 5.56.030 shall be presented to said peace officer upon request. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1505)

5.56.060 Seizure and impoundment.
Any peace officer, upon reasonable belief that a person is not in legal possession of a commercial quantity of avocados, may seize such avocados without warrant. Upon seizure the peace officer shall take custody of the avocados and turn the same over to the custody of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall receive and provide for the care and safekeeping of such avocados in a refrigerated storage facility at a temperature range of approximately 40 degrees Fahrenheit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1506)

5.56.070 Investigation and release to rightful owner.
The Chief of Police shall make reasonable investigation to ascertain ownership of all commercial quantities of avocados seized pursuant to this chapter. The Chief of Police shall release custody of said avocados to the rightful owner upon submission to the Chief of Police of satisfactory proof of ownership and after payment of a reasonable charge sufficient to reimburse the Chief of Police for costs incurred in storing said avocados. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1507)

5.56.080 Disposition by sale.
A. If for any reason a commercial quantity of avocados is not released to its rightful owner after being in the custody of the Chief of Police for five days, the Chief of Police may sell said avocados by public auction, in the manner and upon the notice of sale as prescribed by law for the sale of perishable property under execution.

B. All of said avocados remaining unsold after being offered at such public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the Chief of Police.

C. All proceeds derived from the sale of said avocados shall be held by the Chief of Police for a period of at least six months, during which time the rightful owner of said avocados may submit satisfactory proof of ownership and obtain possession of the proceeds after payment of a reasonable charge sufficient to reimburse the Chief of Police for costs incurred in storage and sale of said avocados.

D. After retention of the proceeds for a period of at least six months, the Chief of Police shall deposit such proceeds in the general fund of the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1508)

5.56.090 Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to the transportation of a commercial quantity of avocados which has been certified pursuant to Article 2, commencing with Section 44971, Chapter 9, Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1509)

5.56.100 Violation – Penalty.
Any person who knowingly provides false information for a statement of ownership, includes false information in a statement of ownership, or alters information contained in a statement of ownership or any copy thereof, shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 21.1510)

Chapter 5.60
CABLE COMMUNICATION OR CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

5.60.005    Intent.

5.60.007    Election to terminate City franchise – Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006.

5.60.010    Short title.

5.60.015    Definitions.

Article II. Grant of Franchise

5.60.020    Grant.

5.60.025    Franchise territory.

5.60.030    Use of public streets and ways.

5.60.035    Duration.

5.60.040    Franchise nonexclusive.

5.60.045    Transfer of ownership or control – Transfer of franchise.

5.60.050    Transfer of ownership or control – Ownership or control.

5.60.055    Franchise renewal – Generally.

5.60.060    Franchise renewal – Renewal procedure.

5.60.065    Police powers.

5.60.070    Franchise fee – Annual franchise payment.

5.60.075    Franchise fee – Acceptance by grantor.

5.60.080    Franchise fee – Failure to make required payment – Payment requirements.

5.60.085    Forfeiture or revocation – Grounds for revocation.

5.60.090    Forfeiture or revocation – Procedure prior to revocation.

5.60.095    Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Disposition of facilities.

5.60.100    Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Restoration of property.

5.60.105    Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Restoration by grantor, reimbursement of costs.

5.60.110    Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Extended operation.

5.60.115    Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Grantor’s right not affected.

5.60.120    Receivership and foreclosure.

5.60.125    Franchise required.

5.60.130    Establishment of franchise requirements.

Article III. Regulation of Franchise

5.60.135    Regulatory authority.

5.60.140    Regulatory responsibility.

5.60.145    Public usage of the system.

5.60.150    Reservation by grantor.

5.60.155    Initial rates.

5.60.160    Rate change procedure.

5.60.165    Rate charge procedure – Schedule of rates.

5.60.170    Rate charge procedure – Disconnections.

5.60.175    Rate charge procedure – No consideration beyond schedule.

5.60.180    Rate charge procedure – Submission of rate increase requests.

5.60.185    Rate charge procedure – Rate increase notice.

5.60.190    Annual review of performance.

5.60.195    System and services review.

5.60.200    Access channel management – Intent.

5.60.205    Access channel management – Functions.

5.60.210    Access channel management – Access rules.

5.60.215    Access channel management – Access management entity reports to grantor.

Article IV. General Financial and Insurance Provisions

5.60.220    General provisions.

5.60.225    Performance bond.

5.60.230    Security fund.

5.60.235    Indemnification.

5.60.240    Insurance.

Article V. Design and Construction Provisions

5.60.245    System design.

5.60.250    Geographical coverage.

5.60.255    Cablecasting facilities.

5.60.260    System construction schedule.

5.60.265    Remedies for delay in construction.

5.60.270    Provision of service.

5.60.275    Undergrounding of cable.

5.60.280    New development undergrounding.

5.60.285    Underground at multiple dwelling units.

5.60.290    Street occupancy.

5.60.295    Construction and technical standards – Generally.

5.60.300    Construction and technical standards – Areawide interconnection.

Article VI. Service Provisions

5.60.305    Services to be provided.

5.60.310    Basic television service (BTS).

5.60.315    Basic subscriber radio service (BSRS).

5.60.320    Institutional service (IS).

5.60.325    Additional subscriber services.

5.60.330    Local origination channel(s).

5.60.335    Government access channel(s).

5.60.340    Education access channel(s).

5.60.345    Public access channel(s).

5.60.350    Public access(es) (closed-circuit).

5.60.355    Leased access channel.

5.60.360    Universal connection.

Article VII. Operation and Maintenance

5.60.365    Open books and records.

5.60.370    Records required.

5.60.375    Maintenance and complaints.

5.60.380    Rights of individuals.

5.60.381    Subscriber rights.

5.60.385    Continuity of service mandatory.

5.60.390    Grantee rules and regulations.

5.60.395    Tenant rights.

Article VIII. Rights Reserved to the Grantor

5.60.400    Rights to purchase the system.

5.60.405    Right of inspection of records.

5.60.410    Right of inspection of construction.

5.60.415    Right of intervention.

5.60.420    Right to require removal of property.

Article IX. Rights Reserved to the Grantee

5.60.425    Right of grantee.

Article X. Franchise Violations

5.60.430    Remedies for franchise violations.

5.60.435    Procedures for remedying franchise violations.

5.60.440    Force majeure – Grantee’s inability to perform.

5.60.445    Findings and conclusions.

Article XI. Reports

5.60.450    Periodic reports.

5.60.455    Plant survey report.

5.60.460    Copies of Federal and State reports.

5.60.465    Public reports.

5.60.470    Complaint file and reports.

5.60.475    Miscellaneous reports.

5.60.480    Income tax returns.

5.60.485    Inspection of facilities.

5.60.490    Business office and files.

5.60.495    Public inspection.

5.60.500    Failure to report.

5.60.505    False statements.

5.60.510    Cost of reports.

Article XII. Miscellaneous Provisions

5.60.515    Compliance with State and Federal laws.

5.60.520    Separability – Nonmaterial provisions.

5.60.525    Separability – Material provisions.

5.60.530    Notices.

5.60.532    Captions.

5.60.535    No recourse against the grantor.

5.60.540    Nonenforcement by the grantor.

5.60.545    Acknowledgments.

Article XIII. Franchise Applications

5.60.550    General requirements.

Article I. General Provisions

5.60.005 Intent.
The City finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the people of the City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the City or such persons as the City designates. It is the intent of the ordinance codified in this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise agreement issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 1, 1984)

5.60.007 Election to terminate City franchise – Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006.
Beginning January 1, 2007, any grantee of a City franchise that elects to terminate the City franchise and replace it with a State franchise pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (Division 2.5 of the Public Utilities Code, commencing at Section 5800) will no longer be governed by this chapter, but instead will be governed by Chapter 5.61 PMC. (Ord. 660 § 1, 2007)

5.60.010 Short title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Poway Cable Television Franchise Ordinance.” (Ord. 129 § 2, 1984)

5.60.015 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

1. “Additional subscriber service” means any service not included in “basic television service,” or “basic subscriber radio service” or “institutional service,” including, but not limited to, “pay-cable.”

2. “Agency subscriber” means a subscriber who receives a service in a government or public agency, school or nonprofit corporation as specified in the franchise agreement.

3. “Basic subscriber radio service” means the provision to all subscribers of such audio programs as the retransmission of broadcast FM radio signals, the retransmission of shortwave, weather, news, time and other similar audio information and the transmission of cablecast audio signals, all provided to subscribers at a monthly rate.

4. “Basic service” means the total of all of the following:

a. The transmission to all subscribers of all broadcast television channel signals authorized by the FCC and provided for in a franchise agreement;

b. The cablecasting to all subscribers of local origination programming and public, education and government access programming;

c. The transmission to all subscribers of all other cablecasting open-channel signals.

Basic service may be offered to subscribers in one or more tiers or combination of programs.

5. “Broadcast signal” or “signal” means a television or radio signal that is transmitted over the air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a cable communications system off-the-air or by microwave.

6. “Cable communications systems” or “system,” also referred to as “cable television system,” “CATV system,” or “broadband communications network,” means a system of antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, cablecasting studios, and other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the primary purpose of distributing video programming to home subscribers, and the secondary purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or distributing audio, video, digital, or other forms of electronic or electrical signals.

7. “Cablecast signal” means a nonbroadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the cable communications system.

8. “Cable-mile” means a linear mile of cable bearing strand as measured on the street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.

9. “Channel” means a frequency band, which is capable of carrying either one standard television or video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals, or some combination of such signals.

10. “Class IV channel” means a signaling path provided by a cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the cable television system.

11. “Closed-circuit” or “institutional service” means such video, audio, data and other services provided to institutional users on an individual requirement, private channel basis. These may include, but not be limited to, two-way video, audio or digital signals among institutions, or from institutions to residential subscribers.

12. “Commence construction” means that time and date when construction of the cable communications system is considered to have commenced, which shall be when the first connection is physically made to a utility pole, or undergrounding of cables is initiated, construction does not include preliminary engineering (strand mapping) nor obtaining necessary permits and authorizations.

13. “Commence operation” means that time and date when operation of the cable communications system is considered to have commenced which shall be when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full service to at least 10 percent of the dwelling units located within the service area.

14. “Commercial subscriber” means a subscriber who receives a service in a place of business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession.

15. “Converter” means an electronic device which converts signal carries from one form to another.

16. “Council” means the governing body of the City of Poway.

17. “Education channel” or “education access channel” means any channel where educational institutions are the primary designated programmers.

18. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successor.

19. “Franchise” means the nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter to construct and operate a cable communications system along the public way within all or a specified area in the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as required by other ordinances and laws of this City.

20. “Franchise agreement” means a franchise awarded ordinance, or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including referenced specifications, franchise applications, franchise requirements, ordinances and other related materials.

21. “Franchise fee” means the fee paid by the grantee to the grantor in consideration of the use of the public streets and rights-of-way.

22. “Government channel” or “government access channel” means any channel where local government agencies are the primary designated programmers.

23. “Grantee” means any “person” receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.

24. “Grantor” or “City” means the City of Poway as represented by the City Council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.

25. “Gross annual revenues” means the annual gross revenues received by the grantee from all sources of operations of the cable communications system as further defined in the franchise agreement.

26. “Initial service area” means the area of the City which will receive service initially, as set forth in the franchise agreement.

27. “Installation” means the connection of the system from the feeder cable to subscribers’ terminals, and the provision of service.

28. “Leased channel” or “leased access channel” means any channel or portion of a channel available for lease and programming by persons or entities other than the grantee.

29. “Local origination channel” means any channel where the grantee is the primary designated programmer, and provides video programs to subscribers.

30. “Monitoring” means observing a communication signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. Monitoring shall not include systemwide, nonindividually addressed sweeps of the system for purposes of verifying system integrity, controlling return paths transmissions, billing for pay-cable, verifying compliance with FCC rules, or detecting unauthorized connections to the cable communications system.

31. “Nonbroadcast signal” means a signal that is transmitted by a cable communications system and that is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast transmission path.

32. “Pay-cable” or “pay-television” means the delivery to subscribers, over the cable communications system, of television signals for a fee or charge to subscribers over and above the charge for basic service, or a per program, per channel, or other subscription basis.

33. “Penetration” means the result expressed in the percentage obtained by dividing the total number of potential subscribers in the franchise area into the number of subscribers receiving service.

34. “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, corporation or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation.

35. “Private channel,” or “closed-circuit channel” means any channel which is available only to subscribers who are provided with special converter or terminal equipment to receive signals on that channel.

36. “Programmer” means a person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system.

37. “Public access channel” or “community access channel” means any channel where any member of the general public or any noncommercial organization may be a programmer, without charge, on a first-come, first served, nondiscriminatory basis, in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement.

38. “Reasonable notice” shall be written notice addressed to the grantee at its principal office or such other office as the grantee has designated to the grantor as the address to which notice should be transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than seven days prior to that day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In computing said seven days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays recognized by the grantor shall be excluded.

39. “Reasonable order” means written orders not excessive or extreme as to costs or time to comply, governed by sound thinking.

40. “Resident” means any person residing in the City as otherwise defined by applicable law.

41. “Residential subscriber” means a subscriber who receives a service in an individual dwelling unit, where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession.

42. “Sale” shall include any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.

43. “School” means any nonprofit educational institution including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private.

44. “Section” means any section, subsection, or provision of this chapter.

45. “Service area” or “franchise area” means the designated geographic area in which the grantee is authorized or obligated to construct a cable system as provided in the franchise agreement.

46. “State” means the State of California.

47. “Street” includes each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the City limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time.

48. “Subscriber” or “customer” means any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable communications system.

49. “Substantially completed” means that sufficient distribution facilities have been installed by the grantee so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least 90 percent of the potential subscribers in the service area which have not already been served by another franchised cable operator. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 3, 1984)

Article II. Grant of Franchise

5.60.020 Grant.
A. In the event that the grantor shall grant to the grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct, a cable communications system within the franchise area, said franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement.

B. The franchise agreement shall include those provisions of the grantee’s “Application for Franchise” that are finally negotiated and accepted by the grantor and grantee.

C. Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained herein shall be consistent with general law and/or statutory requirements, which are incorporated by this reference as if fully set forth herein.

D. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the grantor can grant a franchise, the general law and/or statutory requirements, shall, without exception, control.

E. Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective.

F. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the grantor regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction; provided, however, that in the event of any conflict between the terms of this chapter and the franchise, the terms of the franchise shall control. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.1, 1984)

5.60.025 Franchise territory.
The grantor may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the City. The service area shall be the entire territory defined in the franchise agreement. The initial service area shall be that portion of the service area scheduled to receive initial service, as stated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.2, 1984)

5.60.030 Use of public streets and ways.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system in the franchise area, and subject to the provisions of PMC 5.60.290, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along the public streets and ways within the franchise area such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments, and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable communications system. Prior to construction or alteration, however, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate grantor agencies and local utility companies, and receive written approval before proceeding. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.3, 1984)

5.60.035 Duration.
The term of any franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as specified in the franchise agreement unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided. The effective date of the franchise shall be the date of adoption of the resolution by the grantor approving the franchise agreement. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.4, 1984)

5.60.040 Franchise nonexclusive.
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 129 § 4.5, 1984)

5.60.045 Transfer of ownership or control – Transfer of franchise.
Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. The franchise cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including but not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or other means without the prior consent of the grantor, and then only under such conditions as the grantor may establish. Such consent as required by the grantor shall, however, not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 6(a), 1984)

5.60.050 Transfer of ownership or control – Ownership or control.
A. The grantee shall promptly notify the grantor of any proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the grantee. The word “control” as used in this chapter is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

B. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the grantor shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld.

C. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry.

D. In seeking the grantor’s consent to any change in ownership or control, the grantee shall have the responsibility:

1. To show to the satisfaction of the grantor whether the proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the “proposed transferee”), which in the case of a corporation, shall include all officers, directors, employees and all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent or more of its voting stock, or any of the proposed transferee’s principals:

a. Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude including, but not limited to any violation of Federal, State or local law or regulations, or is presently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts,

b. Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of competent jurisdiction, or

c. Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system;

2. To establish, to the satisfaction of the grantor, the financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data for the proposed transferee which the grantee was required to submit in its franchise application, and such other data as the grantor may request. Financial statements shall be audited, certified and qualified by an independent certified public accountant.

3. To establish to the satisfaction of the grantor that the financial and technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and operate the system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing franchise terms:

a. Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor will take control and operate the cable communications system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. If the grantor finds that such transfer after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor will transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.

b. The consent or approval of the grantor to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the grantor in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of any franchise.

c. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the grantor will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise until the system is substantially completed.

d. In no event shall a transfer of ownership of control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement and otherwise obligated thereto to the satisfaction of the grantor. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.6(b), 1984)

5.60.055 Franchise renewal – Generally.
A. Nothing in any franchise agreement shall require renewal by the grantor after the term of the franchise has expired, nor shall renewal be presumed as a matter of vested interest, except to the extent specified in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (“Cable Act”).

B. The renewal term of any franchise shall not be greater than the initial term. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.7(a), 1984)

5.60.060 Franchise renewal – Renewal procedure.
A. Not later than 18 nor earlier than 24 months prior to the expiration of any franchise, a grantee may submit an application for renewal of such franchise, on forms approved by the grantor, with a nonrefundable application fee established by the grantor in an amount not to exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application. The application shall set forth in detail the franchisee’s legal, character, financial and other pertinent qualifications sufficient to make a determination to renew or terminate such franchise.

B. The application when filed shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the grantor. No later than 90 days after filing, a public hearing shall be held on the application. A decision shall be made by the grantor not later than 90 days after such hearing based upon the application, the hearing, the grantee’s record of compliance with the franchise requirements, its record of satisfactory service, and the terms and conditions proposed for the franchise renewal period.

C. Based on the above criteria, the grantor may decide to renew the franchise under appropriate terms and conditions, or not to renew the franchise.

D. If the grantor’s decision is not to renew the franchise, the grantor may initiate public solicitations for applications for a new franchise. The original grantee shall not be precluded from submitting such an application.

E. In any renewal or public solicitation, the grantor may require additional services, system upgrade or any other conditions it deems feasible and appropriate in the light of the accepted and proven state-of-the-art of the cable communications industry at that time. (Ord. 129 § 4.7(b), 1984)

5.60.065 Police powers.
A. In accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the police power of the grantor to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the grantor pursuant to such power.

B. Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other present or future lawful exercise of the grantor’s police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to any grantee or cable communications systems which contains provisions inconsistent with this chapter shall prevail only if upon such exercise, the grantor finds any emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.8, 1984)

5.60.070 Franchise fee – Annual franchise payment.
A. A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay to the grantor an annual fee in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement.

B. Such payment shall be in addition to any other payments due the grantor and commence as of the effective date of the franchise.

C. In the event of a dispute, the grantor, if it so requests shall be furnished a statement, by a certified public accountant, reflecting the total amounts of gross annual revenues and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.9(a), 1984)

5.60.075 Franchise fee – Acceptance by grantor.
No acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. (Ord. 129 § 4.9(b), 1984)

5.60.080 Franchise fee – Failure to make required payment – Payment requirements.
In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in this chapter, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation:

A. An interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate in effect upon the due date.

B. A sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of delinquent payment.

C. An estimated quarterly payment shall be made for the first three quarters of the calendar year based upon the grantee’s operation, as of March 31st, June 30th, and September 30th. Each of these payments shall be due and payable no later than 30 days after the end of the quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report showing the basis for the estimated payment and such other relevant facts as may be required by the grantor. The payment for the quarter ending December 31st shall be due and payable no later than 90 days after the end of the quarter. The payment shall reflect the actual payment due the grantor from the previous quarter plus an adjustment for any underpayment or overpayment made during the previous three quarters. The payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the quarterly gross revenues, the total annual revenues, the basis of the computation and such other relevant facts as may be required by the grantor.

D. Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall initiate franchise fee payments to the grantor at the minimum rate specified in the franchise agreement. These initial payments shall be credited against payments due in later years of the franchise in as much as they exceed the actual franchise payments due during any year. (Ord. 129 § 4.9(c – e), 1984)

5.60.085 Forfeiture or revocation – Grounds for revocation.
The grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise grant:

A. If the grantee should default in the performance of any of its significant and material obligations under this chapter or under such documents, agreements and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the grantor and the grantee and not cure such default within a reasonable time after notice to grantee;

B. If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages or the security fund or bonds as required in this chapter;

C. If any court of competent jurisdiction, or any Federal or State regulatory body by rules, decisions or other action determines that any provision of the franchise documents, including this chapter, is invalid or unenforceable prior to the commencement of system construction;

D. If the grantee should wilfully violate any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this franchise unless such orders or rulings are being contested by the grantee before an appropriate regulatory body or agency or in a court of competent jurisdiction;

E. If the grantee ceases to provide services for a significant period of time for any reason within the control of the grantee over the cable communications system. The grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond the grantee’s control. A default shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee’s control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest, whether held directly or indirectly;

F. If the grantee evades any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement or practices any fraud or deceit upon the grantor;

G. If the grantee’s construction schedule is delayed for more than 18 months later than the schedule contained in the franchise agreement and the grantor finds that the delay was not excusable;

H. If the grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.10(a), 1984)

5.60.090 Forfeiture or revocation – Procedure prior to revocation.
A. To initiate revocation of a franchise, grantor shall make written demand that the grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, conditions, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand, the grantor may place its request for termination of the franchise upon a regular Council meeting agenda. The grantor shall cause to be served upon such grantee, at least 10 days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least once, 10 days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area.

B. The grantor shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause.

C. If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, the grantor shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.

D. If the grantor determines such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the grantor may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and security fund and bonds forfeited unless there be compliance by the grantee within such period as the grantor may fix.

E. The decision of the grantor shall be in writing the reasons stated therefor set forth with findings supported by evidence within the record of proceedings. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.10(b), 1984)

5.60.095 Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Disposition of facilities.
In the event a franchise expires, is revoked, or otherwise terminated, the grantor may order the removal of the system facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable period of time as determined by the grantor or may allow the underground system facilities to be abandoned in place or require the original grantee to maintain and operate its network until a subsequent grantee is selected and a subsequent or modified cable system becomes operational. (Ord. 129 § 4.11(a), 1984)

5.60.100 Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Restoration of property.
A. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee’s removal of its equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments.

B. The grantor shall inspect and approve the condition of the public ways and public places; and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal.

C. The liability, indemnity and insurance, and the security fund and bonds provided for therein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.11(b), 1984)

5.60.105 Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Restoration by grantor, reimbursement of costs.
A. In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any work required by PMC 5.60.095 and/or 5.60.100, or any other work required by the grantor by law or ordinance within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the grantor, and after seven days notice, the grantor may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the grantor may recover such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by the grantee. The grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.11(c), 1984)

5.60.110 Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Extended operation.
A. Upon either the expiration or revocation of a franchise, the grantor may extend the term of such franchise and may require the grantee to continue to operate the cable communications system for a defined period of time not to exceed 24 months from the date of such expiration or revocation.

B. The grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable communications system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time.

C. The grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.11(d), 1984)

5.60.115 Procedures in the event of termination or expiration – Grantor’s right not affected.
The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the grantor under the franchise or any provision of law. (Ord. 129 § 4.11(e), 1984)

5.60.120 Receivership and foreclosure.
A. Any franchise granted pursuant hereto shall, at the option of the grantor, cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:

1. Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within the 120 days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and

2. Such receivers or trustees shall, within the 120 days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise agreement.

B. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or any part thereof, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless:

1. The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner provided in this chapter; and

2. Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the grantor to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.12, 1984)

5.60.125 Franchise required.
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets in the City or be allowed to operate without a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 4.13, 1984)

5.60.130 Establishment of franchise requirements.
The grantor may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises or franchise renewals, and may modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing conditions and state-of-the-art in the cable television industry. Such requirements shall not be retroactive to franchises then in effect. (Ord. 129 § 4.14, 1984)

Article III. Regulation of Franchise

5.60.135 Regulatory authority.
The grantor shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 5.1, 1984)

5.60.140 Regulatory responsibility.
The grantor, acting alone or acting jointly with other grantors, may exercise or delegate the following regulatory responsibility:

A. Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable communications system franchise(s);

B. Coordinating the operation of government and educational channels;

C. Providing technical, programming and operational support to public agency users, such as government departments, schools and public health care institutions;

D. Establishing procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated to public use and sharing of public facilities, if provided for in any franchise agreement;

E. Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services;

F. Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with other local, State or Federal telecommunications networks;

G. Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunication policy. (Ord. 129 § 5.2, 1984)

5.60.145 Public usage of the system.
If so specified in the franchise agreement, the grantor may utilize a portion of the cable communications system capacity, and associated facilities and resources, to develop and provide cable services that will be in the public interest. In furtherance of this purpose, the grantor may establish a commission, public corporation, or other entity to receive and allocate facilities, support funds and other considerations provided by the grantee, and/or others. Such an entity, if established, may be delegated the following responsibilities:

A. Receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization, channel capacity, facilities, funding and other support provided specifically for public usage of the cable communications system;

B. Review the status and progress of each service developed for public benefit;

C. Reallocate resources on a periodic basis to conform with changing priorities and public needs;

D. Report to the grantor annually on the utilization of resources, the new public services developed and the benefits achieved for the City and its residents. (Ord. 129 § 5.3, 1984)

5.60.150 Reservation by grantor.
The grantor reserves the right, at its discretion, from time to time, to determine if the entity described in PMC 5.60.145 is performing its purposes in a manner satisfactory to the grantor, and if it is not, the grantor may receive and allocate all or a portion of the channel capacity, operations, and capital appropriation, including any facilities and equipment purchased previously with such appropriation, to another entity. A new entity shall be required to comply in all respects with the legal responsibilities described in PMC 5.60.145. (Ord. 129 § 5.4, 1984)

5.60.155 Initial rates.
A. The grantee shall establish initial rates that must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for its services except as provided below.

B. In the event that grantee’s franchise area, or any portion thereof, is actually overbuilt by another franchised or licensed cable operator, or other person or entity who provides the equivalent of cable television services, grantee may, but shall not be required to, reduce its rate schedule for those subscribers within the overbuild area without being required to reduce its rate(s) throughout the entirety of its service area; provided, however, grantee’s published rates shall constitute the maximum rate which can be charged to any subscriber within grantee’s service area irrespective of the presence of overbuild competition or the lack thereof.

C. Grantee may, but shall not be required to, adopt promotional policies which reduce rates upon all or a portion of the services offered by grantee. Grantee shall give notice of the promotional policies to the grantor. Grantee’s promotional policies may be implemented or changed by grantee from time to time without the consent of the grantor; provided, however, grantee’s promotional policies, until changed, shall be applied uniformly throughout an identifiable portion of the grantee’s entire service area. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 5.5, 1984)

5.60.160 Rate change procedure.
A. The grantee may establish its own rates and charges for services rendered to subscribers under this chapter.

B. The grantor may recapture its rate-making authority at any time as is allowed by applicable law.

C. When the grantee elects to increase its rates it shall notify, in writing, the grantor, a minimum of 45 calendar days before the increase is scheduled to take effect.

D. Within 60 days following the notification to the grantee that the grantor wishes to challenge the rate increase, the grantor shall hold a public hearing to consider the proposed rate change, at which hearing all persons desiring to be heard, including the grantee, shall be heard on any matter including, but not limited to, the performance of its franchise, the grantee’s service, and the proposed new rates.

E. Upon notice of any public hearing as provided above, the grantee shall notify its subscribers of the time, place, and subject matter of the public hearing by announcement on at least two channels of its system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for at least five consecutive days prior to the hearing or by such suitable means and messages as may be approved by the grantor.

F. Within 90 days after said hearing, the grantor shall render a written decision on the grantee’s petition, either accepting, rejecting, modifying or deferring the same and reciting the basis for its decision. The grantor shall consider, but not be limited to, the following factors in approving or disapproving the petition:

1. Grantee’s fulfillment of all requirements of the franchise;

2. Quality of service, as indicated by the number and type of service complaints, grantee’s response to complaints, and the result of periodic system performance tests and the annual reviews specified in PMC 5.60.195;

3. Prevailing rates for comparable services in other cable systems of similar size and complexity;

4. Rate of return on grantee’s equity, as compared to businesses of equivalent risk; for the purposes of this chapter, the rate of return on equity shall be defined as the net, after tax profit divided by the equity portion of grantee’s investment in tangible assets; the investment shall be defined as the cumulative cost of tangible assets such as plant, property and equipment, less the cumulative depreciation charges, plus working capital, which shall be defined as equivalent to three months total operating expenses; the rate of return shall be calculated on a cumulative basis for all system revenues and costs including services such as pay-cable that may be exempt from local rate regulation; upon request of the grantor, grantee shall promptly provide, from the grantee, its parent company and any subsidiary company, all information as shall be reasonably necessary to determine system revenues and costs;

5. Performance of grantee in introducing new services and expanding the cable system’s capability, as compared to other systems of similar size and complexity, and as evaluated by the system and services review specified in PMC 5.60.195;

6. Tax benefits received by grantee, its partners or share holders, as the result of their investment in the system;

7. Cash flow derived from system services; the grantor shall not consider any valuation based upon the franchise or the grantee’s goodwill and these items of value shall neither be amortized as an expense nor shall a return be paid on them.

G. If the grantor fails to render a written decision either accepting, rejecting, modifying, or deferring grantee’s petition within 180 days of the grantee’s petition pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall thereafter be entitled to put its proposed new rates into effect;

H. The grantee’s request for a rate increase shall at the request of the grantor, include, but not be limited to, the following financial reports, which shall reflect the operations of the system:

1. Balance sheet;

2. Income sheet;

3. Statement of sources and applications of funds;

4. Detailed supporting schedules of expenses, income, assets, depreciation and other items as may be required;

5. Statement of current and projected subscribers and penetration.

The grantee’s accounting records applicable to the system shall be available for inspection by the grantor at all reasonable times. The grantor shall have access to records of financial transactions for the purpose of verifying burden rates or other indirect costs prorated to the operation. The documents listed above shall include sufficient detail and/or footnotes as may be necessary to provide the grantor with the information needed to make accurate determinations as to the financial condition of the system. All financial statements shall be certified as accurate by a certified public accountant or officer of grantee. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 5.6(a – h), 1984)

5.60.165 Rate charge procedure – Schedule of rates.
The grantee shall maintain and file with the grantor, a complete schedule of subscriber rates including all fees and charges for services not subject to regulation or approval by the grantor. (Ord. 129 § 5.6(i), 1984)

5.60.170 Rate charge procedure – Disconnections.
There shall be no charge for disconnection from the system. However, if a subscriber has failed to pay properly due monthly fees or if a subscriber disconnects for seasonal periods, the grantee may require, in addition to full payment of any delinquent fees, a reasonable fee for reconnection. (Ord. 129 § 5.6(j), 1984)

5.60.175 Rate charge procedure – No consideration beyond schedule.
The grantee shall receive no consideration whatsoever for or in connection with its provision of service to its subscribers other than as filed with the grantor. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 5.6(k), 1984)

5.60.180 Rate charge procedure – Submission of rate increase requests.
The grantee shall not submit a request for rate increases earlier than 12 months after a prior request. (Ord. 129 § 5.6(l), 1984)

5.60.185 Rate charge procedure – Rate increase notice.
The grantee shall give notice to subscribers at least 30 days in advance of the implementation of a rate increase, and no part of the increase shall be applicable to any bills for service which have already been sent to subscribers. (Ord. 129 § 5.6(m), 1984)

5.60.190 Annual review of performance.
At the grantor’s sole option, within 90 days of the first anniversary of the effective date of each franchise, and each year thereafter throughout the term of the franchise, the grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review the performance, quality of service and rates of the cable communications system. The reports required in Article VII of this chapter regarding subscriber complaints, the records of performance tests and the opinion survey report shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered.

A. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the system performance review meetings, the grantor shall issue findings with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of service. If inadequacies are found, the grantor may direct grantee to correct the inadequacies within a reasonable period of time.

B. Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the inadequacies shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and the grantor may, at its sole discretion, exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter or State law considered appropriate. (Ord. 129 § 5.7, 1984)

5.60.195 System and services review.
To provide for technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the proven and accepted state-of-the-art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system, and to achieve a continuing, advanced modern system, the grantor and the grantee shall comply with the following system and services review provisions and the franchise agreement:

A. At the grantor’s sole option, the grantor and grantee shall hold a system and services review session; however, the grantor shall not require such sessions more frequently than every three years;

B. Sixty days prior to the scheduled system and services review session, grantee shall submit a report to the grantor indicating the following:

1. All cable system services referred to above that are known to be in large metropolitan areas;

2. A plan for provision of such services, or justification indicating why such services are not feasible for the franchise area;

C. Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review sessions shall include but shall not be limited to, services provided, rate structure, free or discounted services, application of new technologies, system performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding processes, developments in the law, and regulatory constraints;

D. Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at any review session;

E. Not later than 60 days after the conclusion of each system and services review session, the grantor shall issue findings, including specifically a listing of any cable services not then being provided to the grantor that are considered technically and economically feasible. The grantor may direct grantee to provide such services within a reasonable time, under reasonable rates and conditions. Failure to provide such direct services may be considered a breach of the franchise, subject to remedies as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 129 § 5.8, 1984)

5.60.200 Access channel management – Intent.
It is the intent of the grantor to ensure that public access channels provided for in any franchise agreement, shall be managed in the best public interest, so that programming on such channels will be free of censorship, open to all residents, and available for all forms of public expression, community information and debate of public issues. Pursuant to these objectives, the grantor may delegate the responsibility for nonregionally oriented public access channel management to a nonprofit entity which may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:

A. A nonprofit public corporation;

B. An access management commission or committee, appointed by the grantor, and representing a broad spectrum of the community;

C. An established nonprofit entity with special cablecasting capability, such as a local or regional community college. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 5.9(a), 1984)

5.60.205 Access channel management – Functions.
The entity designated to manage the access channels shall have the following functions:

A. Responsibility for program production for and management of the public access channel. Public access channels may include government and educational access channels, as designated in the franchise agreement;

B. To assure that the public access channels are made available to all residents of the franchise area on a nondiscriminatory, first-come, first-served basis;

C. To assure that no censorship or control over program content of the public access channels exist, except as necessary to comply with FCC prohibition of material that is obscene, or to prevent commercial advertising, or conduct a lottery;

D. To devise, establish, and administer all rules, regulations, and procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the public education, and government channels;

E. To prepare, in conjunction with the grantee, such regular or special reports as may be required or desirable;

F. To hire and supervise staff;

G. To make all purchases of materials and equipment that may be required;

H. To develop additional sources of funding, such as foundation or Federal or State grants, to further community programming;

I. To perform such other functions relevant to the public access channels as may be appropriate;

J. To establish budgets on an annual basis, and utilize funds and resources received from the grantor or the public usage entity designated in PMC 5.60.145, for the purpose of access programming.

K. To solicit and receive grantee’s input in regard to these functions. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 5.9(b), 1984)

5.60.210 Access channel management – Access rules.
The access management entity shall complete a set of rules for the use of the public access channels which shall be promptly forwarded to the grantor. The rules shall be prepared in cooperation with the grantee, and confirmed by a contractual agreement between the access management entity and the grantee. The rules shall, at a minimum, provide for:

A. Access on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis for all residents of the franchise area;

B. Prohibition of advertising for commercial or political purposes, as defined by the FCC;

C. Prohibition of any presentation of lottery information, or obscene or indecent material;

D. Public inspection of the log of producers, which shall be retained by the grantee for a period of two years;

E. Procedures by which individuals or groups who violate any rule may be prevented from further access to the channel;

F. Free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time, cablecasting facilities, and technical support as are provided for in the agreement between the access management entity and the grantee. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 5.6(c), 1984)

5.60.215 Access channel management – Access management entity reports to grantor.
The access management entity shall provide a report to the grantor, at least annually, indicating achievements in community-based programming and services, and also shall provide a special report each time the grantee requests an increase in rates, indicating the level and quality of grantee’s support during the period elapsed since any previous rare increase was implemented. (Ord. 129 § 5.9(d), 1984)

Article IV. General Financial and Insurance Provisions

5.60.220 General provisions.
The grantee shall be subject to the financial and insurance provisions described in this chapter; provided, however, that inconsistent provisions of the franchise agreement shall control. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 6.1, 1984)

5.60.225 Performance bond.
A. The grantee shall, at least 30 days prior to the commencement of construction or reconstruction, file with the grantor a performance bond in the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the grantor and any other person who may be entitled to damages as a result of any occurrence in the operation or termination of the cable communications system operated under the franchise agreement, and including the payments required to be made to the grantor hereunder.

B. Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form and with a company approved by the grantor and shall among other matters cover the cost of removal of any properties installed by the grantee in the event said grantee shall default in the performance of its franchise obligation.

C. In no event shall the amount of the bond be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages.

D. Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or permit consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond and security fund specified in PMC 5.60.230. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 6.2, 1984)

5.60.230 Security fund.
A. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall deposit into a bank account, established by the grantor and maintain on deposit through the term of the franchise, or establish an irrevocable letter of credit, the sum specified in the franchise agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the grantor having jurisdiction over its act or defaults under this chapter, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the grantor which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. The security funds or letter of credit funds may be assessed by the grantor for purposes including, but not limited to the following:

1. Failure of grantee to pay the grantor sums due under the terms of the franchise;

2. Reimbursement of costs borne by the grantor to correct franchise violations not corrected by grantee, after due notice;

3. Monetary remedies or penalties assessed against grantee due to default or violation of franchise requirements.

B. At the grantor’s sole option, some portion of the security fund may be provided in the acceptable form of an irrevocable letter of credit, in lieu of a cash deposit.

C. Within 30 days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn by the grantor from the security fund pursuant to subsection A of this section, the grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount or increase the letter of credit to accomplish the same.

D. If the grantee fails, after 10 days’ notice to pay to the grantor any franchise fee or taxes due and unpaid; or, fails to pay to the grantor within such 10 days, any damages, costs or expenses which the grantor shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise; or fails, after 30 days’ notice of such failure by the grantor to comply with any provision of the franchise which the grantor reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security fund, the grantor may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the grantor shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof.

E. The grantee shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on deposit or release the letter of credit, as appropriate, no later than 90 days after the expiration of the term of the franchise; provided, that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee.

F. The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the grantor whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the grantor may have. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 6.3, 1984)

5.60.235 Indemnification.
A. The grantee shall by acceptance of the franchise, agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees from any and all claims, suits, judgments for damages in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through:

1. The act of the grantor in granting the franchise; and

2. The acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, employees, or agents, except for acts of negligence of the grantor. Both such indemnifications shall cover such claims arising in tort, contracts, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations or otherwise.

B. In the event any such claims shall arise, the grantor shall tender the defense thereof to the grantee; provided, however, that the grantor in its sole discretion may participate in the defense of such claims at its expense. (Ord. 129 § 6.4, 1984)

5.60.240 Insurance.
A. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise insurance in amounts at least as follows:

1. Worker’s Compensation Insurance. In such coverage as may be required by the worker’s compensation insurance and safety laws of the State of California and amendments thereto.

2. Comprehensive General Liability. Comprehensive automobile liability including, but not limited to, nonownership and hired car coverage as well as owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage shall be maintained at the sum(s) specified in the franchise agreement.

B. The grantee shall furnish the grantor with certificates of insurance.

C. Such insurance certificates provided for in this chapter shall name the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as additional insureds and shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be cancelled by the surety or the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City by registered mail written notice of such intention to cancel or not renew.

D. The minimum amounts set forth in the franchise agreement for such insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the grantee to the grantor under the franchise issued to the amounts of such insurance. (Ord. 129 § 6.5, 1984)

Article V. Design and Construction Provisions

5.60.245 System design.
The cable communications system shall be constructed in accordance with the design requirements contained in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 7.1, 1984)

5.60.250 Geographical coverage.
The grantee shall design and construct the system in such a manner as to have the eventual capability to pass by every single-family dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, school and public agency within the service area of the franchise. Service shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line extension policies specified in the franchise agreement. System construction and provision of service shall be nondiscriminatory, and the grantee shall not delay or defer service to any section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 7.2, 1984)

5.60.255 Cablecasting facilities.
The grantee shall provide cablecasting facilities in accordance with the requirements of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 129 § 7.3, 1984)

5.60.260 System construction schedule.
A. The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.

B. The grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan indicating progress schedule, area construction maps, test plan, and projected dates for offering service to any new area or for reconstructing the cable system. In addition, the grantee shall update this information on an annual basis. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 7.4, 1984)

5.60.265 Remedies for delay in construction.
The grantor may at its sole option, apply any or all of the following remedies in the event of material and substantial delays in system construction or reconstruction:

A. Reduction in the duration of the franchise on a month-for-month basis for each month of delay exceeding six months;

B. Forfeiture of construction bonds and/or assessment of monetary damages up to the maximum limit specified in the franchise agreement, levied against the security fund for delays exceeding one year;

C. Termination of the franchise within one year after award of the franchise if the grantee has failed to initiate system construction or reconstruction;

D. Termination of the franchise for other material and substantial delays in completing system construction exceeding 18 months. Any remedies applied shall be in accordance with the procedures contained in PMC 5.60.430 through 5.60.445. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 7.5, 1984)

5.60.270 Provision of service.
After service has been established by activating trunk cables for any area, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that area within 30 days from the date of request. (Ord. 129 § 7.6, 1984)

5.60.275 Undergrounding of cable.
The undergrounding of cable is encouraged. In any event, cables shall be installed underground at grantee’s cost where existing utilities are already underground. Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded and relocated in concert, and on a cost-sharing basis, with other utilities, when such other utilities may convert from aerial to underground construction. (Ord. 129 § 7.7, 1984)

5.60.280 New development undergrounding.
In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, upon request by the grantee, the developer or property owner shall give grantee reasonable notice of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for grantee’s installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the grantee’s expense. The grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Cost of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals within five working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five-day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by grantee. (Ord. 129 § 7.8, 1984)

5.60.285 Underground at multiple dwelling units.
In cases of multiple dwelling units serviced by aerial utilities, the grantee shall make every reasonable effort to minimize the number of individual aerial drop cables giving preference to undergrounding of multiple drop cables between the pole and the dwelling unit. The burden of proof shall be upon the grantee to demonstrate why undergrounding of drop cables is technically or economically unfeasible. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 7.9, 1984)

5.60.290 Street occupancy.
A. The grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public property or on privately owned property until a permit or the written approval of the grantor is obtained. However, no location of any pole or wire holding structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the grantor determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby whether the grantor is acting in its governmental or proprietary capacity.

B. The grantee shall notify the grantor at least 10 days prior to the intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets except in case of a bona fide emergency. The grantor shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits required, providing such grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not unduly interfere with the use of such right-of-way and that proposed construction shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the ordinances of the grantor.

C. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times, shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public right-of-way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public right-of way.

D. Grantee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the grantor, restore to its previously existing condition any public right-of-way which is damaged or disturbed as a result of its operations or construction on its behalf.

E. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the grantor to remove any of the grantee’s facilities, no charge shall be made by the grantee against the grantor for restoration and repair.

F. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to the supervision and direction of the grantor. Trimming of trees on private property shall require written consent of the property owner.

G. The grantee at its expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of the grantee when, in the opinion of the grantor the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street grade, installation of sewers, drains, waterpipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structure or improvements by governmental agencies, or any other structure or public improvement, including but not limited to movement of buildings, redevelopment, or any general program under which the grantor shall undertake to cause any such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. Nothing under this chapter shall be deemed a taking of the property of the grantee and the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything under this chapter.

H. Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter to be done in any street, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may, at its option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the grantor the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the grantor to the grantee within 30 days after receipt of such itemized report.

I. The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely necessary, and only after written permission has been given by the grantor.

J. The grantor reserves the right to require conduit for underground cabling as determined by the superintendent of streets. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 7.10, 1984)

5.60.295 Construction and technical standards – Generally.
A. Construction Standards.

1. Compliance with Safety Codes. All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and any amendments thereto as well as all State and local codes where applicable.

2. Compliance with Electrical Codes. All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code as amended, and all applicable State and local codes.

3. Antennas and Towers. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be designed for the proper loading as specified in Electronics Industry Association’s R.S.-222-A specifications.

4. Compliance with Aviation Requirements. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable State or local codes and regulations.

5. Construction Standards and Requirements. All of the grantee’s plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, head-end and distribution system towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the grantor may deem reasonably proper to make, or to interfere in any manner with the reasonable rights of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

6. Safety and Nuisance Requirements. The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.

B. Technical Standards. The cable communications system shall meet all technical and performance standards contained in the franchise agreement.

C. Test and Compliance Procedure.

1. Frequency of Testing. Grantee shall test the system monthly, on a calendar basis, with no longer than six weeks, nor less than three weeks between monthly tests.

2. Equipment Calibration. All frequency and/or signal level sensitive pieces of test equipment used to perform the monthly tests described herein shall be calibrated, as evidenced by a current certificate of calibration issued by a competent independent calibration facility with traceability of calibration for each piece of equipment to the National Bureau of Standards. In lieu of the requirement of independent calibration, grantee may at its option, certify that its equipment is calibrated and, at the grantor’s request, provide records to demonstrate the traceability of such calibration for each piece of equipment to the National Bureau of Standards.

3. Test Location.

a. The monthly tests shall be made at the output of the (electrically) furthest subscriber tap on any distribution leg checked.

b. The specific test points checked shall be rotated from month to month so that no test point shall be revisited during a monthly test check until all other distribution end-of-lines have been checked, except as provided for below.

c. The output of the subscriber tap shall be connected to the input of the measurement equipment via a 100-foot RG-6 jumper to simulate a typical subscriber drop, and the signal levels measured, recorded, and reported to the grantor prior to making any corrective actions at the subject test location, or on the trunk and distribution legs feeding the subject test location.

4. Tests to be Performed. The following tests shall be performed at five test locations of the outside plant system within the City of Poway. (For the purposes of the following subsections, a channel shall be considered as being “activated” if grantee carries on that channel programming of any nature which is normally available to one or more subscribers within the system.)

a. Video carrier levels on all activated channels. Unit of reporting assessment shall be dBmV.

b. Aural carrier levels on all activated channels. Unit of measurement shall be dBmV.

c. Carrier-to-noise measurement on no less than one activated channel. Unit of reporting measurement shall be a positive number, expressed in dB relative to the reference carrier.

d. Low frequency distortion (“Hum”) measurement on no less than one activated channel with modulation removed, or a substitute unmodulated carrier of equal level to regular video channels. Unit of reporting measurement shall be the percentage of Hum relative to the reference unmodulated carrier.

e. Composite distortion measurement on no less than one activated channel made by measuring the difference between the normal video carrier level, and the highest level distortion product(s) falling within the video bandwidth with the normal video carrier removed, if any. Unit of reporting measurement shall be a negative number, expressed in dB relative to the reference video carrier.

5. Report Scope. The report required by subsection (C)(6) of this section shall contain clear and sufficient information so that the specific test point location may be accurately determined from the report. At a minimum, the test report for each location shall include the following:

a. Tap value and number of ports;

b. Grantee map page and grid, or Thomas Brother’s map page and grid;

c. Trunk and line extender cascade count;

d. Street address (or other suitable physical description);

e. Date of testing;

f. Time of testing;

g. List of all frequency and/or signal level sensitive equipment by manufacturer, model number, and serial number;

h. A statement indicating that all of the equipment generally described in subsection (C)(5)(h) of this section meets the calibration requirements of subsection (C)(2) of this section;

i. Name (printed), and signature of person actually performing the tests described above, for the purpose of certifying the accuracy of the test point report.

6. Report Submission to Grantor. The test point reports shall be submitted to the grantor (either in person, or via prepaid U.S. first class mail), at a location designated by the grantor from time to time, no later than 14 calendar days after the tests are made.

7. Special Retesting of Test Point Locations. In the event that a test point fails to meet any of the technical parameters described elsewhere (in the body of the franchise), shall, in a timely manner, correct the deficiency causing the test point to fail upon initial inspection. Within six weeks after corrections are completed, grantee shall demonstrate to the grantor that, at a minimum all parameters described in subsection A of this section above meet the technical parameters described elsewhere in the franchise agreement. Compliance shall be evidenced by retesting the subject test location in accordance with the test procedures listed above, and by submitting to the grantor a special retest report containing the information described in subsection (C)(5) of this section.

D. Special Tests. At any time after commencement of service to subscribers the grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber’s terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy. The grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to the grantee or to the subscriber. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 7.11, 1984)

5.60.300 Construction and technical standards – Areawide interconnection.
A. Interconnection Required. If required by the franchise agreement, the grantee shall interconnect access channels of the cable communications system with any or all other systems operated pursuant to franchises in contiguous areas within the City, upon the directive of the grantor. Interconnection of systems shall permit interactive transmission and reception of program material, and may be done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method.

B. Interconnection Procedure. Upon receiving the directive of the grantor to interconnect, and if feasible, the grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system or systems. The cost shall be borne by both or all grantees, in the proportion of number of channels received to total number of channels transmitted and received, under the assumption that benefits accrue primarily through receipt of additional channels.

C. Relief. The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or the grantor may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by the grantee to the grantor. The grantor may grant said request if it finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the system or systems of the proposed interconnection, or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates.

D. Initial Technical Requirements to Assure Future Interconnection Capability.

1. All cable communications systems receiving franchises to operate within the City shall use the same frequency allocations for commonly provided television signals so far as is technically and economically feasible.

2. The grantee shall provide local origination and access equipment that is compatible throughout the area so that videocassettes or videotapes can be shared by various systems. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 7.12, 1984)

Article VI. Service Provisions

5.60.305 Services to be provided.
The grantee shall provide, as a minimum, the general category of services listed in the franchise agreement. Services shall not be reduced without prior approval of the grantor. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 8.1, 1984)

5.60.310 Basic television service (BTS).
The “basic television service” shall include the local broadcast signals, distant television broadcast signals, the imported nonbroadcast signals, and the provision of all other cablecast open-channel signals as specified in the franchise agreement. This service shall be provided to all subscribers at the established BTS monthly subscription rates. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 8.2, 1984)

5.60.315 Basic subscriber radio service (BSRS).
The “basic subscriber radio service” shall include the provision of all audio services designated in the franchise agreement, including broadcast FM radio, and cablecast FM signals. This service shall be provided to all subscribers at the established BSRS monthly subscription rates. (Ord. 129 § 8.3, 1984)

5.60.320 Institutional service (IS).
If specified in the franchise agreement, the “institutional service” shall include the provision of transmission and/or reception services to institutional users, on a leased channel basis at established IS rates. Services may include the distribution of video or nonvideo signals. (Ord. 129 § 8.4, 1984)

5.60.325 Additional subscriber services.
“Additional subscriber services,” not included in the BTS and BSRS services specified above, may be provided, either within the basic subscription rates, or on a premium basis, subject to applicable FCC regulations. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 8.5, 1984)

5.60.330 Local origination channel(s).
The grantee shall operate the cablecasting studios on a high-quality, professional basis for the purpose of providing cablecast programming responsive to local needs and interests. The emphasis for the local origination channel(s) shall be on providing programming that is unavailable to viewers on broadcast television channels. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 8.6, 1984)

5.60.335 Government access channel(s).
The grantee shall provide the number of channels specified in the franchise agreement, including all necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation, for the use of the grantor at no charge to the grantor. The grantee shall make every effort to provide advice and technical expertise to aid in the utilization of these channels. (Ord. 129 § 8.7, 1984)

5.60.340 Education access channel(s).
The grantee shall provide the number of channels specified in the franchise agreement including all necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation, for the use of the local educational institutions at no charge. The grantee shall make every effort to provide advice and technical expertise to aid in the utilization of these channels. (Ord. 129 § 8.8, 1984)

5.60.345 Public access channel(s).
The grantee shall provide the number of channels specified in the franchise agreement including all necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation, to be available to the public at no charge. The public access channel(s) shall be managed and operated by the access management entity, as described in Article III of this chapter. The grantee shall make available for programmers of the public access channel the facilities and support listed in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 129 § 8.9, 1984)

5.60.350 Public access(es) (closed-circuit).
If the cable communications system includes a closed-circuit institutional network, and if required by the franchise agreement, the grantee shall make at least three two-way channels available for local government programs, educational programs, and public service programs use at no charge. The public access two-way channels shall be managed and operated by the access management entity. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 8.10, 1984)

5.60.355 Leased access channel.
The grantee shall make available leased access channels, on a nondiscriminatory basis as required by law. All leased channel service revenues shall be included in gross annual revenues subject to the franchise fee. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 8.11, 1984)

5.60.360 Universal connection.
The grantor may require that all dwelling units within the franchise area, where it is economically feasible, to be connected physically to the cable system by the grantee by means of drop cables terminating at each dwelling unit, whether or not the dwelling unit’s occupants desire to subscribe to cable service. The cost and charges shall be determined by the grantor at the time such connection is required. The grantee shall be entitled to recover the incremental cost of providing a universal connection. (Ord. 129 § 8.12, 1984)

Article VII. Operation and Maintenance

5.60.365 Open books and records.
The grantor shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which reasonably relate to the operation of the franchise and the regulatory function of the grantor in question, and are maintained at the office within the franchise area. If any of such books or records are not kept in the local office, or upon reasonable request made available to the grantor, and if the grantor shall determine that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the grantor’s duties, then all reasonable travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 9.1, 1984)

5.60.370 Records required.
A. In any event the grantee shall at all times maintain:

1. A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding three years;

2. A full and complete set of plans, records and “as-builts” maps showing the exact location of all cable communications system equipment installed or in use in the franchise area, exclusive of subscriber service drops. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 9.2, 1984)

5.60.375 Maintenance and complaints.
A. The grantee shall maintain an office in the service area or at other location as specified to be approved by grantor in the franchise agreement which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed toll-free telephone, and be so operated to receive subscriber complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a 24-hour a day basis. A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints and their disposition.

B. The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during period of minimum use of the system. A written log shall be maintained for all service interruptions.

C. The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. No charge shall be made to the subscriber for this service if the complaint is the result of subscriber negligence or equipment misuse.

D. The grantee shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth procedures, furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and furnish information concerning the grantor’s office responsible for administration of the franchise with the address and telephone number of the office. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 9.3, 1984)

5.60.380 Rights of individuals.
A. Subject to applicable law, the grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations, and all applicable executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference.

B. Grantee shall strictly adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC, State and local regulations, and as amended from time to time.

C. No signals of a Class IV cable communications channel shall be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the subscriber. The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provisions. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed one year, which shall be renewable at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber’s failure to provide or renew such an authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such authorization is required for each type or classification of Class IV cable television activity planned; provided, however, that the grantee shall be entitled to conduct system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmission, ensuring technical standards compliance, securing the cable system, verifying basic service customers or billing for pay services.

D. The grantee and its agents or employees shall comply with Section 631 of the Cable Act.

E. Fairness of Accessibility. The entire system of the grantee shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies and other entities having a legitimate use for the network, and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. Allocation of use of said facilities shall be made according to the rules or decisions of the grantee and any regulatory agencies affecting the same. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 9.4, 1984)

5.60.381 Subscriber rights.
A. Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. The franchisee shall not deny cable television service or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, or others on the basis of race, color, religion, physical handicap, marital status, national origin, sex, or age. The franchisee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of Federal, State or local governments and shall comply with all applicable laws and executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.

B. Television Sets. The franchisee shall not directly or indirectly do any of the following acts in the jurisdiction of City:

1. Engage in the business of selling, leasing, renting, repairing or servicing of television sets or radios;

2. Solicit, refer or cause or permit the solicitation or referral of any subscriber to persons engaged in any business herein prohibited to be engaged in by franchisee, provided, however, that the above provisions of subsection (B)(1) of this section shall not apply to modifications made to permit two-way communications.

C. Tapping and Monitoring. The franchisee shall not tap or monitor or permit any other person controlled by or under contract with franchisee to tap or monitor any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet, or receiver for any purpose whatsoever without the express written consent of the subscriber or a court order therefor; provided, however, that the franchisee shall be entitled to conduct system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return path transmission, or checking for unauthorized connections to the cable television system or service levels or billing for pay services.

D. Data Collection.

1. Except for its own internal use, the franchisee shall not permit its system to be used for data collection purposes, nor shall it otherwise collect data which would reveal the commercial product or other preferences or opinions of individual subscribers, members of their families, or their guests, licensees or employees, unless authorized in writing by the City Manager. If City Manager shall in any case give such consent, he may establish reasonable conditions thereof.

2. In any event, the franchisee shall not reveal or permit the release or sale of data on individual subscribers; but may reveal or permit the release or sale of aggregate data only. Any aggregate data released or sold must be provided to the City at no charge.

E. Revealing Subscriber Preferences.

1. Franchisee shall not reveal individual subscriber preferences, viewing habits, beliefs, philosophy, creeds, or religious beliefs to any third person, firm, agency, governmental unit or investigating agency without court authority or prior written consent of the subscriber.

2. Such written consent, if given, shall be limited to a period of time not to exceed one year.

3. The franchisee shall not condition the delivery or receipt of cable services to any subscriber on any such consent.

4. Such a subscriber may revoke without penalty or cost any consent previously made by delivering to the franchisee in writing a substantial indication of his intent to so revoke.

F. Revealing Subscriber Lists. The franchisee shall not reveal, or sell, or permit the release or sale of its subscriber list unless authorized in writing by the City Manager, and if such consent is given, City Manager may place reasonable conditions thereon; provided that franchisee may use its subscriber list as necessary for the construction, marketing, and maintenance of the franchisee’s services and facilities authorized by a franchise, and the concomitant billing of subscribers for such services; and further, provided that consistent with applicable law, City may use franchisee’s subscribers list for the purpose of communication with subscribers in connection with matters relating to operation, management and maintenance of the cable system.

G. Other Persons Affected. The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall extend and apply to all of the foregoing as well as the franchisee.

1. Officers, directors, employees and agents of the franchisee;

2. General and limited partners of the franchisee;

3. Any person or combination of persons owning, holding or controlling five percent or more of any corporate stock or other ownership interest of the franchisee;

4. Any affiliated or subsidiary entity owned or controlled by, or in which any officer, director, stockholder, general or limited partner or person or group of persons owning, holding or controlling any ownership interest in the franchisee, shall own, hold or control five percent or more of any corporate stock or other ownership interest; and

5. Any person, firm or corporation acting or serving in the capacity of holding or controlling company of the franchisee.

H. Subscriber Bill of Rights. Franchisee shall provide, at the time of initial connection and annually thereafter to all subscribers a notice, in a form approved in advance by the City Manager. If the City Manager fails to deny consent within 15 days of franchisee submission, consent shall be deemed given, delineating and describing, in clear and understandable language, the consumer rights granted herein.

I. Notice to New Subscribers. Before providing cable television service to any subscriber, franchisee shall provide a written notice to the subscriber substantially as follows:

Subscriber is hereby notified that services provided make use of public rights-of-way whose continued use is not guaranteed. If use is denied for any reason, Franchisee will make every reasonable effort to continue service. But, by accepting service, subscriber agrees to make no claim or undertake any action against the City, its officers, commissions, employees, or agents if service is interrupted or discontinued. In the event of unresolved disputes between subscriber and Franchisee, subscriber may register a complaint with the City Manager or City Council.

J. Complaint Advise. City Manager may require that franchisee advise each subscriber that the City’s representative is the official to whom complaints of poor service should be made if such complaints of poor service are not resolved by franchisee to the satisfaction of each subscriber. (Ord. 419, 1993)

5.60.385 Continuity of service mandatory.
A. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. In the event of a change of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.

B. In the event the grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without prior approval of the grantor or without just cause, the grantor may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the grantor that are the result of the grantee’s failure to perform. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 9.5, 1984)

5.60.390 Grantee rules and regulations.
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, or this chapter, and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or applicable State and Federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 9.6, 1984)

5.60.395 Tenant rights.
The grantee shall be required to provide service to tenants in individual units of a multiple housing facility (unless such facility is served under a bulk billing agreement providing for alternate tiers of services) with all services offered to other dwelling units within the franchise area, so long as the owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by the grantee, to the following:

A. To grantee’s providing of the service to units of the facility without payment to such owner;

B. To reasonable conditions and times for installation, maintenance, and inspection of the system on the facility premises;

C. To reasonable conditions promulgated by the grantee to protect the grantee’s equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system; and

D. To not discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants who receive cable service and those who do not. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 9.7, 1984)

Article VIII. Rights Reserved to the Grantor

5.60.400 Rights to purchase the system.
The grantor may, if and to the extent permitted by applicable laws and regulations, in any lawful manner and upon the payment of compensation as required and determined by applicable law, lawfully purchase, condemn, acquire, and take over and hold the franchise, the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall create or be construed to create any such rights in grantor (including any right of first refusal) in addition to or different from those, if any, created by applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 10.1, 1984)

5.60.405 Right of inspection of records.
The grantee shall provide such information which shall show the following in such form as may be required by the grantor.

A. The true and entire cost of construction equipment, of maintenance and of the administration and operation thereof; the amount of stock issued, if any; the amount of cash paid in, the number of par value of shares, the amount and character of indebtedness, if any; the rate of taxes, the dividends declared; the character and amount of all fixed charges; the allowance, if any, for interest, for wear and tear or depreciation; all amounts and sources of income.

B. The amount collected annually from the grantor treasury and the character and extent of the service rendered therefor to the grantor.

C. The amount collected annually from other users of service and the character and extent of the service rendered therefor to them.

D. The grantor shall have the right to inspect all books, records, maps, plans, financial statements, and other like materials of the grantee during normal business hours which are reasonably related to the grantor’s regulating powers and functions hereunder. The grantor may inspect all such records required in this section at the offices of the grantee and the grantee shall make the records mentioned in this chapter available to the grantor. If the grantor needs copies of such information in order to complete its examination of the grantee’s operation, the grantee may make available such copies of the books and reports that the grantor is requesting in order to complete the grantor’s examination of the grantee’s operation. Immediately upon completion of such review, the grantor shall return all such materials to the grantee. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 10.2, 1984)

5.60.410 Right of inspection of construction.
The grantor shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the chapter and other pertinent provisions of law. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 10.3, 1984)

5.60.415 Right of intervention.
The grantor shall have the right of intervention in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is party, and to which the outcome might materially affect cable service in the City, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the grantor. (Ord. 129 § 10.4, 1984)

5.60.420 Right to require removal of property.
At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or expiration, as provided for herein, the grantor shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable communications system from all streets and public ways within the franchise area. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 10.5, 1984)

Article IX. Rights Reserved to the Grantee

5.60.425 Right of grantee.
In any material dispute, the grantee may pursue such other remedies as are available, including the bringing of action in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 129 § 11.1, 1984)

Article X. Franchise Violations

5.60.430 Remedies for franchise violations.
If the grantee fails to perform any significant and material obligation under the franchise, or fails to do so in a timely manner, the grantor may at its option, and in its sole discretion:

A. Assess against the grantee monetary damages up to the limits established in the franchise agreement or this chapter for material franchise violations, which the grantee agrees to pay, said assessment to be levied against the security fund, hereinabove provided and collected by the grantor immediately upon said assessment. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or under applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from the grantee such damages, losses, costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees actually incurred, as may have been suffered or incurred by the grantor by reason of or arising out of such breach of the franchise. This provision for assessment of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from the grantor’s right to enforce the provisions of the construction and performance bonds provided for in Article IV of this chapter, and is intended to provide compensation to the grantor for actual damages.

B. For violations considered by the grantor to have degraded the quality of service, order and direct the grantee to issue rebates or reduce its rates and/or charges to subscribers, in amounts specified in this chapter or the franchise agreement to provide monetary relief substantially equal to the reduced quality of service resulting from the grantee’s failure to perform.

C. Terminate or shorten the franchise period, for any of the causes stated in Article II of this chapter, above or otherwise contained within this chapter or the franchise agreement.

D. No remedy shall be imposed by the grantor against the grantee for any violation of the franchise without the grantee being afforded due process of law, as provided for in PMC 5.60.435. The grantor may, in its sole judgment and discretion, impose any of all of the above enumerated measures against the grantee, which shall be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under this chapter or under any applicable law. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 12.1, 1984)

5.60.435 Procedures for remedying franchise violations.
In the event that the grantor determines that the grantee has violated any provision of the franchise, any rule or regulation promulgated hereto or any applicable Federal, State, or local law, the grantor may make a written demand on the grantee that it remedy such violation. If the violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect is not remedied to the satisfaction of the grantor within 30 days following such demand, the grantor shall determine whether or not such violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was excusable or inexcusable, in accordance with the following procedure:

A. A public hearing shall be held and the grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon 30 days’ written notice to the grantee of the time and the place of the hearing provided and the allegations of franchise violations.

B. If, after notice is given and, at the grantee’s option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was excusable as provided in PMC 5.60.440, the grantor shall direct the grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional time, in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the grantor may direct.

C. If, after notice is given and, at the grantee’s option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation, breach, failure, refusal or neglect was inexcusable, then the grantor may assess a penalty or remedy in accordance with PMC 5.60.430 and 5.60.440. (Ord. 129 § 12.2, 1984)

5.60.440 Force majeure – Grantee’s inability to perform.
In the event the grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be excused as a result thereof, provided the grantee has notified the grantor in writing within 30 days of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond the grantee’s reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts of God and civil emergencies. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 12.3, 1984)

5.60.445 Findings and conclusions.
Any conclusion by the grantor, pursuant to this section shall be made in writing and supported by written findings supported by evidence within the record of said proceedings. (Ord. 129 § 12.4, 1984)

Article XI. Reports

5.60.450 Periodic reports.
A. Grantee shall submit to the appropriate City department (as designated by the City) on a quarterly basis, by March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st of each year, throughout the term of this agreement:

B. Grantee shall submit to the appropriate City department (as designated by the City) on an annual basis by March 31st of each year, throughout the term of the franchise, a progress report and map indicating in detail the location of completed extensions, existing construction, and system expansion and severe enhancements for the forthcoming year, and a statistical summary of the operations of the system. Such information shall include at a minimum, the number of dwelling units passed, the number of basic service subscribers, and the rate of penetration.

C. Grantee shall submit upon request a copy of all communications between grantee and the FCC, or any Federal or State regulatory agency having jurisdiction over grantee’s system, to the City Manager.

D. Grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of grantor during all business hours of any and all maps and other such records kept or maintained by grantee or under its control concerning the operation, affairs, transactions or property of grantee at the local office as limited by PMC 5.60.405.

E. Grantee shall keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all the records necessary to determine the amount of such franchise fee, including but not limited to all business records, bank statements and copies of Federal and State income tax returns filed by the grantee.

F. Grantee shall conduct annual proof-of-performance tests of the system and shall submit the results to such tests to the City’s community services department within 30 days after the completion of such tests.

G. The grantor may prepare a questionnaire; such questionnaire shall elicit responses from subscribers on matters such as their appraisal of the service they receive and their needs and interests related to cable TV services. Within 30 days after receipt thereof, the grantee shall mail to those subscribers designated by the City Manager, a copy of a questionnaire provided to the grantee by the City unless the grantee submits an appeal to the City Manager and/or the City Council. The costs associated with such questionnaires shall be borne by the City, and responses should be addressed to the City’s community services department. The department may require such questionnaire from time to time, as may be necessary, but in no event more than once each year.

H. The reports and information mentioned in this section shall be made available to the grantor at the offices of the grantee as requested by the grantor. Such information shall be available for review by the grantor during normal business hours. However, if additional information and research may be needed, the grantor may request and the grantee shall provide copies of any of the information mentioned in this chapter for use in its review of the grantee’s compliance with its franchise and shall return it to the grantee at the earliest possible moment after the review has been completed. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 13.1, 1984)

5.60.455 Plant survey report.
At the grantor’s sole option, the grantee shall submit to the grantor an annual plant survey report which shall be a complete survey of the grantee’s plant and a full report thereon. Said report shall include, but not be limited to, a description and “as-built” maps of the portions of the franchisee area that have been cabled and have all services available, an appropriate engineering evaluation including suitable electronic measurements conducted in conformity with such requirements, including supervision, as the grantor may prescribe. The report shall contain sufficient detail to enable the grantor to ascertain that the service requirements and technical standards of the FCC and/or the franchise are achieved and maintained. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 13.2, 1984)

5.60.460 Copies of Federal and State reports.
The grantee shall submit to the grantor copies of all initial pleadings, applications, reports, submitted by the grantee to any Federal, State and regulatory agencies and other government bodies materially relating to its cable television operations within the franchise area. The grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor simultaneously with their submission to such courts, agencies and bodies. (Ord. 129 § 13.3, 1984)

5.60.465 Public reports.
A copy of each of the grantee’s annual and other periodic public reports and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, as the grantor requests and is reasonably appropriate, shall be submitted to the grantor within five days of its issuance. (Ord. 129 § 13.4, 1984)

5.60.470 Complaint file and reports.
An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the grantee of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. A procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of the cable system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the satisfaction of the grantor. Complete records of the grantee’s actions in response to all complaints shall be kept. These files and records shall remain open to the public during normal business hours. A summary of complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition, in a form approved by the grantor, shall, upon request of the grantor, be completed for each month and submitted to the grantor by the tenth day of the succeeding month. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 13.5, 1984)

5.60.475 Miscellaneous reports.
The grantee shall submit to the grantor such other information or reports in such forms and at such times as the grantor may reasonably request or require. (Ord. 129 § 13.6, 1984)

5.60.480 Income tax returns.
If not incorporated with parent company returns, the grantee shall submit to the grantor copies of all income tax returns and reports which are filed with the local, State or Federal governments pertaining to its cable system in the franchise area within five days of the date on which such reports are filed. (Ord. 129 § 13.7, 1984)

5.60.485 Inspection of facilities.
The grantee shall allow the grantor to make inspections of any of the grantee’s facilities and equipment at any time upon reasonable notice, or, in case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice, to allow the grantee to verify the accuracy of any submitted report. (Ord. 129 § 13.8, 1984)

5.60.490 Business office and files.
The grantee shall maintain an office within the franchise area. The grantee shall keep complete and accurate books and records. The grantor shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the cable system. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that the records contain confidential, privileged, or proprietary information. (Ord. 129 § 13.9, 1984)

5.60.495 Public inspection.
All reports subject to public disclosure shall be available for public inspection at a designated grantor office during normal business hours. (Ord. 129 § 13.10, 1984)

5.60.500 Failure to report.
The refusal, failure, or neglect of the grantee to file any of the reports required, or such other reports as the grantor reasonably may request, after notice from grantor to grantee, shall be deemed a material breach of franchise, and shall subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise, unless grantee submits in writing to grantor reasonable explanations for such refusal, failure or neglect. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 13.11, 1984)

5.60.505 False statements.
Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly by the grantee in any report required under the franchise, shall subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise. (Ord. 129 § 13.12, 1984)

5.60.510 Cost of reports.
All reports and records required under this or any other section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 13.13, 1984)

Article XII. Miscellaneous Provisions

5.60.515 Compliance with State and Federal laws.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the State and Federal government or any administrative agencies thereof; provided, however, if any such State or Federal law or regulation shall require the grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the franchise or any law or regulation of the grantor, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the grantor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the grantor or the franchise. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 14.1, 1984)

5.60.520 Separability – Nonmaterial provisions.
A. If any provision of this chapter or any related agreements is held by any court or by any Federal, State, or local agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal, State, or local law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, and if said provision is considered nonmaterial by the grantor, said provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions of this chapter.

B. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof or thereof which has been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the parties to the franchise agreement; provided, that the grantor gives the grantee 30 days’ written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 14.2, 1984)

5.60.525 Separability – Material provisions.
A. If any material section of this chapter or related franchise agreement is held to be invalid or preempted by Federal, State or County regulations or laws, the grantor shall negotiate with the grantee appropriate modifications to the franchise to provide reasonable relief from such invalidity or preemption, including the payment of compensating moneys to either party.

B. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on such modifications, then the dispute shall be submitted to a mutually agreeable arbitrator, in accordance with State law, who shall determine what modifications and/or compensating moneys are appropriate.

C. The arbitrator’s decision shall be binding on the parties; provided, that no decision of the arbitrator shall require the grantor or the grantee to be in violation of any Federal or State law or regulation.

D. If an arbitrator cannot be agreed upon, then each party shall select an arbitrator of his choice and each selected arbitrator shall agree upon a third.

E. Said panel of three arbitrators shall render a majority decision therein. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 14.3, 1984)

5.60.530 Notices.
A. The grantee shall maintain within the franchise area or in the County throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail.

B. The grantee shall also maintain within the franchise area, a local office telephone number or toll free number for the conduct of matters related to the franchise during normal business hours. (Ord. 129 § 14.4, 1984)

5.60.532 Captions.
The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989)

5.60.535 No recourse against the grantor.
The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, costs, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise except any tortious acts. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 14.6, 1984)

5.60.540 Nonenforcement by the grantor.
The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance. (Ord. 129 § 14.7, 1984)

5.60.545 Acknowledgments.
A. Except as expressly provided in the franchise, the grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor for any loss, cost, or expense, for damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the grantor, nor for the failure of the grantor to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise excepting any tortious acts.

B. The grantee by its acceptance of the franchise, acknowledges that it does so voluntarily and in reliance upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the grantor to grant the franchise.

C. The grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise, or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the grantor or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein.

D. The grantee acknowledges that it was not coerced or unlawfully induced into accepting the franchise and that any offers which it made for services or benefits under the franchise were made as a matter of its own volition without any coercion from the grantor or any agent thereof.

E. The grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, acknowledges that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that, in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against the grantee and in favor of the grantor. (Ord. 298 § 1, 1989; Ord. 129 § 14.8, 1984)

Article XIII. Franchise Applications

5.60.550 General requirements.
Applicants for a franchise shall submit to the grantor written applications utilizing the standardized format provided by the grantor, at the time and place designated by the grantor for accepting applications, and including the designated application fee. (Ord. 129 § 15.1, 1984)

Chapter 5.61
REGULATION OF STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE HOLDERS
Sections:

5.61.010    Purpose and authority.

5.61.015    Definitions.

5.61.020    State video franchise and PEG fees.

5.61.030    Authority to examine business records.

5.61.040    Customer service penalties.

5.61.050    City response to State video franchise applications.

5.61.060    Development review for facilities in streets and public rights-of-way.

5.61.070    Construction standards.

5.61.080    Environmental review.

5.61.090    Severability.

5.61.010 Purpose and authority.
This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding State video franchises and operating within the City.

As of January 1, 2007, the State of California will have the sole authority to grant State video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“Act”). Pursuant to the Act, the City of Poway shall receive a franchise fee and shall receive a fee for public, educational, and government (PEG) purposes from all State video franchise holders operating within the City. Additionally, the City will acquire the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with State law, against all State video franchise holders operating within the City for violations of customer service standards; however, the Act grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the State. The Act leaves unchanged the City’s authority to regulate the City’s current cable franchise in accordance with Chapter 5.60 PMC and the cable franchise currently in effect until such time as the cable franchisee no longer holds a City franchise or is no longer operating under a current or expired City franchise. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

5.61.015 Definitions.*
The terms “video,” “video franchise” and “video franchisee” shall have the same meaning as the terms “cable,” “franchise” and “grantee,” as used in Chapter 5.60 PMC. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

*    Editor’s Note: Ordinance 660 adds the provisions of this section as Section 5.61.010. The section has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.

5.61.020 State video franchise and PEG fees.
A. For any State video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City of Poway, there shall be a fee paid to the City equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that State video franchise holder.

B. For any State video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City of Poway, there shall be an additional fee paid to the City equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that State video franchise holder, which shall be imposed under the terms and conditions set forth in the Act. This fee shall be used by the City for PEG purposes consistent with State and Federal law.

C. “Gross revenue,” for the purposes of subsections A and B of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

5.61.030 Authority to examine business records.
Not more than once annually, the City Manager or his or her designee may examine the business records of a holder of a State video franchise to ensure compliance with PMC 5.61.020, under the terms and conditions set forth in the Act. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

5.61.040 Customer service penalties.
A. The holder of a State video franchise shall comply with all applicable State and Federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

B. The City Manager shall monitor the compliance of State video franchise holders with respect to State and Federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager will provide the State video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the State video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the City:

1. For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500 for each violation.

2. For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each violation.

3. For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each violation.

C. A State video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The City Council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

5.61.050 City response to State video franchise applications.
A. Applicants for State video franchises within the boundaries of the City of Poway must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the Public Utilities Commission. One complete copy must be provided to the City Manager.

B. Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a State video franchise. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

5.61.060 Development review for facilities in streets and public rights-of-way.
Prior to construction or alteration of any facilities in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along the public streets and rights-of-way within the City of Poway, a State video franchise holder shall, for each facility, submit plans and drawings to the Director of Development Services for review, pursuant to PMC 17.52.050. For purposes of this section, “facilities” includes wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments, and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the video service system. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

5.61.070 Construction standards.
The construction standards set forth in PMC 5.60.275, 5.60.280, 5.60.285, 5.60.290, and 5.60.295 shall apply to State video service franchise holders constructing or altering any facilities within the City of Poway, as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

5.61.080 Environmental review.
The City of Poway shall serve as the lead agency for any environmental review that is required for construction or alteration of facilities by a State video service franchise holder within the City of Poway, and may impose conditions to mitigate environmental impacts of the applicant’s use of the public rights-of-way that may be required by the California Environmental Quality Act (Division 13 commencing with Section 21000 of the Public Resources Code). (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

5.61.090 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 660 § 2, 2007)

Chapter 5.64
CONSUMER COMMODITIES PRICE MARKING
Sections:

5.64.010    Definitions.

5.64.020    Readable prices on packaged consumer commodities – Exemptions – Definitions.

5.64.030    Liability for losses and expenses.

5.64.040    Unintentional error – No violation.

5.64.050    Exclusive remedies.

5.64.060    Violations – Fines – Injunctions.

5.64.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words set out in this section are defined as follows:

A. “Automatic checkout system” means a computer capable of reading the universal product code or similar code to determine the price of items being purchased.

B. “Consumer commodity” includes:

1. Food, including all material whether solid, liquid, or mixed, and whether simple or compound, which is used or intended for consumption by human beings or domestic animals normally kept as household pets, and all substances or ingredients added to any such material for any purpose. This definition shall not apply to individual packages of cigarettes or individual cigars;

2. Napkins, facial tissues, toilet tissues, foil wrapping, plastic wrapping, paper toweling, and disposable plates and cups;

3. Detergents, soaps and other cleaning agents;

4. Pharmaceuticals, including nonprescription drugs, bandages, female hygiene products, and toiletries.

C. “Grocery department” means an area within a general retail merchandise store which is engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food, rather than food prepared for immediate consumption on or off the premises.

D. “Grocery store” means a store engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food, rather than food prepared for consumption on the premises.

E. “Sale item” or “special” means any consumer commodity offered in good faith for a period of seven days or less, on sale at a price below the normal price that item is usually sold for in that store. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.701(C))

5.64.020 Readable prices on packaged consumer commodities – Exemptions – Definitions.
A. Every retail grocery store or grocery department within a general retail merchandise store which uses an automatic checkout system shall cause to have a clearly readable price indicated on each packaged consumer commodity offered for sale.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the following:

1. The following consumer commodities which were not generally item-priced on January 1, 1977, as determined by the Department of Food and Agriculture:

a. Beer, individual containers,

b. Soft drink, individual containers,

c. Candy bars, mints,

d. Dry drink, individual packets (Kool-Aid type),

e. Cigarettes and cigars, either individually or in cartons,

f. Baby food (strained and junior jars) only,

g. Eggs,

h. Frozen novelties (ice cream bars, popsicles, etc.),

i. Ice cream, cartons,

j. Milk, including buttermilk and chocolate drink,

k. Packaged produce,

l. Yogurt;

2. Any packaged fresh food produce, or consumer commodities which are under three cubic inches in size, weigh less than three ounces, and are priced under $0.30;

3. Any consumer commodity offered as a sale item or as a special;

4. Any business which has as its only regular employees the owner thereof, or the parent, spouse, or child of such owner, or, in addition thereto, not more than two other regular employees;

5. Identical items within a multi-item package;

6. Items sold through a vending machine. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.701(A, B))

5.64.030 Liability for losses and expenses.
Any person, firm, corporation, or association who violates PMC 5.64.010, 5.64.020 and 5.64.060 shall be liable to any person injured for any losses and expenses thereby incurred. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.703)

5.64.040 Unintentional error – No violation.
Improper pricing on the shelf or on the item due to unintentional error shall not constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.704)

5.64.050 Exclusive remedies.
The remedies set forth in PMC 5.64.030 and 5.64.060 are the exclusive remedies available to any person. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.705)

5.64.060 Violations – Fines – Injunctions.
A. The intentional violation of PMC 5.64.010 and 5.64.020 is punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00.

B. Failure to have a clearly readable price indicated on 12 units of the same item of the same commodity shall constitute a presumption of intent to violate PMC 5.64.010 and 5.64.020.

C. Every additional 12 units of the same item that fail to have a price indicated on them shall constitute a presumption of intent to violate PMC 5.64.010 and 5.64.020.

D. Each day that a violation continues shall also constitute a separate violation after notification thereof to the manager or assistant manager of the retail grocery store or the grocery department of the general retail merchandise store and shall constitute a presumption of intent to violate PMC 5.64.010 and 5.64.020.

E. Any person may bring an action to enjoin a violation of PMC 5.64.010 and 5.64.020. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.702)

Chapter 5.66
BATHHOUSES
(Repealed by Ord. 683)

Chapter 5.68
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

5.68.010    Title.

5.68.020    Purpose and intent.

5.68.030    Rules and construction.

5.68.040    Definitions.

5.68.050    Massage establishment license.

5.68.060    Application for massage establishment – Massage service license.

5.68.070    Massage establishment license application fee.

5.68.080    Massage technician’s permit.

5.68.090    Massage technician application fee.

5.68.100    Application form for massage technician.

5.68.110    Massage technician trainee.

5.68.120    Qualification period.

5.68.130    Massage establishment facilities.

5.68.140    Name of business.

5.68.150    Change of location.

5.68.160    Inspection.

5.68.170    Records of treatments.

5.68.180    Applicability of regulations to existing business.

5.68.190    Exemptions.

5.68.200    Fee modification and allocation.

5.68.210    Effective date of chapter provisions.

5.68.220    Violation – Penalty.

5.68.230    Rules applicable to certificate holders.

5.68.240    Attire.

5.68.010 Title.
This chapter may be cited as the massage establishment and technician chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.501)

5.68.020 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of the massage business in the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.502)

5.68.030 Rules and construction.
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. Unless otherwise specifically prescribed in this chapter the following provisions shall govern its interpretation and construction:

A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number.

B. The masculine form as used in this chapter applies equally to a female person or a corporation.

C. Time is of the essence in this chapter. No license or permit holder shall be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any provision of this chapter by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance with any of its provisions except as provided in PMC 5.68.120.

D. Any right or power conferred or duty imposed upon any officer, employee, department or board of the City is subject to transfer by operation of law to any other officer, employee, department or board of the City.

E. No license or permit holder shall have any recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or the enforcement thereof.

F. This chapter does not relieve any license or permit holder of any requirement of any ordinance, rule, regulation or specification of the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.503)

5.68.040 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used, they shall mean:

A. “Building inspection” means the Development Services Department of the City.

B. “Certificate holder” means a person certified pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., or a business establishment where only people certified pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq. practice massage.

C. “Chief of Police” means the Chief of Police of the City or any other law enforcement official of competent jurisdiction.

D. “Health Department” means the Health Department of the County.

E. “License” means the business license to operate a massage establishment required by this chapter.

F. “Massage” means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. Massage includes practices by holistic health practitioners or other similar professions or avocations that otherwise meet this definition.

G. “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in subsection F of this section. An establishment of a holistic health provider or any other similar professional who includes massage as part of his or her practice is a massage establishment.

H. “Massage technician” means any person, including a trainee, male or female, who gives or administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a “massage,” as that term is defined in this chapter.

I. “Permit” means the permit to engage in the activities of a massage technician required by this chapter.

J. “Person” means a natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.

K. “Recognized school” means any school or institution of learning, which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage, and which has been approved pursuant to Section 29007.5 of the California Education Code or pursuant to a similar code provision of another State.

L. “Specified anatomical areas” mean pubic region, human genitals, perineum, anal region and the area of the female breast that includes the areola and the nipple. (Ord. 691 § 6, 2009; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 265 § 2, 1988; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.504)

5.68.050 Massage establishment license.
The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a license is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. In addition to the reasons stated in the uniform licensing procedure, the Issuing Officer may deny the application for a license if he finds that:

A. The applicant knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a license; or

B. The applicant, or in the case of an applicant-corporation or partnership any of its officers, directors, holders of five percent or more of the corporation’s stock or partners, within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, has been convicted of an offense or has been adjudged to be a mentally disordered sex offender and has a duty to register with the Chief of Police under Section 290 of the Penal Code; or has been convicted of a violation of Sections 314 (indecent exposure), 315 (keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame), 316 (keeping a disorderly house, disturbing the peace), 647(a) (soliciting or engaging in lewd or dissolute conduct in a public place), or 647(b) (soliciting or engaging in prostitution) of the Penal Code, or convicted in another State of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses. No massage establishment license shall be issued by the Issuing Officer until he has been notified in writing by the Health Department and the Department of Development Services that the applicant has fulfilled the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.505)

5.68.060 Application for massage establishment – Massage service license.
A. The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, the proposed place of business and facilities therefor, and the name and address of each applicant.

B. In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a license shall furnish the following information:

1. The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

2. Written proof satisfactory to the Chief of Police that the applicant is over the age of 18 years;

3. The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

4. Two portrait photographs, at least two inches by two inches. One photograph shall be retained by the Chief of Police and one photograph shall be affixed to the license;

5. Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

6. The business license or permit history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another City, County or State, under license or permit, has had such license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation;

7. Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction and the circumstances surrounding the crime for which he was convicted;

8. Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matter specified in this chapter as required to be set forth in this section;

9. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to deny to the Chief of Police the right to take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, nor shall anything contained in this chapter be construed to deny the right of the Chief of Police to confirm the height and weight of the applicant;

10. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of Incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.506)

5.68.070 Massage establishment license application fee.
The annual nonrefundable fee for a massage establishment license shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application to defray in part the cost of inspection, investigation and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 683 § 19, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.507)

5.68.080 Massage technician’s permit.
A. The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a permit is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure, set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. In addition to the reasons stated in the uniform licensing procedure the Issuing Officer may deny the application for a permit where he finds that the applicant has, within five years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, been convicted of an offense or has been adjudged to be a mentally disordered sex offender and has a duty to register with the Sheriff or Chief of Police under Section 290 of the Penal Code; or has been convicted of a violation of Section 314 (indecent exposure), 315 (keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame), 316 (keeping a disorderly house, disturbing the peace), 647(a) (soliciting or engaging in lewd or dissolute conduct in a public place), or 647(b) (soliciting or engaging in prostitution) of the Penal Code, or convicted in another State of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses.

B. No massage technician permit shall be issued by the Issuing Officer until he has been notified in writing by the Health Department that the applicant has fulfilled the requirements of PMC 5.68.100(M).

C. The trainee permit shall allow the student to work in a massage establishment under the supervision and direction of a massage technician who has received a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, no licensed massage technician shall be permitted to supervise more than two persons issued a trainee permit at any one time. The trainee permit shall expire nine months from the date of issuance and shall not be renewed unless good cause is shown by the applicant for such renewal. Any person desiring to obtain a permit to act as a massage technician trainee shall make an application to the Issuing Officer.

D. The nonrefundable fee for a massage technician trainee permit and the annual nonrefundable renewal fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application. The trainee must at all times comply with the laws relating to massage establishments and the failure to comply may render the trainee ineligible to obtain a massage technician permit. (Ord. 683 § 20, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.508)

5.68.090 Massage technician application fee.
A. The annual nonrefundable fee for a massage technician permit and the annual nonrefundable renewal fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time; provided, however, the provisions of PMC 5.68.100(L) and (M) shall not apply to such annual renewal. The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application to defray the cost of investigation and examination.

B. A permit to act as a massage technician does not authorize the operation of a massage establishment. Any person obtaining a permit to act as a massage technician who desires to operate a massage establishment must separately apply for a license therefor. A person who applies for a license to operate a massage establishment and who desires to act as a massage technician within said establishment who pays the fee required by PMC 5.68.070 shall not be required to pay the fee required by this section. (Ord. 683 § 21, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.509)

5.68.100 Application form for massage technician.
The application for a massage technician permit shall contain the following:

A. The name and residence address;

B. The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of three years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each;

C. Social Security number and driver’s license number, if any;

D. The applicant’s weight, height, color of hair and eyes;

E. The written evidence, satisfactory to the Chief of Police, that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

F. Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

G. Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction, and the circumstances surrounding the crime for which he was convicted;

H. The business license or permit history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another County, City or State under license or permit, has had such license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation;

I. Two portrait photographs, at least two inches by two inches. One photograph shall be retained by the Chief of Police for his files and one photograph shall be affixed to the permit;

J. Such other identification and information as the Chief of Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this chapter as required to be set forth in this section;

K. For all new applicants after September 1, 2009, passage of a certifying examination approved by the regulatory body providing oversight to massage professionals pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq. Applicants renewing their applications without a break in licensure status from before September 1, 2009, shall demonstrate that they have passed a qualifying written examination prepared by the Health Department and administered by the Chief of Police establishing competency and ability of the applicant to engage in the practice of massage. In lieu of taking such written examination, applicant may furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school wherein the method, profession and work of massage is taught or may furnish evidence of employment as a massage technician for 1,200 hours;

L. Pass an examination prepared and conducted by the Health Department wherein the applicant shall be required to demonstrate a basic knowledge of anatomy, physiology, hygiene and manual and mechanical massage. These examinations shall be conducted at regular intervals. The Health Director shall advise the Chief of Police of the results of such examination;

M. The Chief of Police shall fingerprint the applicant. (Ord. 691 § 7, 2009; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.510)

5.68.110 Massage technician trainee.
A. A massage technician trainee permit shall be issued to any person who has fulfilled the requirements of PMC 5.68.100, with the exception of subsection L or M of that section, provided he is currently enrolled in a recognized school as defined in PMC 5.68.040(K) and has completed at least 25 hours of instruction; and provided the applicant submits a letter signed by the owner or manager of a licensed massage establishment stating his immediate intent to employ the applicant to do massage as a trainee working under the direct supervision and control of a massage technician who has received a permit under the provisions of this chapter. The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a permit is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. In addition to the reasons stated in the uniform licensing procedure, the Issuing Officer may deny an applicant for a permit if he finds that:

1. The applicant has, within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, been convicted of an offense or has been adjudged to be a mentally disordered sex offender and has a duty to register with the Sheriff or Chief of Police under Section 290 of the Penal Code; or has been convicted of a violation of Section 314 (indecent exposure), 315 (keeping or residing in a house of ill fame), 316 (keeping a disorderly house, disturbing the peace), 647(a) (soliciting or engaging in lewd or dissolute conduct in a public place), or 647(b) (soliciting or engaging in prostitution) of the Penal Code, or convicted in another State or any offense which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses.

2. The trainee permit shall allow the student to work in a massage establishment under the supervision and direction of a massage technician who has received a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, no licensed massage technician shall be permitted to supervise more than two persons issued a trainee permit at any one time. The trainee permit shall expire nine months from the date of issuance and shall not be renewed unless good cause is shown by the applicant for such renewal. Any person desiring to obtain a permit to act as a massage technician trainee shall make an application to the Issuing Officer.

3. The nonrefundable fee for a massage technician trainee permit and the annual nonrefundable renewal fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application. The trainee must at all times comply with the laws relating to massage establishments and the failure to comply may render the trainee ineligible to obtain a massage technician permit.

4. An applicant who is denied a trainee permit may request a hearing from the Issuing Officer. Such request must be made in writing and filed with the Issuing Officer within five days after the applicant has received notice of the denial. The Issuing Officer shall notify the applicant of the time and place of such hearing.

B. After September 1, 2009, no more massage technician trainee permits shall be issued. (Ord. 691 § 8, 2009; Ord. 683 § 22, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.511)

5.68.120 Qualification period.
All those persons employed as massage technicians in massage establishments at the time Ordinance 29 from 1981 went into effect or so employed within the 12 months immediately preceding such effective date, who cannot qualify for a massage technician permit by reason of PMC 5.68.100(K) and (L), will have 120 days to qualify either as a massage technician or a massage technician trainee and obtain the required permit under this chapter. All other information required under PMC 5.68.100 shall be submitted immediately. (Ord. 691 § 9, 2009; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.512)

5.68.130 Massage establishment facilities.
A. No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be granted and no massage establishment shall practice massage unless an inspection by the Department of Development Services and the Health Department reveals that the proposed establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements:

1. A recognizable and legible sign complying with the sign regulations in the zoning ordinance of the City shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the premises as a massage establishment.

2. A light level of no less than five foot-candles at any point within the room shall be maintained in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons. This subsection does not apply to certificate holders.

3. Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons, except that certificate holders need not provide any facilities over and above those required by applicable law for other professional or personal services:

a. In steam rooms and rooms containing tubs and showers, a waterproof floor covering shall be provided which extends up the walls at least six inches and shall be covered at the floor-wall juncture with at least a three-eighths-inch radius. Toilet rooms shall be of similar construction.

b. Walls of toilet and bathing facilities shall be smooth, waterproof and kept in good repair.

4. Cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean linen. Approved containers shall be provided for the storage of all soiled linen.

5. Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the building code of the City. To allow for adequate ventilation in cubicles, rooms and areas provided for patrons’ use, which are not serviced directly by required window or mechanical systems of ventilation, partitions shall be constructed so that the height of partitions does not exceed 75 percent of the floor-to-ceiling height of the area in which they are located. However, nothing in this subsection shall require certificate holders to maintain any higher standards than apply to other professional or personal services.

6. A minimum of one separate washbasin provided with hot and cold running water, soap and individual towels in a dispenser shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees. This washbasin shall be separate from washbasins located in toilet rooms. This subsection does not apply to certificate holders, but certificate holders must comply with all other related standards established by law.

7. All plumbing and electrical installations shall be installed under permit and inspection of the Department of Development Services and such installations shall be installed in accordance with the International Building Code and Uniform Plumbing Code.

8. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department after each use. This subsection does not apply to certificate holders.

9. Towels, sheets, and linens of all types and items for personal use of operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, clothes, and sheets shall not be used for more than one person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited unless the same has been first laundered. Common use of towels or linens is prohibited. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle.

10. All lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with hot and cold running water, soap and single service towels in wall-mounted dispensers, except for certificate holders, who must abide by all laws applicable to professional or personal services.

11. Except for certificate holders, security deposit facilities for the protection of the valuables of the patrons shall also be available.

12. Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment approved by the Health Department shall be provided for any instruments used in performing acts of massage.

13. Pads used on massage tables shall be covered in a workmanlike manner with durable washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material.

14. Except for certificate holders, no exterior entrance to the massage establishment which is regularly used by the public for ingress or egress to such establishment shall be locked during business hours.

15. All massage establishments shall be subject to reasonable inspection during hours of business operation.

16. Except for certificate holders who must comply with all laws applicable to professional or personal services, a minimum of one tub or shower, and one toilet and washbasin shall be provided by every massage establishment; provided, however, that if male and female persons are employed by any massage establishment or if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at said establishment, or any combination thereof, a separate massage room, or rooms, separate dressing facilities and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons and employees. Further, in those establishments where steam room or sauna baths are provided, if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate steam rooms or sauna rooms shall be provided for male and female patrons.

B. This section shall be construed to require minimum standards only. The application shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 691 § 10, 2009; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.513)

5.68.140 Name of business.
No person licensed to do business as provided in this chapter shall operate under any name or conduct his business under any designation not specified in his permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.516)

5.68.150 Change of location.
A change of location of a licensed massage establishment shall be approved by the City Council, provided all applicable provisions of this chapter are complied with and a nonrefundable change of location fee, as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, has been paid to the Development Services Department, and the Building Division has inspected the new location and has advised the Director of Development Services that it complies with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 683 § 23, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.517)

5.68.160 Inspection.
The Chief of Police, the Department of Development Services and the Health Department shall make, at least two times each calendar year, an inspection of each massage establishment in the City for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.519)

5.68.170 Records of treatments.
Except for certificate holders, every person, association, firm, or corporation operating a massage establishment under a license as provided in this chapter shall keep for a period of 90 days a record of the date and hour of each treatment, and the name of the technician administering such treatment. Said record shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of these provisions for the purposes of law enforcement and for no other purpose. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential. Any willfully unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the City shall constitute an infraction and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this code, in addition to any other penalties provided by law. Records shall be kept for a period of 90 days of treatments rendered off the business site. (Ord. 691 § 11, 2009; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.521)

5.68.180 Applicability of regulations to existing business.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described in this chapter whether the activities described in this chapter were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in the adopted County code and set out in this chapter, except where expressly provided otherwise herein. (Ord. 691 § 12, 2009; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.522)

5.68.190 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:

A. Acupuncturists, physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State;

B. Nurses who are licensed under the laws of this State;

C. Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team;

D. Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the State. (Ord. 691 § 13, 2009; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.523)

5.68.200 Fee modification and allocation.
A. All fees referenced in this chapter shall be reviewed annually by the City Manager to determine whether such fees are adequate to cover the cost of implementing the provisions of this chapter. If the City Manager determines that such fees should be modified he/she shall submit his/her proposal to the City Council for approval. The City Council, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, may establish any schedule of fees by resolution.

B. All fees established by this chapter shall be collected by the Department of Finance. (Ord. 811 § 11, 2017; Ord. 683 § 24, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.531)

5.68.210 Effective date of chapter provisions.
A. A licensee of any existing massage establishment at the time this chapter goes into effect shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be required to comply with the provisions of PMC 5.68.130 on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B. Any massage establishment coming within this section must comply with the requirements of subsections (A)(3)(a), (5), (6) and (16) of PMC 5.68.130 no later than one year after the effective date of the ordinance codified in the County Code Section adopted herein. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.514)

5.68.220 Violation – Penalty.
A. Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this chapter, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee, or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment or practices the giving or administering of any of the services defined in PMC 5.68.040 without first obtaining the necessary permit or license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. Any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge or in control of a massage establishment who knowingly employs a person performing as a massage technician, as defined in this chapter, who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked permit or valid, unrevoked State-issued certificate, or who allows such person to perform, operate or practice massage within such place of business is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 691 § 14, 2009; Ord. 265 § 2, 1988; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.524)

5.68.230 Rules applicable to certificate holders.
The following rules apply to certificate holders:

A. No later than three business days before practicing massage in the City of Poway, a certificate holder shall register with the City of Poway. A certificate holder must re-register within five business days of submitting information to the California Massage Therapy Council or its successor to renew the certificate holder’s certification. The certificate holder shall, in his or her registration form, include the following information:

1. The certificate holder’s name;

2. A copy of the certificate holder’s current, valid certificate;

3. The certificate holder’s business address;

4. Any other information the City Manager deems relevant, consistent with Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

B. Nothing in this chapter exempts a certificate holder from an obligation to obtain a business license from the City of Poway.

C. Within three business days of any change in the information required by subsection A of this section, a certificate holder who practices massage in the City of Poway shall notify the City Manager of this change. (Ord. 691 § 15, 2009)

5.68.240 Attire.
A. Each massage establishment shall provide to all patrons clean, sanitary and opaque coverings capable of covering the patron’s specified anatomical areas. Such coverings shall be used for one customer only and shall not be reused without first being cleaned.

B. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, permittee or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment shall permit a massage to be given unless the patron’s specified anatomical areas are covered during the entire massage by the covering referred to in subsection A of this section.

C. With the exception of bathrooms or dressing rooms not open to public view, no owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, permittee or licensee in charge of or in control of any massage establishment shall permit any person in any area within the massage establishment which is used in common by the patrons or which can be viewed by patrons from such an area, unless such person’s specified anatomical areas are fully covered.

D. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, permittee or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment shall permit any massage technician to perform any service or task while in the presence of a patron or to be on the premises of a massage establishment during its hours of operation unless the massage technician is fully covered from a point not to exceed four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck. Such covering shall be of an opaque material and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

E. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, permittee or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment shall permit any person to massage or intentionally touch the specified anatomical areas of another person while performing the services of an adult massage technician. (Ord. 691 § 16, 2009)

Chapter 5.72
BINGO AND OTHER GAMES
Sections:

5.72.010    Definitions.

5.72.020    Prohibited games.

5.72.030    Free games as enticement prohibited.

5.72.040    Specific games prohibited.

5.72.050    Bingo authorized.

5.72.060    License.

5.72.070    Application – Contents.

5.72.080    Term of license and fees.

5.72.090    Limitations.

5.72.100    Inspection.

5.72.105    Remote caller bingo.

5.72.110    Violation.

5.72.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

A. “Authorized organization” is an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701l or 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code. “Authorized organization” also includes a senior citizens organization, a mobile home park association, or a charitable organization affiliated with a school district.

B. “Bingo” is a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols that are marked or covered by the player on a tangible card in the player’s possession and that conform to numbers or symbols selected at random and announced by a live caller. The game of bingo also includes cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All such preprinted cards shall bear the legend “For sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance.”

C. “Minor” is any person under the age of 18 years.

D. “Remote caller bingo” means a game of bingo, as defined in subdivision (o) of Penal Code Section 326.5, in which the numbers or symbols on randomly drawn plastic balls are announced by a natural person present at the site at which the live game is conducted, and the organization conducting the bingo game uses audio and video technology to link any of its in-state facilities for the purpose of transmitting the remote calling of a live bingo game from a single location to multiple locations owned, leased or rented by that organization. (Ord. 706 §§ 1 – 3, 2010; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.306)

5.72.020 Prohibited games.
It is unlawful for any person to set up, manage, conduct or maintain any game, machine or enterprise wherein:

A. A consideration is paid by the player;

B. Prizes are awarded as determined by skill or by any combination of skill and chance; and

C. Said game, machine or enterprise is played concurrently with or alternately or in conjunction or connection with:

1. Any lottery;

2. Any game of chance, whether or not a consideration is paid for playing the game of chance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.301)

5.72.030 Free games as enticement prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to set up, manage, conduct or maintain any combination of games, machines or enterprises wherein games of chance and games of skill are alternated or played in any sequence with each other so that free games are used to entice or allure players into the playing for a consideration of paid games of skill or paid games combining the element of chance with the element of skill. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.303)

5.72.040 Specific games prohibited.
This chapter is intended to prohibit the playing of bingo, tango, bridgo, skill ball or any game or combination of games similar in operation to such games, except as specifically authorized by this chapter, and to apply to free as well as to paid playing of such games. (Ord. 706 § 4, 2010; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.304)

5.72.050 Bingo authorized.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, this chapter is adopted pursuant to section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution in order to make the game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions in the following sections of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.305)

5.72.060 License.
A license shall only be issued to a person who is a member of an authorized organization. The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a license is that set forth in the uniform licensing procedure set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. (Ord. 706 § 5, 2010; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.307)

5.72.070 Application – Contents.
The application shall be filed not less than 10 days prior to the proposed date of the bingo game or games. Such application form shall require from the applicant at least the following:

A. A list of all members who will operate the bingo game, including full names of each member, date of birth, place of birth, physical description and driver’s license number;

B. The date(s) and place(s) of the proposed bingo game or games.

C. Proof that the organization is an authorized organization as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 706 § 6, 2010; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.308)

5.72.080 Term of license and fees.
A. The term of a bingo license is one year.

B. The fee for a bingo license shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. One-half of the fee shall be refunded if the application for a license is denied. An additional fee, as established by City Council resolution from time to time, will be applied to monthly gross receipts over $5,000 derived from bingo games and shall be collected monthly by the Issuing Officer. (Ord. 706 § 7, 2010; Ord. 683 § 25, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.309)

5.72.090 Limitations.
An authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property that has been owned or leased by it or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, such organization.

A. No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

B. All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the authorized organization.

C. A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization. Such members shall be approved by the Chief of Police. If, after the license has been issued, the authorized organization submits additional names to the Issuing Officer for approval, the application for approval shall be accompanied by a fee for each additional name, as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, and of which no part shall be refundable, and which shall be used to defray the cost of investigation. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game.

D. No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.

E. With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

1. Such proceeds may be used for prizes.

2. A portion of such proceeds, as established by City Council resolution from time to time, may be used for the rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment and administrative costs, security equipment and security personnel.

3. Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees.

F. Within 30 days after the bingo game is held, the applicant will file with the Issuing Officer a full and complete financial statement of all moneys collected, disbursed and the amount remaining for charitable purposes.

G. No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. This provision shall not apply to a person participating in a game of remote caller bingo meeting the requirements of PMC 5.72.105.

H. The total value of the prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed $500.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. This provision shall not apply to a person participating in a game of remote caller bingo meeting the requirements of PMC 5.72.105.

I. No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and 8:00 a.m.

J. The licensee may conduct bingo on not more than three days during any seven-day period. Once during each year, the Issuing Officer may permit a licensee to conduct bingo games for more than three days during any seven-day period; provided, that such permission shall be limited to bingo games which will be conducted in conjunction with an established annual event regularly held by the licensee. This provision shall not apply to games of remote caller bingo meeting the requirements of PMC 5.72.105. (Ord. 706 § 8, 2010; Ord. 683 § 26, 2008; Ord. 106 § 4, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.312)

5.72.100 Inspection.
Any peace officer of the City shall have free access to any bingo game licensed under this chapter. The licensee shall have the bingo license and lists of approved staff available for inspection at all times during any bingo game. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.313)

5.72.105 Remote caller bingo.
A. Legislative Authorization. This section is adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution, as implemented by Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code.

B. Remote Caller Bingo Authorized. Remote caller bingo may be lawfully played in the City of Poway pursuant to the provisions of Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and this chapter, and not otherwise.

C. Qualified Applicants – Applicants for Licensure.

1. The following organizations are qualified to apply to the License Official for a license to operate a bingo game if the receipts of those games are used only for charitable purposes:

a. An organization exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701, 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, or 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

b. A mobile home park association of a mobile home park that is situated in the City of Poway.

c. Senior citizen organizations.

d. Charitable organizations affiliated with a school district.

2. The application shall be in a form prescribed by the License Official and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council from time to time. The following documentation shall be attached to the application, as applicable:

a. A certificate issued by the Franchise Tax Board certifying that the applicant is exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax pursuant to Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

b. Other evidence as the License Official determines is necessary to verify that the applicant is a duly organized mobile home park association of a mobile home park situated in the City of Poway.

D. License Application – Verification. The license shall not be issued until the License Official has verified the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant is qualified.

E. Annual Licenses. A license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid until the end of the calendar year, at which time the license shall expire. A new license shall only be obtained upon filing a new application and payment of the license fee. The fact that a license has been issued to an applicant creates no vested right on the part of the licensee to continue to offer bingo for play. The City Council expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this section at any time by resolution. If this section is repealed, all licenses issued pursuant to this section shall cease to be effective for any purpose on the effective date of the repealing resolution.

F. Conditions of Licensure.

1. Any license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to the conditions contained in Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and each licensee shall comply with the requirements of those provisions.

2. Each license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to the following additional conditions:

a. Bingo games shall not be conducted by any licensee on more than two days during any week, except that a licensee may hold one additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter.

b. The licensed organization is responsible for ensuring that the conditions of this section and Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code are complied with by the organization and its officers and members. A violation of any one or more of those conditions or provisions shall constitute cause for the revocation of the organization’s license. At the request of the organization, the City Council shall hold a public hearing before revoking any license issued pursuant to this section, following the procedure set forth in the uniform licensing procedure set out in Chapter 5.04 PMC. (Ord. 706 § 9, 2010)

5.72.110 Violation.
It is unlawful for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter. This section does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at a bingo game by the organization conducting the game. (Ord. 706 § 10, 2010; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.317)

Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapters:

6.04    Livestock

6.08    Strays

6.12    Animal Control

6.16    Disposal of Dead Animals

6.20    Treatment of Wildlife

6.24    Treatment of Rodeo Animals

Chapter 6.04
LIVESTOCK
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

6.04.010    Definitions.

6.04.020    Provisions supplement laws.

6.04.030    Duties of County Veterinarian.

6.04.040    County Veterinarian may enter premises.

6.04.050    Interference with County Veterinarian.

6.04.060    Illegally imported livestock subject to examination at owner’s expense.

6.04.070    Duty to assist County Veterinarian.

6.04.080    Rats prohibited.

6.04.090    Sanitary premises required.

6.04.100    Rabies vaccination.

6.04.110    Tests for livestock diseases – Fees.

6.04.120    Revocation of permits.

Article II. Importation of Livestock

6.04.130    Transportation of diseased animals – Permit.

6.04.140    Transportation directly to stockyards.

Article III. Quarantines

6.04.150    Quarantine of importations from other cities.

6.04.160    Quarantine within City.

6.04.170    Removal of quarantine notices prohibited.

6.04.180    Quarantined animals not to drink from streams or other channels.

Article IV. Tuberculosis Tests

6.04.190    Injection of tuberculin.

6.04.200    County Veterinarian may require tuberculin test.

6.04.210    Movement of cattle during testing prohibited.

Article V. Slaughterhouses

6.04.220    Slaughtering of animals – Permit required.

Article I. General Provisions

6.04.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Immediate slaughter” means and applies to livestock shipped to a public stockyard and released therefrom for slaughter, and to livestock shipped to the plant or premises of a firm regularly engaged in the slaughter of animals under approved inspection.

B. “Infectious disease” includes any infectious, contagious or communicable disease considered by the County Veterinarian to be sufficiently dangerous to the welfare of the City and to the health of the livestock therein to warrant putting into effect the provisions of this chapter and their rules and regulations.

C. “Livestock” means any horses, mules, asses, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, poultry, rabbits, pet birds, or dogs and cats, and fish, or any animal or animals ordinarily considered as wild animals which are kept in captivity or under control or ownership of any person for any purpose.

D. “Stockyard” means and applies to any stockyard, corral or premises wherein public trading in livestock is carried on, or where yarding, feeding and watering facilities are provided and where Federal, State or County inspection is maintained for the inspection of livestock for infectious disease.

E. “Tuberculin test” means any test approved by the Veterinary Services Division, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services, United States Department of Agriculture for the detection of tuberculosis in animals. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.101 – 62.106)

6.04.020 Provisions supplement laws.
This chapter shall in all respects be construed to supplement and harmonize with the provisions of the laws of the State pertaining to animal husbandry. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.107)

6.04.030 Duties of County Veterinarian.
A. It shall be the duty of the County Veterinarian, acting in cooperation with the State Bureau of Animal Health, to enforce all laws of the State and all orders and ordinances of the City Council pertaining to the health and sanitary surroundings of the livestock, in the City, and for that purpose is empowered by this chapter and authorized by and with the approval of the City Council to establish, maintain and enforce such quarantine, sanitary, testing and immunizing measures or to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be deemed proper and necessary.

B. The County Veterinarian shall supervise examination and testing of animals or premises for the presence of contagious, infectious, or communicable disease; attend such meetings and conferences as may be called from time to time by the Bureau of Animal Industry or the Director of Agriculture. He shall investigate with the State any reported outbreak of contagious, infectious or communicable disease, the presence of which in the State may constitute a menace to the health of livestock in the City; shall investigate, make diagnosis of, and institute control measures for any suspicious case of rabies of animals reported by the Health Officer or any other person or agency. A report of such investigation shall be furnished to the Health Officer. The County Veterinarian shall supervise and administer the operation of the livestock and poultry laboratory. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.109)

6.04.040 County Veterinarian may enter premises.
The County Veterinarian is empowered by this chapter to enter any premises where livestock is kept, or on which he has reason to believe that livestock is kept, in order to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.110)

6.04.050 Interference with County Veterinarian.
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the official actions of the County Veterinarian. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.111)

6.04.060 Illegally imported livestock subject to examination at owner’s expense.
All livestock brought into the City in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to quarantine, examination and test at the expense of the owner by the County Veterinarian, who may dispose of such livestock to comport with the welfare of the City and the protection of the health of the domestic livestock therein. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.112)

6.04.070 Duty to assist County Veterinarian.
It is hereby made the duty of any person suspecting or having knowledge of the presence of any infectious disease in livestock to report same to the County Veterinarian. It shall be the duty of any person owning or having control of livestock to assist the County Veterinarian to enforce the provisions of this chapter, to obey all orders of the County Veterinarian made for the control and eradication of infectious disease, the sanitation of premises, the destruction of livestock and the disposal of carcasses, manure, offal, refuse, condemned meat and meat products. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.113)

6.04.080 Rats prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to maintain a rat menace where livestock is kept. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.114)

6.04.090 Sanitary premises required.
All premises where livestock is kept, fed, stabled or otherwise cared for, or any premises on which a hog ranch or slaughterhouse is maintained or where meat products are prepared for food shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.115)

6.04.100 Rabies vaccination.
The County Veterinarian is hereby empowered to vaccinate animals for rabies at the request of the owner or person in possession of the animal vaccinated or whenever in his judgment the County Veterinarian deems such vaccination a necessary part of the control program authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.116)

6.04.110 Tests for livestock diseases – Fees.
At such times and places within the City as he determines, the County Veterinarian, in accordance with his authority and duties prescribed by law, may perform such tests as may be required to make proper diagnosis of various conditions and diseases in livestock as may be authorized from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Any person desiring such a test shall provide the County Veterinarian with such samples and/or specimens as the County Veterinarian may require. The County Veterinarian may issue health certificates based on his findings resulting from such tests or from such livestock examinations as may be authorized by law. The fees for such tests and health certificates shall be collected in advance by the County Veterinarian and shall be as specified by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.117)

6.04.120 Revocation of permits.
Any permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the City Council on recommendation of the County Veterinarian for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations established under the authority thereof, or because the conduct or location of such premises has become a nuisance. Such permit shall be subject to suspension by the County Veterinarian for the same cause or causes and until the conditions resulting in such violation are remedied or because the business no longer comports with public health and welfare. During the period of such suspension, the County Veterinarian may in his discretion permit such preparation of food products in an establishment for the slaughtering of animals or for the preparation of meat products as is absolutely necessary to preserve the food value thereof. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.118)

Article II. Importation of Livestock

6.04.130 Transportation of diseased animals – Permit.
It is unlawful for any person to bring into or receive in, or to transport from place to place within the City, except for the purpose of immediate slaughter, any livestock affected with any contagious, infectious or communicable disease without a permit from the County Veterinarian, except such diseased animals as are specifically permitted to enter the State and the City under Federal or State regulations, and only under the conditions and for the purpose prescribed in the Federal and State regulations governing movement of livestock. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.123)

6.04.140 Transportation directly to stockyards.
All livestock entering the City for the purpose of immediate slaughter by any method of transportation or by driving on hoof must be moved directly to a public stockyard or to the premises upon which they are to be slaughtered, except that such livestock in railroad shipments may be unloaded enroute in order to comply with the provisions of what is known as the “28-hour law” of the United States Department of Agriculture. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.125)

Article III. Quarantines

6.04.150 Quarantine of importations from other cities.
When the County Veterinarian has determined that an infectious disease exists among livestock in any other City or areas of the State and the importation of livestock from such City or area might spread such disease among livestock within the City, the County Veterinarian shall notify the City Council thereof, designating and describing the City or area wherein such disease has been found and shall, with their approval, establish quarantine restrictions against such City or area as the circumstances warrant. The County Veterinarian may refuse to permit shipments of livestock originating in such areas to enter the City unless accompanied by a certificate signed by a State or Federal Veterinarian which shall satisfactorily prove that there is no possibility that the livestock for which such certificate is issued are infected with or exposed to an infectious disease. Any livestock entering the City from any City or area so described and designated without such certificate may be quarantined by the County Veterinarian in such manner as to eliminate any danger of the livestock within the City being exposed to infection from such disease. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.130)

6.04.160 Quarantine within City.
Upon information received by the County Veterinarian of any infectious disease affecting livestock within the City, the County Veterinarian shall proceed to thoroughly investigate the same. Upon discovery of any infectious disease affecting livestock in the City, the County Veterinarian shall have the power and duty to establish such quarantine, sanitary testing, immunizing, and police regulations as may be necessary to control or eradicate such disease and prevent the spread thereof to other livestock. The County Veterinarian may quarantine any livestock which may have been exposed to infection from such diseased livestock or which may have been located upon the land or premises where such diseased livestock has been kept, and thereafter it is unlawful for any person to break such quarantine or to move or allow to be moved any such livestock from within the premises thus quarantined, or across the quarantine line so established without first obtaining from the County Veterinarian a permit to do so. If the County Veterinarian shall deem it proper to issue such a permit after inspection, the County Veterinarian may cause such livestock, premises, vehicles of transportation, and any infected materials, equipment or effects to be properly cleaned and disinfected. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.131)

6.04.170 Removal of quarantine notices prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person during the existence of such quarantine to remove, tear, deface, mutilate, obscure or otherwise destroy or in any other manner whatsoever interfere with any placard, notice, or proclamation declaring such quarantine which is placed on or about the premises on which any of said animals so quarantined are located. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.132)

6.04.180 Quarantined animals not to drink from streams or other channels.
It is unlawful for any person to permit any livestock so quarantined to have access to any irrigation ditch, stream or other channel in which water is running or may run at any time through such quarantined premises, or to allow such livestock to come in contact with other livestock which may have access to any irrigation ditch, stream or other channel so mentioned, or to permit the depositing in such irrigation ditch, stream, or channel of any manure, offal, excrement, or material which might carry infection, or to allow the drainage from any premises so quarantined to come in contact with such irrigation ditch, stream or other channel aforementioned. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.133)

Article IV. Tuberculosis Tests

6.04.190 Injection of tuberculin.
No person shall inject or cause to be injected tuberculin into any cattle except when used in connection with a tuberculin test. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.136)

6.04.200 County Veterinarian may require tuberculin test.
Whenever the County Veterinarian has cause to believe that there is danger that any cattle brought into the City are afflicted with tuberculosis he shall cause such cattle to be examined and tested for tuberculosis. Such test or tests may be made at any time within 120 days after arrival of such cattle into the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.139)

6.04.210 Movement of cattle during testing prohibited.
No person shall move from any premises any cattle upon which a tuberculin test has been started until the same has been completed without the permission of the veterinarian conducting such test, nor in any way interfere with the proper conduct of such test after it has been started. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.140)

Article V. Slaughterhouses

6.04.220 Slaughtering of animals – Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain or operate an establishment for the slaughtering of animals or for the preparation of meat products in the City without a permit issued by the County Veterinarian with the approval of the City Council; provided, that no permit shall be required for any establishment or individual exempt from inspection by the provisions of Section 307 of the Agricultural Code of the State, nor shall any permit be required of any establishment which is under Federal or State inspection. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.161)

Chapter 6.08
STRAYS
Sections:

6.08.010    Unlawful to permit animals to stray on military property.

6.08.010 Unlawful to permit animals to stray on military property.
It is unlawful for any person to permit any domestic animal or animals owned by him or under his control to stray upon any land in the City used or occupied by the military or naval forces of the United States. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.301)

Chapter 6.12
ANIMAL CONTROL
Sections:

6.12.010    County provisions adopted – Copy on file.

6.12.010 County provisions adopted – Copy on file.
Sections 16.101 and 16.102 and Chapter 6, Article 1, Sections 62.601 – 62.687 and Chapter 7, Sections 62.700 – 62.701 of the San Diego County Code are hereby adopted by reference. One copy of said sections is on file in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 568 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 6.16
DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS
Sections:

6.16.010    Definitions.

6.16.020    Prohibition against dead animals upon private property.

6.16.030    Duty of owner to dispose of dead animal.

6.16.040    Duty of owner or occupant of land to remove dead animal.

6.16.050    Removal of dead animal by City officer.

6.16.060    Liability for cost of removal of dead animal.

6.16.070    Burial of animal carcasses.

6.16.080    Transportation of dead animals.

6.16.090    Vehicles used to transport dead animals.

6.16.100    Disposal of dead animals.

6.16.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies: “Animal” includes, but is not limited to all of the following:

A. All animals, whether wild or tame, including but not limited to the dog, cat, horse, mule, cattle, sheep, hog;

B. All reptiles, including but not limited to the snake;

C. All aquatic animals, including but not limited to fish; and

D. All birds, and all fowl including but not limited to the chicken, turkey and duck. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.801)

6.16.020 Prohibition against dead animals upon private property.
No dead animal shall be deposited or allowed to remain upon any premises within a quarter of a mile of any park, City highway, State highway, or any public highway, road or alley, or any dwelling or other structure used or occupied by a person or persons, or in any standing or running water or in any open excavation, and any animal deposited or allowed to remain upon such premises is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.802)

6.16.030 Duty of owner to dispose of dead animal.
It shall be the duty of the owner of a dead animal to dispose of such dead animal in a manner authorized by law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.803)

6.16.040 Duty of owner or occupant of land to remove dead animal.
It shall be the duty of the owner, the occupant and any person having control of the premises referred to in PMC 6.16.020 on which there is a dead animal to remove said dead animal from said premises, or otherwise dispose of said dead animal in a manner authorized by law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.804)

6.16.050 Removal of dead animal by City officer.
In the event a dead animal is deposited or allowed to remain upon premises in violation of PMC 6.16.020 and the Director of Public Health determines that in the interest of protecting the public health the City should forthwith remove and dispose of said dead animal, the Director of Public Health or any department of the City at the request of said Director may remove and dispose of said animal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.805)

6.16.060 Liability for cost of removal of dead animal.
In the event a dead animal is deposited or allowed to remain upon premises in violation of PMC 6.16.020, the owner of the dead animal, the owner of such premises, the occupant of such premises and any other person having control of such premises who has knowledge of the existence of said dead animal or who has received notice from the Director of Public Health requiring the removal of said dead animal shall be liable to the City for the cost of the removal and disposal of such dead animal by the City. Said cost may be recovered by a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.806)

6.16.070 Burial of animal carcasses.
It is unlawful for any person to bury the carcass of any dead animal in such a way that there shall be less than three feet of soil above such carcass. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.807)

6.16.080 Transportation of dead animals.
A. Any person desiring to engage in the business of collecting and/or conveying or transporting dead animals along any public highways in the City or who collects and/or so transports such animals incidental to the operation of a business, shall annually make an application to the department of general services for a separate permit for each vehicle in which dead animals are to be transported or conveyed.

B. The City Manager or designee shall make an investigation to determine that such vehicle to be used will be suitable to transport dead animals and that such vehicle has a watertight body or watertight tank within which dead animals may be transported or conveyed. If the City Manager or designee is satisfied that such applicant meets the requirements of this chapter he shall grant the applicant a permit to transport dead animals over any public highway in the vehicle for which the permit is issued. The fee for such permit shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, and shall be paid and collected prior to the issuance of the permit.

C. Unless sooner revoked every permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire December 31st of the year in which it is issued. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall be displayed in a prominent place on the vehicle for which it is issued. (Ord. 683 § 27, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.808)

6.16.090 Vehicles used to transport dead animals.
Vehicles used by a permittee to transport dead animals shall have watertight metal bodies and any dead animals therein shall be covered with a tarpaulin or other cover approved by the Director of General Services. Such vehicles shall be cleaned and disinfected immediately after dead animals are transported in such vehicle. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.809)

6.16.100 Disposal of dead animals.
A permittee disposing of dead animals in the City shall dispose of such animals at a reduction plant approved by the Director of Public Health. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 62.810)

Chapter 6.20
TREATMENT OF WILDLIFE
Sections:

6.20.010    Definitions.

6.20.020    Feeding of wildlife prohibited.

6.20.030    Feeding exceptions.

6.20.040    Use of steel-jawed traps prohibited.

6.20.050    Excepted use of steel-jawed traps.

6.20.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, “wildlife” means:

A. Coyotes, bobcats and mountain lions; and

B. Foxes, raccoons, opossums, ground squirrels and skunks. (Ord. 216 § 1, 1987)

6.20.020 Feeding of wildlife prohibited.
Except as expressly provided in this chapter, no person shall feed or in any manner provide food to any wildlife within the City. (Ord. 216 § 1, 1987)

6.20.030 Feeding exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the feeding of wildlife under any of the following circumstances:

A. When the wildlife is kept, treated or fed pursuant to a valid certificate or permit issued by the State.

B. When the wildlife is kept, treated, or fed between the time the agency in charge of animal control is notified and the time the wildlife is picked up by such agency. (Ord. 216 § 1, 1987)

6.20.040 Use of steel-jawed traps prohibited.
Except as expressly provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to set, trigger, activate or otherwise use, or cause to be set, triggered, activated or used any steel-jawed animal leg-hold trap. (Ord. 257 § 1, 1988)

6.20.050 Excepted use of steel-jawed traps.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any governmental agency from using or causing to be used any steel-jawed leg-hold trap, provided that written notice of the intended location and dates of use is first provided by such agency to the City. (Ord. 257 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 6.24
TREATMENT OF RODEO ANIMALS
Sections:

6.24.010    Humane treatment required.

6.24.020    Large animal veterinarian required.

6.24.030    Notification and access.

6.24.040    Duties and responsibilities.

6.24.010 Humane treatment required.
All rodeo animals shall be treated humanely. No stimulants or hypnotics shall be given to any rodeo animal. The use of the following are prohibited:

A. Flank or bucking straps unless the strap is fleece-lined or neoprene-lined or, in the case of bull riding, a soft cotton rope at least 5/8 inches in diameter.

B. Electric prods or shocking devices, except if required for the safety of humans while (1) loading or unloading an animal into or out of a vehicle; or (2) moving an animal from place to place on the rodeo grounds. In no event shall any such device be used on an animal while in a chute or immediately prior to entering a chute. (Ord. 536 § 1, 2001)

6.24.020 Large animal veterinarian required.
A qualified, California licensed, large animal, noncontestant veterinarian shall be physically present throughout the duration of every event using rodeo animals. The veterinarian shall be given access to all areas of the rodeo grounds at all times, and shall have the right to examine any rodeo animal at any time without notice. The veterinarian shall declare unfit any rodeo animal that is unfit to participate in a rodeo event. No rodeo animal declared unfit by the veterinarian shall be used in any rodeo event. The veterinarian shall notify in writing the San Diego County Department of Animal Control of any rodeo animal which is treated inhumanely, or is used in a rodeo event after being declared unfit. (Ord. 536 § 1, 2001)

6.24.030 Notification and access.
The Humane Society of San Diego County and the San Diego County Department of Animal Control shall be notified in writing at least 14 days in advance of the dates upon which any rodeo is to be held. Proof of such notice shall be given to the City Clerk at the same time. The notice shall be given by the person, committee, or organization presenting the rodeo and shall include a written description of the animal events, a copy of the rules governing the events, the name, address, and license number of the rodeo veterinarian, and the dates of the rodeo. The duly authorized officers of the Humane Society and the Department of Animal Control shall be provided access to all areas of the rodeo grounds at all times and shall have the powers granted by Penal Code Section 597.1 to take charge of any animal which is unfit or is being treated cruelly. For said purpose, violation of PMC 6.24.010 shall constitute cruel treatment. (Ord. 536 § 1, 2001)

6.24.040 Duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the person, rodeo committee, or other organization presenting the rodeo to ensure that the requirements of this chapter are fulfilled. Each such person, committee, or organization shall be subject to civil fine as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time or any other civil remedy imposed for the violation of any provision hereof, whether the violation was committed by such person, committee, or organization, or by an agent, independent contractor, volunteer, or employee of such person, committee, or organization. Any person who directly commits any violation of this chapter shall be subject to all of the criminal and civil penalties provided in PMC 1.08.010. This section shall not create a private right of action. Any action created hereby shall be commenced only by the City Attorney. Any civil fine shall be payable to the City. (Ord. 683 § 28, 2008; Ord. 536 § 1, 2001)

Title 7
(Reserved)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapters:

8.04    Smoking and Electronic Cigarettes Prohibited on Public Grounds, and in Public Buildings, Parks and Trails

8.05    Regulation of the Sale of Tobacco Products

8.06    Misuse of Business Premises

8.08    Noise Abatement and Control

8.09    Responsible Beverage Service

8.10    Possession of Open Containers of Alcoholic Beverages

8.11    Alcoholic Beverage Warning Signs

8.12    Repealed

8.14    Wholesale Food Warehouses

8.16    Disease Control

8.20    Sanitation Regulations for Businesses – Permits and Fees

8.21    Food Regulations

8.24    Camps and Picnic Grounds

8.28    Refrigeration Plants

8.32    Reduction Plants

8.36    Enforcement of State Housing Law

8.40    Apartments and Hotels

8.44    Trailers and Trailer Parks

8.48    Water Waste and Pollution

8.52    Swimming Pools

8.56    Wells

8.60    Septic Tanks and Seepage Pits

8.64    Septic Tanks and Cesspool Cleaners

8.68    Solid Waste Management

8.72    Nuisance Abatement Procedure

8.76    Defensible Space, Vegetation Management and Waste Accumulations

8.80    Accumulation of Junk

8.84    Repealed

8.88    Hazardous Materials and Hazardous Waste Establishments

8.89    Medical Waste

8.90    Rental of Housing Used for Drug Activity

8.92    Rental of Substandard Housing

8.94    Water Conservation Plan

8.96    Water Conservation Enforcement Measures

8.98    Drone Operations During Periods of Emergency Response

Chapter 8.04
SMOKING AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC GROUNDS, AND IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS, PARKS AND TRAILS*
Sections:

8.04.010    Purpose.

8.04.020    Definitions.

8.04.030    Prohibitions.

8.04.040    Posting of signs.

8.04.050    Repealed.

8.04.070    Repealed.

8.04.080    Repealed.

8.04.090    Repealed.

8.04.100    Violation – Enforcement and penalties.

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 29, 67 and 89.

8.04.010 Purpose.
The City Council finds that:

A. Discarded cigarettes are one of the leading causes of outdoor fires, including the Viejas Fire in 2001 that destroyed over 10,000 acres in Eastern San Diego County;

B. Parks and trails in the City of Poway are high risk areas for brush fires due to the presence of flammable vegetation in these areas;

C. The 2003 Cedar Fire resulted in the destruction of 54 homes and 6,887 acres in the City of Poway;

D. Prohibiting smoking at public parks and trails will reduce the risk of brush fires caused by discarded cigarettes;

E. Scientific studies have concluded that cigarette and cigar smoking causes chronic lung disease, coronary heart disease, stroke, and cancer;

F. An inordinate amount of people die in the United States from tobacco-related diseases every year, making it the nation’s leading cause of preventable illness;

G. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has found secondhand smoke to be a risk to public health, and has classified secondhand smoke as a Group A carcinogen, the most dangerous class of carcinogen;

H. The California Air Resources Board has determined that secondhand smoke is a toxic air contaminant, finding that exposure to secondhand smoke has serious health effects including low birth-weight babies, sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), increased respiratory infections in children, asthma in children and adults, lung, sinus, and breast cancer, heart disease and death;

I. Public parks and trails are areas where children are likely to congregate, gather, play and/or engage in athletic competitions;

J. Prohibiting smoking at public parks and trails will protect users of the parks and trails from the risks of secondhand smoke exposure;

K. Cigarette and cigar butts and used matches dropped in public spaces have negative environmental impacts and degrade the aesthetic quality of those spaces;

L. Cigarette butts are the most common type of litter found in the City’s parks and trails; and

M. Prohibiting smoking at public parks and trails will reduce the amount of cigarette-related litter in these public spaces. (Ord. 766 § 2, 2014; Ord. 652 § 3, 2007; Ord. 354 § 1, 1992)

8.04.020 Definitions.
A. “Public grounds” means any “community services facility” and “skate park” (as defined in PMC 9.48.010), and such other facilities and buildings owned by, or under the control of, the City, including the Poway Performing Arts Center, and the grounds upon which the facility, building, or structure is located.

B. “Public park” has the same meaning as “parks,” as set forth in PMC 9.48.010, and includes all City parks, recreational areas, and reserves designated by the City Council including all land, water, road improvements, parking and facilities therein.

C. “Public trail” means all City trails designated by the City Council including all land, water, road improvements, parking and facilities therein.

D. “Smoke” or “smoking” means (1) the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco products, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance; or (2) the carrying, holding or use of an electronic cigarette as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 119405 (“e-cigarette”) or a similar device intended to emulate smoking, which permits a person to inhale vapors or mists that may or may not include nicotine. “Smoking” also includes emitting or exhaling the fumes or vapor of any pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted smoking equipment used for burning any tobacco product, weed, plant or any other combustible substance, or any e-cigarette, hookah, or other similar device. (Ord. 766 § 3, 2014; Ord. 652 § 4, 2007; Ord. 354 § 1, 1992)

8.04.030 Prohibitions.
A. No person shall smoke in a public building, on public grounds, in a public park or on a public trail, except in areas designated by the Director of Community Services as smoking areas.

B. The provisions of this chapter do not apply in any circumstance where federal or State law regulates smoking if the federal or State law preempts local regulation, or if the federal or State law is more restrictive. (Ord. 766 § 4, 2014; Ord. 652 § 5, 2007; Ord. 354 § 1, 1992)

8.04.040 Posting of signs.
Permanent signs shall be installed at all City parks and City trails indicating “This Park/Trail Is a Smoke Free Zone.” Smoking areas, as designated by the Director of Community Services, shall be posted using clear and prominent signs. (Ord. 652 § 7, 2007; Ord. 354 § 1, 1992. Formerly 8.04.060)

8.04.050 Optional prohibition.
Repealed by Ord. 652. (Ord. 354 § 1, 1992)

8.04.070 Retaliation against person requesting compliance prohibited.
Repealed by Ord. 652. (Ord. 354 § 1, 1992)

8.04.080 Governmental agency cooperation.
Repealed by Ord. 652. (Ord. 354 § 1, 1992)

8.04.090 Exceptions.
Repealed by Ord. 652. (Ord. 354 § 1, 1992)

8.04.100 Violation – Enforcement and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter by smoking in or upon public buildings, public grounds, public parks or public trails, in an area which is not designated as a smoking area, is guilty of an infraction, punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.08 PMC, or in the alternative is subject to administrative enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.10 PMC. This chapter is not exclusive, and is not intended to preclude enforcement pursuant to any other applicable law, including laws prohibiting the act of littering or improper disposal of a cigarette or lighted substance. Nothing in this section shall preclude any person from seeking any other remedies, penalties or procedures provided by law. (Ord. 766 § 5, 2014; Ord. 652 § 9, 2007; Ord. 354 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 8.05
REGULATION OF THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sections:

8.05.010    Purpose.

8.05.020    Definitions.

8.05.030    Prohibitions.

8.05.040    Nonretaliation.

8.05.050    Other applicable laws.

8.05.060    Violation – Enforcement and penalties.

8.05.010 Purpose.
The City Council does find that substantial scientific evidence exists that the use of tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease, and various other medical diseases. The Surgeon General of the U.S. has found that tobacco-caused diseases are the leading cause of premature, preventable death and disability in the U.S. The National Centers for Disease Control have found that at least 434,000 Americans die each year from tobacco-caused diseases. The Surgeon General of the U.S. and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services have found that a majority of those Americans who die of tobacco caused diseases became addicted to nicotine in tobacco products as adolescents before the age of legal consent. Accordingly, the City Council finds and declares it in the public interest to: (1) prohibit self-service sales and self-service displays, racks and shelves of tobacco products; (2) require the posting of warning signs at the point of purchase stating the legal age of sale and that identification is required to purchase tobacco; (3) prohibit vending machine sales of tobacco products; and (4) require all cigarettes, other tobacco or smoking products be sold in their original packaging with all required health warnings. (Ord. 444 § 1, 1995)

8.05.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words are defined:

“Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profitmaking purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

“City” means the City of Poway.

“Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.

“Minor” means any individual who is less than 18 years old.

“Nonprofit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character-building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a “nonprofit entity” within the meaning of this section.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

“Self-service merchandising” means open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee.

“Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling or other manner of ingestion.

“Tobacco retailer” means any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption or use.

“Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product.

“Vendor-assisted” means only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased. (Ord. 444 § 1, 1995)

8.05.030 Prohibitions.
A. No person or business shall engage in the sale of a tobacco product without first posting a plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products which states: “THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. PHOTO ID IS REQUIRED TO PURCHASE TOBACCO.” The letters of the sign shall be at least one quarter inch high.

B. No person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any establishment subject to this chapter shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco product to an individual without requesting and examining identification establishing the purchaser’s age as 18 years or greater unless the seller has some reasonable basis for determining the buyer’s age.

C. No person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings.

D. It is unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales.

E. No person, business, or tobacco retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises any tobacco vending machine for the purposes of selling or distributing any tobacco product. (Ord. 444 § 1, 1995)

8.05.040 Nonretaliation.
A. No person or employee shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter.

B. No person shall intimidate or threaten any reprisal or effect any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against another person because such other person seeks to attain compliance with provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 444 § 1, 1995)

8.05.050 Other applicable laws.
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit tobacco vending machines and distribution of tobacco product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 444 § 1, 1995)

8.05.060 Violation – Enforcement and penalties.
A. Any person, business or tobacco retailer who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as specified in PMC 1.08.010.

B. The owner, operator or manager of any public place or place of employment within the purview of this chapter shall comply herewith. Such owner, operator or manager shall post or cause to be posted all signage required by this chapter.

C. It shall be the responsibility of employers to disseminate information concerning the provisions of this chapter to employees. (Ord. 444 § 1, 1995)

Chapter 8.06
MISUSE OF BUSINESS PREMISES
Sections:

8.06.010    Use of property prohibited.

8.06.020    Reentry prohibited.

8.06.030    Exceptions.

8.06.010 Use of property prohibited.
No person shall have the right to use privately operated business premises which are open to the general public for any purpose which is contrary to the functions or services provided thereon without the consent of the owner, operator or agent thereof. It is unlawful for any person so using such property to refuse or fail to leave such property upon being requested to leave by the owner, operator or agent thereof. (Ord. 205 § 1, 1986)

8.06.020 Reentry prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person without the permission of the owner, operator or agent of privately operated business premises which are open to the general public to enter upon such premises within 48 hours after having been requested by the owner, operator or agent thereof to leave therefrom pursuant to the provisions of PMC 8.06.010. (Ord. 205 § 1, 1986)

8.06.030 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances:

A. Where their application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provisions of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of color, race, religion, sex, creed, ancestry or national origin;

B. Where their application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful picketing directed toward the business establishment, lawful labor activities, or peaceful political activities;

C. Where their application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by Section 365 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers;

D. Where the person who is upon the privately operated business premises which are open to the general public is present under claim or color of legal right. (Ord. 205 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 8.08
NOISE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL
Sections:

8.08.010    Purpose and intent.

8.08.020    Definitions.

8.08.030    Sound level measurement.

8.08.040    Sound level limits.

8.08.050    Motor vehicles.

8.08.060    Powered model vehicles.

8.08.070    Refuse vehicles.

8.08.080    Watercraft.

8.08.090    Airports.

8.08.100    Construction equipment.

8.08.110    Containers and construction material.

8.08.120    Signal device for food trucks.

8.08.130    Multiple-family dwelling units.

8.08.140    General noise regulations.

8.08.150    Burglar alarms.

8.08.160    Aircraft.

8.08.170    Exemptions.

8.08.180    Manner of enforcement.

8.08.190    False statement.

8.08.200    Reproductions of permits.

8.08.210    Display of permits.

8.08.220    Variances.

8.08.230    Applications for permits and variances.

8.08.240    Application fees.

8.08.250    Extension fees.

8.08.260    Actions on applications.

8.08.270    Applications deemed denied.

8.08.280    Provision of sampling and testing facilities.

8.08.300    Filing fee.

8.08.310    Contents of petition.

8.08.320    Dismissal of petition.

8.08.330    Place of hearing.

8.08.340    Notice of hearing.

8.08.350    Evidence.

8.08.360    Effective date of decision.

8.08.010 Purpose and intent.
The City Council finds and declares that:

A. Inadequately controlled noise presents a growing danger to the health and welfare of the residents of the City;

B. The making and creating of disturbing, excessive, offensive or unusually loud noises within the jurisdictional limits of the City is a condition which has persisted and the level and frequency of occurrence of such noises continue to increase;

C. The making, creation or continuance of such excessive noises which are prolonged or unusual in their time, place, and use effect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of the City;

D. Every person is entitled to an environment in which the noise is not detrimental to his or her life, health, and enjoyment of property; and

E. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions contained in this chapter and enacted is declared to be a matter of legislative determination and public policy and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted are in the pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace and quiet of the City and its inhabitants. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.401)

8.08.020 Definitions.
A. Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter, unless otherwise defined in this chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

1. “Aircraft” means any powered vehicle which at any time of its operation is airborne, and is used to transport people or materials for whatever purpose.

2. “Average sound level” means a sound level typical of the sound levels at a certain place during a given period of time, averaged by the general rule of combination for sound levels, said general rule being set forth in American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters S1. 4-1971. “Average sound level” is also called “equivalent continuous sound level.”

3. “Commercial purpose” means and includes the use, operation or maintenance of any sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating such sound equipment.

4. “Construction equipment” means any tools, machinery or equipment used in connection with construction operations including all types of “special construction” equipment as defined in the pertinent sections of the California Vehicle Code when used in the construction process on any construction site, regardless of whether such construction site be located on-highway or off-highway.

5. “Container” means any receptacle, regardless of contents, manufactured from wood, metal, plastic, paper, or any other material including but not limited to any barrel, basket, box, crate, tub, bottle, can or refuse container.

6. “Decibel” means a unit of measure of sound (noise) level.

7. “Disturbing, excessive or offensive noise” means:

a. Any sound or noise which constitutes a nuisance involving discomfort or annoyance to persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area;

b. Any sound or noise conflicting with criteria standards or levels as set forth in this chapter for permissible noises;

c. Any sound or noise conflicting with criteria standards or levels established by Federal or State government which are applicable in the City.

8. “Emergency work” means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger or damage or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility service.

9. “Fixed source” means a machine or device capable of creating a noise level at the property upon which it is regularly located including but not limited to: industrial and commercial process machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, air conditioning apparatus or refrigeration machines.

10. “Holiday” means January 1st, known as “New Year’s Day”; the third Monday in January, known as “Martin Luther King, Jr. Day”; the third Monday in February, known as “Washington’s Birthday”; March 31st, known as “Cesar Chavez Day”; the last Monday in May, known as “Memorial Day”; the fourth day of July, known as “Independence Day”; the first Monday in September, known as “Labor Day”; the eleventh day in November, known as “Veterans Day”; the last Thursday in November, known as “Thanksgiving Day”; and December 25th, known as “Christmas Day.” In the event “New Year’s Day,” “Cesar Chavez Day,” “Independence Day” or “Christmas Day” falls on Sunday, the following day will be deemed a holiday, and if they fall on Saturday, the Friday preceding will be deemed a holiday.

11. “Motor vehicles” means any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Vehicle Code and shall specifically include, but not be limited to, “mini-bikes” and “go-carts.”

12. “Noise control officer” means the Director of Development Services or his duly authorized representatives.

13. “Noise level” means the “sound level” and the terms may be used interchangeably in this chapter.

14. “Noncommercial purpose” means the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a “commercial purpose.” Noncommercial purpose means and includes, but is not limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic, and charitable purposes.

15. “Nonstationary source” means a machine or device capable of being moved from place to place for occasional or temporary use at a given location, including but not limited to, powered and manual construction equipment not used in connection with construction operations, powered lawn mowers, chain saws and soil tillers, but excluding motor vehicles.

16. “Person” means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private.

17. “Powered model vehicles” means, but is not limited to, airborne, waterborne, or landborne vehicles such as model airplanes, model boats, and model vehicles of any type or size which are not designed for carrying persons or property and which can be propelled in any form other than manpower or windpower.

18. “Sound amplifying equipment” means any machine or device, mobile or stationary used to amplify music, the human voice, or any sound.

19. “Sound level” (noise level) means in decibels the quantity measured using the frequency weighting-A of a sound level meter as defined in this chapter.

20. “Sound level meter” means an instrument for the measurement of sound, including a microphone, an amplifier, an attenuator, networks at least for the standardized frequency weighting-A, and an indicating instrument having at least the standardized dynamic characteristic “fast,” as specified in American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters S1. 4-1971 or the latest version thereof.

21. “Sound truck” means any motor vehicle or other vehicle regardless of motive power whether in motion or stationary having mounted thereon, built-in, or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment other than a car radio or television.

22. “Watercraft” means any boat, ship, barge, craft or floating thing designed for navigation in the water which is propelled by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion, but does not include a vessel possessing a valid marine document issued by the United States Bureau of Customs or any Federal agency successor thereto.

B. Supplemental Definitions of Technical Terms. Definitions of technical terms not defined in this chapter shall be obtained from the American National Standard, “Acoustical Terminology” S1. 1-1961 (R-1971) or the latest revision thereof. (Ord. 646 § 2, 2006; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.402)

8.08.030 Sound level measurement.
A. Any sound or noise level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting and “slow” response pursuant to applicable manufacturer’s instructions, except that for sounds of a duration of two seconds or less, the “fast” response shall be used and the average level during the occurrence of the sound reported.

B. The sound level meter shall be appropriately calibrated and adjusted as necessary by means of an acoustical calibrator of the coupler-type to assure meter accuracy within the tolerances set forth in American National Standards ANSI-S1. 4-1971.

C. For outside measurements, the microphone shall be not less than four feet above the ground, at least four feet distant from walls or other large reflecting surfaces and shall be protected from the effects of wind noises by the use of appropriate wind screens and the location selected shall be at any point on the affected property. In cases when the microphone must be located within 10 feet of walls or similar large reflecting surfaces, the actual measured distances and orientation of sources, microphone and reflecting surfaces shall be noted and recorded. In no case shall a noise measurement be taken within five feet of the noise source.

D. For inside measurements, the microphone shall be at least three feet distant from any wall, ceiling or partition, and the average measurement of at least three microphone positions throughout the room shall be determined. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.403)

8.08.040 Sound level limits.
Unless a variance has been applied for and granted pursuant to this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to cause or allow the creation of any noise to the extent that the one-hour average sound level, at any point on or beyond the boundaries of the property on which the sound is produced, exceeds the applicable limits set forth below, except that construction noise level limits shall be governed by PMC 8.08.100:

Zone or Land Use Designation

 

Applicable Limit One-Hour Average Sound Level
(in decibels)

OS-RM, OS, OS/1du, RR-A, RR-B, RR-C, RS-2, RS-3, RS-4, RS-7, and Specific Plan, PRD and PC regulations with a density of 11 dwelling units or less per acre.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

40

50

PF, RA, RC, MHP, and Specific Plan, PRD and PC regulations with a density of 11 or more dwelling units per acre.

7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

55

50

45

SPC, MU, CO, CN, CB, CG, TC, A/GC and HC

7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

60

55

55

MRE, SC, LI, LI/S and IP

Anytime

70

The sound level limit at a location on a boundary between two zoning districts is the arithmetic mean of the respective limits for the two districts.

Fixed location public utility distribution or transmission facilities located on or adjacent to a property line shall be subject to the noise level limits of this section, measured at or beyond six feet from the boundary of the easement upon which the equipment is located. (Ord. 646 § 3, 2006; Ord. 172 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.404)

8.08.050 Motor vehicles.
Provisions for motor vehicles shall be as follows:

A. Repairs of Motor Vehicles. It is unlawful for any person within the City to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause disturbing, excessive or offensive noises as defined in PMC 8.08.020(A)(7).

B. On-Highway. Violations for exceeding applicable noise level limits as to persons operating motor vehicles on a public street or highway in the City shall be prosecuted under applicable California Vehicle Code provisions and under Federal Regulation adopted pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 4905(a) (1) (A), (B) and (C) (ii), (iii) for which enforcement responsibility is delegated to local government agencies.

C. Off-Highway. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, it is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle of any type on any site other than on a public street or highway as defined in the California Vehicle Code in a manner so as to cause noise in excess of:

1. Those noise levels permitted for on-highway motor vehicles as specified in the table “35 miles per hour or less speed limits” contained in Section 23130 of the California Vehicle Code and as corrected for distances set forth below:

Corrections:

Distance
(in feet)

 

Correction (decibels)

 

25

-6

28

-5

32

-4

35

-3

40

-2

45

-1

50 (preferred distance)

0

56

+1

63

+2

70

+3

80

+4

90

+5

100

+6

A measured noise level thus calibrated to the lane-to-microphone distance of 50 feet shall be deemed in violation of this section if it exceeds the applicable noise-level limit specified by this section;

2. Or in excess of those sound levels permitted in PMC 8.08.040.

D. Emergency Vehicles. Nothing in this section shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles when being used in emergency situations.

E. Urban Transit Buses. Buses as defined in the California Vehicle Code shall at all times comply with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.405)

8.08.060 Powered model vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any powered model vehicle except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and then only in such a manner so as not to emit noise in excess of those levels set forth in PMC 8.08.040; however, if powered model vehicles are operated in public parks at a point more than 100 feet from the property line, the noise level shall be determined at a distance of 100 feet from the noise source instead of at the property line, and noises from powered model vehicles measured at that distance in excess of the noise limits specified in PMC 8.08.040 are prohibited. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.406)

8.08.070 Refuse vehicles.
No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, a refuse compacting, processing, or collection vehicle within the City which when compacting creates a sound level in excess of 80 decibels when measured at a distance of 50 feet from any point of the compacting vehicle unless a variance has been applied for and granted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.407)

8.08.080 Watercraft.
Violations for excessive noise of watercraft operating in waters under the jurisdiction of the City shall be prosecuted under applicable provisions of this California Harbors and Navigation Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.408)

8.08.090 Airports.
All noise emanating from airport activities other than that produced by aircraft shall be subject to all of the regulations contained in this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.409)

8.08.100 Construction equipment.
Except for emergency work, it is unlawful for any person, including the City, to operate any single or combination of powered construction equipment at any construction site, except as outlined in subsections A and B of this section:

A. It is unlawful for any person, including the City, to operate any single or combination of powered construction equipment at any construction site before 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays or at any time on a Sunday or holiday except as provided below. For purposes of this section, “construction” does not include minor home repairs, lawn mowing, gardening and similar types of routine maintenance as identified in PMC 8.08.170(D).

1. The City Engineer may permit, in writing, the use of powered construction equipment during specific hours before 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, or any time on a Sunday or holiday, if he or she determines that such operations are not detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding community, that the conduct of the activity is limited by the nature of the work, and that it is in the best interest of the public to perform the work outside of normal hours and days of work.

2. A residential property owner constructing a single-family residence, or constructing an addition to, or otherwise modifying, a single-family residence for personal occupancy may operate powered construction equipment on Sundays or holidays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. in compliance with the requirements of subsection B of this section; provided, that:

a. The type of equipment used is limited to handheld construction equipment or equipment powered by small electrical motors, including, but not limited to, small cement mixers, table saws, and similar small equipment; and

b. The construction is not carried out for profit or livelihood. Upon request of the City, a property owner shall provide documentation, to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services, of personal occupancy of the residence, or the intent to personally occupy the residence.

B. No such equipment, or combination of equipment regardless of age or date of acquisition, shall be operated so as to cause noise at a level in excess of 75 decibels for more than eight hours during any 24-hour period when measured at or within the property lines of any property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes. These sound levels shall be corrected for time duration in accordance with the following table:

Total Duration in 24 Hours

 

Decibel Level Allowance

 

Total Decibel Level

 

Up to 15 minutes

+15

90

Up to 30 minutes

+12

87

Up to 1 hour

+9

84

Up to 2 hours

+6

81

Up to 4 hours

+3

78

Up to 8 hours

0

75

In the event that lower noise limit standards are established for construction equipment pursuant to State or Federal law, said lower limits shall be used as a basis for revising and amending the noise level limits specified in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 646 § 4, 2006; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.410)

8.08.110 Containers and construction material.
It is unlawful for any person to handle or transport or cause to be handled or transported in any public place, any container or any construction material in such a way as to create a disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise as defined under PMC 8.08.020(A)(7). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.411)

8.08.120 Signal device for food trucks.
No person shall operate or cause to have operated or used any sound signal device other than sound-amplification equipment attached to a motor vehicle wagon or manually propelled cart from which food or any other items are sold which emits a sound signal more frequently than once every 10 minutes in any one street block and with a duration of more than 10 seconds for any single emission. The sound level of this sound signal shall not exceed 90 decibels at 50 feet. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.412)

8.08.130 Multiple-family dwelling units.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter it is unlawful for any person to create, maintain or cause to be maintained any sound within the interior of any multiple-family dwelling unit which causes the average sound level of 45 decibels to be exceeded in any other dwelling unit for a cumulative period of five minutes in any one hour or 50 decibels for a cumulative period of one minute in any one hour or 55 decibels at no time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. The monitoring procedures outlined under PMC 8.08.030 shall be followed in enforcing this section. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.413)

8.08.140 General noise regulations.
A. General Prohibitions. In the absence of objective measurement by use of a sound level meter, additionally it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, within the limits of the City, any disturbing, excessive or offensive noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

B. The characteristics and conditions which should be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists, include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. The level of the noise;

2. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

3. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

4. The level of the background noise;

5. The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities;

6. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

7. The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

8. The time of day or night the noise occurs;

9. The duration of the noise;

10. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and

11. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.

C. Disturbing, Excessive or Offensive Noises. The following acts, among others, are declared to be disturbing, excessive and offensive noises in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:

1. Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc. Violations for disturbing, excessive or offensive noises associated with the use or operation of horns, signaling devices, etc., on automobiles, motorcycles, or any other vehicle, except as provided in PMC 8.08.130, shall be prosecuted under applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code.

2. Radios, Televisions, Phonographs, and Similar Devices.

a. Uses Restricted. The use, operation, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

b. Prima Facie Violations. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, television set, machine or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

3. Loud Speaking Amplifiers for Advertising. The use, operation, or the permitting to be played, used or operated of any sound production or reproduction device or machine including but not limited to radio receiving sets, phonographs, musical instruments, loud-speakers, and sound amplifiers, for commercial or business advertising purposes in, upon, over, or across any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or public property in such a manner as to violate the provisions of this chapter is prohibited. This provision shall not be applicable to sound amplifying equipment mounted on any sound truck or vehicle for commercial or noncommercial purposes where the owner or operator complies with the following requirements:

a. The only sound permitted is music or human speech.

b. Operations are permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. or after 9:00 p.m. during public events and affairs of interest to the general public.

c. Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least 10 miles per hour, except when said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic the said sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each stop.

d. Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools, churches, or courthouses.

e. The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous.

f. The volume of sound shall be controlled so that said volume is not raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility and so that the volume of sound shall not exceed a sound level of 65 decibels (on the “A” scale) at a distance of 50 feet from the sound amplifying equipment as measured by a sound level meter which meets the American National Standard ANSI S1. 4-1971 or the latest revision thereof.

g. No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated unless the axis of the center of any sound reproducing equipment used shall be parallel to the direction of travel of the sound truck; provided, however, that any sound reproducing equipment may be so placed upon said sound truck as to not vary more than 15 degrees either side of the axis of the center of the direction of travel.

h. No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be driven on the same street past the same point more than twice in a period of one hour.

4. Yelling, Shouting, Etc. Disturbing or raucous yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity within the area for whatever reason, is prohibited.

5. Hawkers and Peddlers. The shouting or crying out of any peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or persons of normal sensitivity is prohibited. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at sporting events, parades, fairs, celebrations, festivals, circuses, carnivals and other similar special events for public entertainment.

6. Drums and Other Instruments. The use of any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the City is prohibited. This provision shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or legally authorized parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized by the City to engage in such conduct.

7. Animals and Fowls. The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person of any animal or fowl which by any frequent or long continued noise shall cause annoyance or discomfort to persons of normal sensitivity in the vicinity; provided, however, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to occasional noises emanating from legally operated dog and cat hospitals, humane societies, pounds, farm and/or agricultural facilities, or areas where keeping of animals or fowls are permitted. The written affirmation by two persons having separate residences that violation of this section disturbs the peace and quiet of said persons shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

8. Schools, Courts, Churches and Hospitals. The creation of any noise on any street, sidewalk, or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning (except recreational areas of schools), church, court or library, while the same are in use; or adjacent to a hospital, rest home, or long-term medical or mental care facility which noise interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, rest home, or long-term medical or mental care facility, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalks, or public places indicating the presence of a school, institution of learning, church, court, library, rest home or long-term medical or mental care facility, is prohibited.

9. Steam Whistles. The operation, use or causing to be operated or used any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler is prohibited except to give notice of the time to start or stop work or as a sound signal of imminent danger.

10. Engines and Motor Vehicles. Any disturbing or raucous noises caused off streets or highways by racing or accelerating the engine of any motor vehicle while moving or not moving, by the wilful backfiring of any engine and exhaust from the engine tailpipe or muffler, or from the screeching of tires, is prohibited.

11. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system from a motor vehicle not being operated upon a highway which can be heard outside the vehicle from 150 or more feet, unless that system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.

This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or vehicles operated by gas, electric, communications or water utilities. This section does not apply to the sound systems of vehicles used for advertising, or in parades, political or other special events, provided that such systems comply with all other requirements of local ordinance and State law. (Ord. 312 § 1, 1990; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.414)

8.08.150 Burglar alarms.
A. Any building burglar alarm must have an automatic cutoff, capable of terminating its operation within 30 minutes of the time it is activated, unless such an alarm is located within an agricultural or estate zone. Notwithstanding the requirements of this provision, any member of the Police Department of the City shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm during the period of its activation.

B. No owner of a motor vehicle shall have in operation an audible burglar alarm therein unless such burglar alarm shall be capable of terminating its operation within 15 minutes of the time it is activated. Notwithstanding the requirements of this provision, any member of the Police Department of the City shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm installed on a motor vehicle at any time during the period of its activation.

C. Any motor vehicle upon which a burglar alarm has been installed shall, when parked on a public highway or parking lot open to the public, prominently display the telephone number at which communication may be made with the owner of such motor vehicle. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.415)

8.08.160 Aircraft.
Violations for exceeding applicable noise level limits as to persons operating aircraft shall be prosecuted under applicable law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.416)

8.08.170 Exemptions.
A. Emergency Work. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any emergency work as defined in this chapter; provided, that:

1. The Noise Control Officer has been notified in advance, if possible, or as soon as practical after said emergency; and

2. Any vehicle device, apparatus, or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency work is designed, modified, or equipped to reduce sounds produced to the lowest possible level consistent with effective operation of such vehicle, device, apparatus, or equipment.

B. Sporting, Entertainment and Public Events. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

1. Those reasonable sounds emanating from authorized school bands, school athletic and school entertainment events;

2. Sporting, entertainment and public events which are conducted pursuant to a license or permit issued by the City for which noise has been a consideration;

3. Those reasonable sounds emanating from a sporting, entertainment, or public event; provided, however, it is unlawful to exceed those levels set forth in PMC 8.08.040 when measured at or within the property lines of any property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes unless a variance has been granted allowing sounds in excess of said levels.

C. Federal or State Preempted Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by State or Federal law.

D. Minor Maintenance to Residential Property. The provisions of PMC 8.08.040 shall not apply to noise sources associated with minor maintenance to property used either in part or in whole for residential purposes provided said activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday, or between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday.

E. Agricultural Operations. The provisions of PMC 8.08.040 shall not apply to equipment associated with agricultural operations conducted on agriculturally zoned property; provided, that all equipment and machinery powered by internal-combustion engines is equipped with a proper muffler and air intake silencer in good working order, and; provided further, that:

1. Operations do not take place between 7:00 p.m. and the following 7:00 a.m.; or

2. Such operations and equipment are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions; or

3. Such operations and equipment are associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application, provided the application is made in accordance with permits issued by, or regulations enforced by the County Department of Agriculture. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.417)

8.08.180 Manner of enforcement.
The Chief of Police shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of PMC 8.08.050, 8.08.070, 8.08.080, 8.08.120, 8.08.140 and 8.08.150; provided, however, that whenever noise level measurements are required for enforcement, the Chief of Police shall be assisted by the noise control officer and/or his duly authorized representatives with instrumentation operated and provided by the noise control officer. The noise control officer shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of all other provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5 the above specified enforcement officers may arrest a person without a warrant when they have reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction in their presence which is a violation of this chapter. Violations of these regulations will be prosecuted in the same manner as other infraction violations of the City Code; however, nothing in these regulations shall prevent the Chief of Police or noise control officer or his duly authorized representatives from efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice or educational means. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.418)

8.08.190 False statement.
No person shall knowingly make a false statement or submit a false document to the noise control officer as to any matter within his jurisdiction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.421)

8.08.200 Reproductions of permits.
No person shall make, reproduce, alter, or cause to be made, reproduced, or altered a permit, certificate, or other document issued by the noise control officer or required by this chapter if the purpose of such reproduction or alteration is to evade or violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.422)

8.08.210 Display of permits.
Any permit, certificate, or other notice required in this chapter shall be displayed or maintained on the premises designated thereon. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.423)

8.08.220 Variances.
A. The noise control officer shall evaluate all applications for variances from the requirements of this chapter and may grant said variances with respect to time for compliance, subject to such terms, conditions, and requirements as he may deem reasonable to achieving compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Each such variance shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment.

B. If in the judgment of the noise control officer the time for compliance cannot be reasonably determined, a variance to cause the noise may be issued for a specified period of time, subject to revocation or modification after review by the noise control officer at interim times to be designated by the noise control officer in the variance.

C. In determining the reasonableness of the terms of any proposed variance, said noise control officer shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise, the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise, operations carried on under existing nonconforming rights or conditional use permits or zone variances, the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work, the economic factors related to age and useful life of the equipment and general public interest and welfare. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.424)

8.08.230 Applications for permits and variances.
Every applicant for a permit or variance required by this chapter shall file with the noise control officer a written application on a form prescribed by said officer. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the noise source involved, and such other information as the noise control officer may require. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.425)

8.08.240 Application fees.
A. Every applicant, except any State or local governmental agency or public district, shall pay a fee for each application for variance. The fee amount shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time.

B. A request for a duplicative permit or variance shall be made in writing to the noise control officer within 10 days after the destruction, loss, or defacement of a permit or variance. A fee, which shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, shall be charged, except to any State or local government agency or public district, for issuing a duplicate permit or variance. (Ord. 683 § 29, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.426)

8.08.250 Extension fees.
If a permit or variance is to be extended beyond the original use termination on date of permit or variance, the extension fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 30, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.427)

8.08.260 Actions on applications.
A. The noise control officer shall act, within 30 days, if possible, on an application for a permit or variance and shall notify the applicant in writing by mail or in person of the action taken, namely, approval, conditional approval, or denial. Notice of the action taken shall be deemed to have been given when the written notification has been deposited in the mail, postpaid, addressed to the address shown on the application, or when personally delivered to the applicant or his representative. Before acting on an application for a variance or permit, the noise control officer may require the applicant to furnish further information or further plans or specifications. Failure of the applicant to provide such further information or further plans or specifications within 10 days shall be grounds for denial of the permit or variance.

B. In the event of denial of an application for a permit or variance, the noise control officer shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons therefor. Service of this notification may be made by mail, and such service may be proved by the written acknowledgement of the persons served or affidavit of the person making the service. The noise control officer shall not accept a further application unless the applicant has complied with the objections specified by the noise control officer as his reasons for denial. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.428)

8.08.270 Applications deemed denied.
The applicant may at his option deem the permit or variance denied if the noise control officer fails to act on the application within 30 days after filing, or within 10 days after the applicant furnishes the further information, plans and specifications requested by the noise control officer, whichever is later. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.429)

8.08.280 Provision of sampling and testing facilities.
A person operating under a permit or variance shall provide and maintain such sampling and testing facilities as specified in the permit or variance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.430)

8.08.300 Filing fee.
Request for hearing shall be initiated by the filing of a petition in triplicate with the City Clerk and the payment of a fee, which shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. A copy of the petition shall also be made in person or by mail and service may be proved by written acknowledgement of the person served or by the affidavit of the person making the service. (Ord. 683 § 31, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.432)

8.08.310 Contents of petition.
A petition to review a denial or conditional approval of a permit or variance shall include a copy of the permit or variance application, and a copy of the noise control officer’s action setting forth the reasons for the denial or the conditions of the approval, and the reasons for appeal. A petition to review a permit or variance revocation shall include a copy of the permit or variance, the noise control officer’s revocation notice, including his reasons for revocation, and the reasons for appeal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.433)

8.08.320 Dismissal of petition.
The petitioner may dismiss his petition at any time before submission of the case to the City Council, without a hearing or meeting of the City Council. The City Clerk shall notify all interested persons of such dismissal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.434)

8.08.330 Place of hearing.
All hearings shall be held at the City Council Chambers, 13325 Civic Center Drive, Poway, California, unless some other place is designated by the City Council. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.435)

8.08.340 Notice of hearing.
The City Clerk shall mail or deliver a notice of hearing to the practitioner and the noise control officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.436)

8.08.350 Evidence.
A. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.

B. Each party shall have these rights: to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though the matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify; and to rebut the evidence against him. If respondent does not testify in his own behalf, he may be called and examined as if under cross-examination.

C. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.437)

8.08.360 Effective date of decision.
The decision shall become effective 15 days after delivering or mailing a copy of the decision, or the hearing board may order that the decision shall become effective sooner. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 36.442)

Chapter 8.09
RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SERVICE
Sections:

8.09.010    Definitions.

8.09.020    Manager and server training.

8.09.030    Abatement of nonconforming on-sale establishments.

8.09.040    Appeals.

8.09.050    Violations.

8.09.010 Definitions.
A. “On-sale establishment” means a facility providing the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises (on-sale), including restaurant dining areas where food service is the primary function, and bars, in which the sale and consumption of alcohol on the premises is the primary function. “Bar” includes those facilities located within a hotel, motel, or other similar transient occupancy establishment.

B. “Manager” means a person, regardless of the job title or description, who has discretionary powers to organize, direct, carry on, or control the operations of an on-sale establishment, including a restaurant or bar. Authority to engage in one or more of the following functions is prima facie evidence that a person is a manager of an on-sale establishment:

1. Hire or separate employees;

2. Contract for the purchase of furniture, equipment, or supplies, except for the occasional replenishment of stock;

3. Disburse funds of the business, except for the receipt of regularly replaced items of stock;

4. Make or participate in making policy decisions regarding operations of the licensed business.

C. “Responsible beverage service training course” means a training program recognized by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for on-sale management and on-sale professional services. (Ord. 582 § 3, 2003)

8.09.020 Manager and server training.
A. No on-sale establishment may serve or sell alcoholic beverages unless a manager who has completed a responsible beverage service training course is on the premises.

B. Every manager of an on-sale establishment must complete a responsible beverage service training course within 90 days of hire, or by December 31, 2003, whichever is later.

C. Every person who serves or sells alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises of an on-sale establishment shall complete a responsible beverage service training course within 90 days of hire, or by December 31, 2003, whichever is later.

D. A list of all persons who have completed the training required by this section shall be maintained on the premises of the on-sale establishment and, together with the proof of such completion, shall be provided to any police or other enforcement officer for inspection and copying promptly upon request. (Ord. 582 § 3, 2003)

8.09.030 Abatement of nonconforming on-sale establishments.
An on-sale establishment in existence on August 8, 2003, the effective date of this chapter, must comply with the provisions of this chapter no later than December 31, 2003. (Ord. 582 § 3, 2003)

8.09.040 Appeals.
A. A person aggrieved by an action of the City taken pursuant to this chapter may appeal the decision by filing with the City Clerk a statement addressed to the City Manager and setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the appealed action. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the time and place set for the hearing on the appeal.

B. The hearing on the appeal must be held within 20 business days of the City Clerk’s receipt of the appeal.

C. The City Manager or his designee shall serve as Hearing Officer unless the appellant objects thereto at the time of the filing of the appeal, in which case an independent Hearing Officer shall be appointed in accordance with this code. The Hearing Officer shall issue a decision regarding the appeal within 10 business days of the conclusion of the hearing. The Hearing Officer’s decision is final. (Ord. 582 § 3, 2003)

8.09.050 Violations.
A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirement of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Chapter 1.08 PMC and may be enforced through injunctive relief. Penalties for violation of the provisions of this chapter may result in a misdemeanor citation, punishable by a maximum of six months in jail and a $1,000 fine. (Ord. 582 § 3, 2003)

Chapter 8.10
POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sections:

8.10.010    Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited on or near premises where liquor is sold.

8.10.010 Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited on or near premises where liquor is sold.
A. No person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.08 PMC.

B. As used in subsection A of this section, “posted premises” means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, posted at the front entrance, on which a clearly visible notice indicates to the patrons of the licensee that the provisions of subsection A of this section are applicable.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises.

D. All retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees licensed pursuant to Division 9 of the Business and Professions Code to operate in the City shall post such licensed premises as provided in subsection B of this section. Such notices shall include language that states that possession of any opened alcoholic beverage container is prohibited by law. Any licensee who does not so post the licensed premises is guilty of a misdemeanor.

E. In the event that any portion of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such portion shall be severable from all other portions of this chapter. Those portions not declared invalid shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 196 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 8.11
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE WARNING SIGNS
Sections:

8.11.010    Purpose.

8.11.020    Definitions.

8.11.030    Duty to post signs or notices.

8.11.040    Placement of educational posters.

8.11.050    Compliance deadline.

8.11.060    Violations.

8.11.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to educate the public through the use of educational posters to be placed at bars where alcoholic beverages are consumed by the public, advising the public of the dangers of alcohol consumption, and to increase public awareness of unsafe alcohol-related behavior, warn people about the risks and legal penalties of drinking and driving, and deter people from engaging in this very risky behavior. (Ord. 636 § 1, 2006; Ord. 613 § 3, 2004)

8.11.020 Definitions.
A. “Bar” means any on-sale establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served or given away for consumption on the premises and where food service is not required, including but not limited to any facility that holds License Type 40, 42, 48, 51, 52, or 61 from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Typical on-sale uses under this definition include but are not limited to the following establishments: bars, taverns, night clubs, dance bars, piano bars, ballrooms, billiard and/or game parlors, or other private clubs.

B. “Manager” means a person, regardless of the job title or description, who has discretionary powers to organize, direct, carry on, or control the operations of a bar. Authority to engage in one or more of the following functions is prima facie evidence that a person is a manager of a bar:

1. Hire or separate employees;

2. Contract for the purchase of furniture, equipment, or supplies, except for the occasional replenishment of stock;

3. Disburse funds of the business, except for the receipt of regularly replaced items of stock;

4. Make or participate in making policy decisions regarding operations of the licensed business.

C. “Educational poster” means a poster or sign:

1. With a size no less than 11 inches by 17 inches;

2. Containing information regarding blood alcohol content;

3. Containing information regarding the costs associated with being charged for driving under the influence (DUI) or for driving while intoxicated (DWI);

4. Containing a disclaimer for the City, the bar, and sponsors;

5. Containing contact numbers for cab service or other safe ride alternatives;

6. Containing language or images to help educate patrons about their choices and to deter them from driving in an impaired state.

D. “Visible location” means any area within a bar that is easily visible to patrons of the establishment. (Ord. 636 § 1, 2006; Ord. 613 § 3, 2004)

8.11.030 Duty to post signs or notices.
Every manager of a bar offering wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages for sale, or dispensing for consideration to the public, shall cause an educational poster to be permanently posted or displayed on the premises as provided in this chapter. The educational poster required shall not be smaller than 11 inches wide by 17 inches long, nor shall any lettering thereon be less than three-eighths inch in height. (Ord. 636 § 1, 2006; Ord. 613 § 3, 2004)

8.11.040 Placement of educational posters.
A. Educational posters are to be posted within restrooms, smoking areas, or other visible locations.

B. Each bar shall post a minimum of one educational poster within each restroom. (Ord. 636 § 1, 2006; Ord. 613 § 3, 2004)

8.11.050 Compliance deadline.
A bar in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter no later than 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 636 § 1, 2006; Ord. 613 § 3, 2004)

8.11.060 Violations.
A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirement of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Chapter 1.08 PMC and may be enforced through injunctive relief. (Ord. 636 § 1, 2006; Ord. 613 § 3, 2004)

Chapter 8.12
FOOD REGULATIONS
(Repealed by Ord. 683)

Chapter 8.14
WHOLESALE FOOD WAREHOUSES
Sections:

8.14.010    Adoption of county ordinance by reference.

8.14.020    San Diego County enforcement.

8.14.030    Fees.

8.14.010 Adoption of county ordinance by reference.
The provisions of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances concerning permitting and regulation of wholesale food warehouses, codified at Sections 61.212 through 61.256 of the San Diego County Code and any subsequent revisions or corrections to these sections, are incorporated into this code by reference. (Ord. 585 § 1, 2003)

8.14.020 San Diego County enforcement.
The County of San Diego, or any successive designee of the City Manager, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter regarding wholesale food warehouses pursuant to an agreement with the City of Poway for the provision of certain services related to public health and sanitation by the County of San Diego within the City of Poway. The City Manager is authorized to enter into any supplemental or modified agreement with the County of San Diego, or any successive designee of the City Manager, that may be required to effect this purpose. (Ord. 585 § 1, 2003)

8.14.030 Fees.
The County of San Diego shall retain all fees and charges collected by it in the performance of its duties in regulating wholesale food warehouse owners or operators pursuant to PMC 8.14.010. (Ord. 585 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 8.16
DISEASE CONTROL
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions – Nuisances

8.16.010    Duty of Health Officer.

8.16.020    Resisting Health Officer unlawful.

8.16.030    Abatement of nuisances.

8.16.040    Notification of nuisance.

8.16.050    Recovery of cost of abatement.

Article II. Mosquitoes and Flies

8.16.060    Breeding places are public nuisances.

8.16.070    Abatement.

8.16.080    Order of abatement not prerequisite to prosecution.

8.16.090    Violation – Penalty.

Article I. General Provisions – Nuisances

8.16.010 Duty of Health Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer, under the direction and control of the City Council, to enforce all laws, ordinances, and rules and regulations relating to the public health, prevention of sickness, nuisances or sanitation within the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.101)

8.16.020 Resisting Health Officer unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the Health Officer into any railroad car, stage, vehicle, building, room, lot or other place in the City in performance of his duty, or to refuse to obey any lawful order of the Health Officer when made in performance of his duties or within the powers conferred by this chapter or by law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.102)

8.16.030 Abatement of nuisances.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer or his authorized agent, when necessary to secure the public health, to enter upon the premises or in the house or other place of any person to discover or inspect any nuisance that may there exist, to inspect drains, vaults, cellars, cesspools, water closets, privies, or sewers, or the yards of such premises, to examine into their condition, and when satisfied that any such premises, house or place used for lodging or other purposes are improperly constructed or liable from overcrowding or filth to become dangerous to the public health, or to disseminate contagious or infectious disease, or are not provided with privies, water closets or with sewers, drains or cesspools properly tapped, they or any of them shall serve a written notice upon the owner or other person in charge of such premises, to remove the nuisance therein named and if such owner or other person in charge neglects to obey such notice, the Health Officer or his authorized agent shall, if deemed necessary, forthwith report the same to the City Attorney, who shall take the necessary steps to have the same abated. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.104)

8.16.040 Notification of nuisance.
Whenever a nuisance endangering, in the opinion of the Health Officer, the public health shall be ascertained to exist on any premises, or in any house or other place in the City, the Health Officer shall notify in writing any person or persons owning or having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises, house, or other place, to abate or remove such nuisance within a reasonable time, to be stated in such notice. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.105)

8.16.050 Recovery of cost of abatement.
Upon the neglect or refusal of any owner, occupant or agent, or other person having control of such house, or other place to comply with such notice, the Health Officer may abate such nuisance, and the owner, agent, or occupant, or other person having control of such house, or place, in addition to the penalty provided by this chapter, shall be liable to the City for the cost of such abatement, to be recovered in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.106)

Article II. Mosquitoes and Flies

8.16.060 Breeding places are public nuisances.
In the City any breeding place of mosquitoes is a public nuisance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.201)

8.16.070 Abatement.
Such nuisance may be abated by the Director of Public Health in any manner permitted by law, or by any proceeding or remedy provided by law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.203)

8.16.080 Order of abatement not prerequisite to prosecution.
The issuance of an order to abate shall not be a prerequisite to nor shall the fact that such order of abatement shall have been issued preclude or stay any prosecution pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.204)

8.16.090 Violation – Penalty.
Any person who creates, allows, suffers or maintains a public nuisance as defined by PMC 8.16.060 is guilty of a public nuisance as provided in PMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 64.202)

Chapter 8.20
SANITATION REGULATIONS FOR BUSINESSES – PERMITS AND FEES
Sections:

8.20.010    Application – Filing.

8.20.020    Application – Fee.

8.20.030    Annual inspection fee for health regulated activities.

8.20.040    Investigation by Department of Health Services.

8.20.050    Renewal of permit, license or registration.

8.20.060    Delinquent payments.

8.20.070    Permit or license not transferable.

8.20.080    Fees.

8.20.090    Exemption from permit fees.

8.20.100    Refunds.

8.20.010 Application – Filing.
Every applicant for a permit, license or registration required by this code and issued by the Health Officer shall file with the Department of Health Services a written application on a form prescribed by said department. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the description of the property by street and number wherein or whereon it is proposed to conduct the business or activity for which the permit or license is required, the nature of the permit or license for which application is made, the character of the business or activity proposed to be conducted and such other information as the Department of Health Services may require. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 9, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 65.101)

8.20.020 Application – Fee.
Every applicant for a permit, license or registration required by Chapters 5.68, 8.21, and 8.24 through 8.60 PMC shall at the time of making application pay the fee prescribed by the County of San Diego. (Ord. 745 § 3, 2012; Ord. 268 § 1, 1988; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 11, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.101)

8.20.030 Annual inspection fee for health regulated activities.
Every person applying for a permit for a food establishment, apartment house or hotel, camp or picnic ground, public swimming pool, sewage pumping vehicle or other health regulated business for which an annual permit, license or registration is required under the provisions of this code and issued by the Health Officer shall at the time of making application for the permit pay the annual inspection fees, as set forth by the County of San Diego with the exception that the fee for food-vending and sewage pumping vehicles and food-vending machines shall be prorated so that the annual renewal date will be January 1st of each year. The fee for vehicles and vending machines that are prorated shall be reduced by an amount equal to one-twelfth of the total annual permit fee for each month less than one year for which the permit is issued. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1988; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 9, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 65.102)

8.20.040 Investigation by Department of Health Services.
Upon receipt of such application, accompanied by the required fee, it shall be the duty of the Health Officer to investigate the matters set forth in such application, and the sanitary conditions in the place where it is proposed to conduct the business or activity mentioned in the application, and if it shall appear to the Health Officer, that the statements contained in the application are true, and that the existing sanitary conditions in the place mentioned in said application comply with the provisions of law, a permit, license or registration shall thereupon be granted. Such permit or license shall be granted only upon the express condition that it shall be subject to revocation or suspension by said Health Officer upon a showing satisfactory to said Health Officer of a violation by the holder of such permit or any person acting with his consent or under his authority, of any applicable provision of law regulating places or activities of the character for which the permit or license is granted. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 9, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 65.103)

8.20.050 Renewal of permit, license or registration.
A permit or license issued pursuant to this title shall expire on the last day of the month of the one-year anniversary month in which the permit was issued and shall be renewed annually, except as provided in the resolution establishing fees for food vending and sewage pumping vehicles, food-vending machines, and underground hazardous materials storage tanks. At the time application is made, there shall be paid to the Department of Health Services the required annual fee, which fee is due and payable each year on the first day of the month following the expiration of the permit. (Ord. 227 § 1, 1987; Ord. 190, 1986; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 9, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 65.104)

8.20.060 Delinquent payments.
A. Any fee which is not paid by the first day of the month following the month in which it is due is 30 days delinquent, and on the first day of the next following month, if still unpaid, is 60 days delinquent. Delinquent penalty fees shall be established by the County of San Diego.

B. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this code or any ordinance nor prosecution for violation of this code or any ordinance.

C. The delinquent penalty fee may be waived by the Health Officer in case of error made by Environmental Health Services staff or when the applicant has not held a health permit during the past five years, and was unaware that a health permit was required. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1988; Ord. 227 § 2, 1987; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 9, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 65.105)

8.20.070 Permit or license not transferable.
A permit or license is not transferable from one person or one place to another, and shall be deemed voided if removed from the place or location specified in the written application and in the permit. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 9, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 65.106)

8.20.080 Fees.
Every person applying for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall at the time of making an application for such permit pay a fee the exact amount of which shall be determined by the County of San Diego and kept on record by the County Department of Health Services with a copy on file in the City Clerk’s Officer. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1988; Ord. 112 § 1, 1983; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 9, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 65.107)

8.20.090 Exemption from permit fees.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, an applicant for a permit or renewal thereof relating to operation of an apartment house or hotel, or a public swimming pool shall not be required to pay permit or renewal fees provided that the applicant meets the following requirements:

A. The Internal Revenue Service of the Treasury Department of the United States Government has determined that the permit applicant is exempt from income taxation and from filing income tax returns pursuant to the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of Title 26 of the United States Code. (Ord. 227 § 3, 1987)

8.20.100 Refunds.
A. The Health Officer may authorize the refunding of any Health Department fee which was erroneously paid or collected.

B. The Health Officer may authorize the refunding of any portion of a fee paid for which no service costs have been incurred. A refund will not be authorized if the total refundable amount, after deductions of County costs is $5.00 or less.

C. Every applicant for a health fee refund shall file with the Department of Health Services a written application of a form prescribed by said department. (Ord. 227 § 4, 1987)

Chapter 8.21
FOOD REGULATIONS
Sections:

8.21.010    Adoption of San Diego County ordinance.

8.21.010 Adoption of San Diego County ordinance.
The provisions of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances concerning permanent and mobile food facilities, Title 6, Division 1 of the County Code, are incorporated into this code by reference. (Ord. 745 § 2, 2012)

Chapter 8.24
CAMPS AND PICNIC GROUNDS
Sections:

8.24.010    Definitions.

8.24.020    Permit – Required.

8.24.030    Permit – Application – Fee.

8.24.040    Posting of permit required.

8.24.050    Caretaker required – Register maintained.

8.24.060    Regulations covering camp grounds.

8.24.070    Rule 1 – Supervision.

8.24.080    Rule 2 – Supervision.

8.24.090    Rule 3 – Supervision.

8.24.100    Rule 4 – Garbage and refuse.

8.24.110    Rule 5 – Camping space.

8.24.120    Rule 6 – Water supply.

8.24.130    Rule 7 – Water supply.

8.24.140    Rule 8 – Fires.

8.24.150    Rule 9 – Sewage and refuse disposal.

8.24.160    Rule 10 – Sewage and refuse disposal.

8.24.170    Rule 11 – Sewage and refuse disposal.

8.24.180    Rule 12 – Dogs.

8.24.190    Rule 13 – Construction and maintenance of buildings.

8.24.200    Rule 14 – Communicable diseases to be reported.

8.24.210    Violation – Penalty.

8.24.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Camping party” is a person, or two or more persons together, using at the same time a tent, automobile, or automobile camping outfit, a camp wagon, or such other camping facilities for living or sleeping purposes.

B. “Public camp” is any place, area or tract of land upon which are located on said area or tract of land having a common use of any part thereof, or any convenience thereon. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.201)

8.24.020 Permit – Required.
No person shall operate, maintain, or offer for public use within the City any tract of land on which persons may camp or picnic either free of charge or by payment of a fee without a permit therefor from the Department of Health Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.202)

8.24.030 Permit – Application – Fee.
The permit required by this chapter shall be applied for and issued as prescribed by the County of San Diego. The annual fee for the permit shall be as prescribed in Chapter 8.20 PMC. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1988; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 13, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.203)

8.24.040 Posting of permit required.
No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or carry on any conspicuous place upon said area or tract of land upon which said public camp is located, a permit issued by the Department of Health Services in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.204)

8.24.050 Caretaker required – Register maintained.
No person shall maintain, conduct or carry on, or cause or permit to be maintained, conducted or carried on, any public camp, unless said camp shall be provided at all times with a resident caretaker whose duty it shall be to enforce all rules and regulations and to see that no law, nor this code nor City ordinance is violated by any person camping thereon. It shall be the duty of said manager or caretaker to keep a record of all camping parties, which said register shall specify the date of arrival of said camping party, the full name and permanent address of each person in said camping party, and in the event said camping party is traveling by means of an automobile, said register shall further specify the name of the owner of said automobile, the City and State in which said owner is a resident, the make of said automobile, the State in which said automobile is registered, the license number thereof and the year of its issuance. Said register shall at all times be open for inspection to all peace officers of the City and to the Health Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.205)

8.24.060 Regulations covering camp grounds.
The rules and regulations specified in the following sections of this chapter shall be applicable to every public camping ground, and it is unlawful for any person maintaining, operating, conducting or carrying on any such public camp to violate, or cause or permit to be violated, any of said rules or regulations. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.206)

8.24.070 Rule 1 – Supervision.
The management of every public camp or picnic ground shall assume responsibility for maintaining in good repair all sanitary appliances on said ground, and shall promptly bring such action as may be necessary to prosecute or eject from such ground any person who wilfully or maliciously damages such appliances or any person who in any way fails to comply with the regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.207)

8.24.080 Rule 2 – Supervision.
At least one caretaker shall be employed by the management to visit said camp or picnic ground every day that campers or picnickers occupy said ground. Such caretaker shall do whatever may be necessary to keep said ground and its equipment in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.208)

8.24.090 Rule 3 – Supervision.
Every owner and lessee of any public camp or picnic ground shall be held responsible for full compliance with these regulations. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.209)

8.24.100 Rule 4 – Garbage and refuse.
Supervision and equipment sufficient to prevent littering of the ground with rubbish, garbage or other refuse shall be provided and maintained. Flytight depositories for such materials shall be provided and conspicuously located. Every camp or picnic spot on said ground shall be within a distance of not over 200 feet from such a depository. These depositories shall not be permitted to become foul smelling or unsightly or breeding places for flies. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.210)

8.24.110 Rule 5 – Camping space.
Each camping party shall be allowed usable camping space of not less than 350 square feet. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.211)

8.24.120 Rule 6 – Water supply.
A water supply of sanitary quality shall be provided in ample quantity to meet all requirements of the maximum number of persons using such ground at any time. Said water supply shall be easily obtainable from its source or on a pipe distribution system, faucets from which shall be located not more than 300 feet from any camp or picnic spot within such ground. If water supply is obtained direct from above ground source, said source must be covered properly and water withdrawn by means of open pipe or faucet. In no case shall dipping from open springs be permitted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.212)

8.24.130 Rule 7 – Water supply.
Any water in the vicinity of such ground which may be unsafe for human consumption to which campers or picnickers may have access shall be either eliminated or purified, or shall be kept posted with placards definitely warning persons against its use. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.213)

8.24.140 Rule 8 – Fires.
No fires shall at any time be so located as to endanger automobiles or other property in the camp ground. No fires shall be left unattended at any time, and all fires shall be completely extinguished before leaving. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.214)

8.24.150 Rule 9 – Sewage and refuse disposal.
The method of final sewage or refuse disposal utilized in connection with the operation of any camp or picnic ground shall be such as to create no nuisance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.215)

8.24.160 Rule 10 – Sewage and refuse disposal.
Flytight privies or waterflush toilets shall be provided and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Separate toilets for men and women shall be provided, one for each 25 men and one for each 25 women of the maximum number of persons occupying such ground at any time. No camp or picnic spot within such ground shall be at a greater distance than 400 feet from both a men’s or women’s toilet. The location of all toilets shall be plainly indicated by signs. Toilet buildings shall be at all times lighted properly and from sunset to sunrise proper lights shall be kept burning. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.216)

8.24.170 Rule 11 – Sewage and refuse disposal.
A sufficient number of slop sinks or sinks shall be provided, and each shall be connected with a sewerage system or covered cesspool. These are to be used for the disposal of domestic wastewaters. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.217)

8.24.180 Rule 12 – Dogs.
Dogs shall be tied up and at no time be permitted to run at large in any public camp. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.218)

8.24.190 Rule 13 – Construction and maintenance of buildings.
If cottages, cabins, dwelling houses or other buildings to be used for human habitation are erected in any public camping ground, the following minimum requirements for their construction shall be observed, in addition to other requirements of this code and City ordinances:

A. All floors shall be raised at least 18 inches above the ground and space underneath shall be kept free of obstruction.

B. All floors shall be constructed of tongue and groove material.

C. Interior walls shall be of surfaced lumber or other material that may be kept clean and shall be constructed so that they may always be kept in a thoroughly clean condition.

D. No room used for sleeping purposes shall have less than 630 cubic feet of air space.

E. The area of window space in each sleeping room shall be equal to at least one-eighth of the floor area of the room.

F. Windows of sleeping rooms shall be so constructed that at least one-half of each window can be opened.

G. Cooking shall not be permitted in any sleeping room.

H. If a kitchen is provided it must be equipped with running water and a sink connected with a sewerage system, septic tank or a covered cesspool. Kitchens must be screened against flies and mosquitoes.

I. If a private toilet is provided it must be waterflushed and connected with a sewerage system or septic tank. Rooms containing such toilets must have window openings to the outside air and their floors must be constructed of impervious material.

J. If a bathroom is provided it must have an impervious floor and must have a window opening to outside air. Baths and lavatories must be connected with a sewerage system, septic tank or cesspool.

K. Covered metal garbage containers must be provided, at least one for every two buildings.

L. Buildings shall be cleaned daily and after each occupancy shall be thoroughly cleaned. If bedding is provided it must be kept in a clean condition. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.219)

8.24.200 Rule 14 – Communicable diseases to be reported.
It shall be the duty of the management of any public camp to report immediately to the Health Officer any person afflicted with or reasonably suspected of being afflicted with a communicable disease. Upon receiving a report of communicable disease in a public camp, it shall be the duty of the Health Officer to take such steps as are necessary for the protection of public health. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.220)

8.24.210 Violation – Penalty.
Any person violating the provisions of PMC 8.24.020, 8.24.030 and 8.24.200 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.221)

Chapter 8.28
REFRIGERATION PLANTS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

8.28.010    Refrigeration plant defined.

8.28.020    Permit – Required.

8.28.030    Permit – Application.

8.28.040    Annual permit fee.

8.28.050    Permit – Revocation.

8.28.060    Bond required.

Article II. Regulations

8.28.070    Sanitation requirements.

8.28.080    Stamping of uninspected meat.

8.28.090    Hides must accompany carcasses.

8.28.100    Designation of meat processing days.

8.28.110    Uninspected meat includes deer, game and fowl.

Article I. General Provisions

8.28.010 Refrigeration plant defined.
For the purposes of this chapter the following definition shall apply: “Refrigeration plant” means any facility or equipment for the refrigerated storage for compensation of meat not owned by the person maintaining the refrigeration equipment, or for the sale of frozen meat at wholesale or retail. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.401)

8.28.020 Permit – Required.
It is unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or keep in the City any refrigeration plant without an annual permit therefor from the Health Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.402)

8.28.030 Permit – Application.
Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall make application therefor as prescribed in PMC 8.20.080. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 14, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.403)

8.28.040 Annual permit fee.
The annual fee for the permit required by this chapter shall be that prescribed by PMC 8.20.080. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 15, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.404)

8.28.050 Permit – Revocation.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Health Officer on proof of violation by the permittee of any provisions of State law, this code, City ordinance or rule of the Health Officer pertaining to health or sanitary matters. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.405)

8.28.060 Bond required.
Every refrigeration plant handling inspected and uninspected beef, lamb, pork or veal shall post with the Department of Health Services a surety or cash bond in the sum of $1,000 conditioned upon compliance by the permittee with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and subject to forfeiture upon the conviction of the permittee of violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.406)

Article II. Regulations

8.28.070 Sanitation requirements.
Every refrigeration plant where meat is stored shall be maintained and operated in a clean and sanitary manner. Every such plant shall be open at all times to inspection by the Department of Health Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.410)

8.28.080 Stamping of uninspected meat.
All uninspected beef, veal or lamb kept or placed in any refrigeration plant shall be stamped immediately upon arrival with a roller stamp so as to be legibly marked “Uninspected Meat – Not for Sale.” All uninspected pork kept or placed in any refrigeration plant shall be stamped immediately upon arrival with a hot stamp so as to be legibly marked “Uninspected Meat – Not for Sale.” Every stamp required by this section shall also legibly show the plant permit number issued to the plant by the Health Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.411)

8.28.090 Hides must accompany carcasses.
Every refrigeration plant shall accept and store beef, veal and lamb carcasses only when the hide accompanies the carcass. Every refrigeration plant shall keep a record of the disposition of each such hide, which record shall be available at all times to the Department of Health Services and the State Hide and Brand Inspector. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.412)

8.28.100 Designation of meat processing days.
Every refrigeration plant handling or processing inspected and uninspected meat shall designate different days of the week upon which inspected meat will be processed and uninspected meat will be processed, and shall notify the Department of Health Services in writing of such designation and of any change thereof together with the effective date of such change. It is unlawful for any refrigeration plant to process both inspected and uninspected meat on the same day, except with the permission of the Department of Health Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.413)

8.28.110 Uninspected meat includes deer, game and fowl.
The handling of meat or deer or other game or fowl shall be classified as handling of uninspected meat and shall not be handled on days designated for inspected meat. Except as in this section provided, this chapter shall not apply to carcasses of deer, game or fowl. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.414)

Chapter 8.32
REDUCTION PLANTS
Sections:

8.32.010    Permit – Required.

8.32.020    Permit – Application – Fee.

8.32.030    Inspection of reduction plants.

8.32.040    Removal of decomposed material.

8.32.050    Construction of structures.

8.32.060    Offensive odors declared public nuisance.

8.32.010 Permit – Required.
No person shall conduct, maintain or operate an establishment for the steaming, boiling, reducing, rendering, or cooking of any animal substance or matter, fish substance or matter, or vegetable substance or matter for the manufacture of fertilizer, fats, oils, chicken meal, or any byproduct of any kind or character, or conduct, operate, maintain, or carry on, whether as owner or lessee, agent or superintendent or otherwise, any reduction works, or fertilizer plant or other places where the business of steaming, boiling, reducing, rendering, or cooking of an animal substance or matter, fish substance or matter, vegetable substance or matter, for the manufacture of fertilizer, fats, oils, chicken meal, or any byproducts of any kind or character is carried on or maintained within the City without a permit therefor issued by the health department. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.801)

8.32.020 Permit – Application – Fee.
The permits required by this chapter shall be applied for and issued as prescribed in PMC 8.20.080(H). The annual fee shall be as prescribed in Chapter 8.20 PMC. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 16, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.802)

8.32.030 Inspection of reduction plants.
All material received by reduction plants for the process of reducing or rendering shall be immediately processed, and the processing of same shall continue until the entire supply is entirely reduced. The Health Officer shall cause an inspection to be made during the process of reduction to determine whether the process and equipment may be operated without becoming a nuisance, and if it shall be determined to the satisfaction of the Health Officer that the establishment is objectionable or liable to become a nuisance, said Health Officer is empowered by this section to suspend or revoke the permit therefor until satisfactory improvements have been made or suitable equipment has been installed. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.803)

8.32.040 Removal of decomposed material.
Putrid or decomposed material shall be removed only under permit and under the direction of the Department of Health Services designated to perform such duties. Fish or parts of fish or fish guts not suitable for reduction shall be condemned and disposed of in a manner designated by the Department of Health Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.804)

8.32.050 Construction of structures.
Floors and gutters of reduction plants shall be constructed of concrete or other material impervious to liquids. Walls, ceilings, partitions, doors and other parts of all structures used as a part of a reduction plant shall be of such materials, construction, and finish as will permit them to be readily and thoroughly cleaned. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.805)

8.32.060 Offensive odors declared public nuisance.
The escape into the open air of any offensive or obnoxious odors or gases from any material in the process of reduction under the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the Health Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.806)

Chapter 8.36
ENFORCEMENT OF STATE HOUSING LAW
Sections:

8.36.010    Enforcement by Health Officer.

8.36.020    Inspection of hotels and apartment houses.

8.36.010 Enforcement by Health Officer.
The Health Officer, in addition to his other duties, is designated as the officer to enforce and is charged with the enforcement of the provisions of the State Housing Law pertaining to sanitation, ventilation, use or occupancy of apartment houses, dwellings and hotels within the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.901)

8.36.020 Inspection of hotels and apartment houses.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to make periodic inspections of all hotels and apartment houses whenever the Health Officer deems it necessary. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.902)

Chapter 8.40
APARTMENTS AND HOTELS
Sections:

8.40.010    Definitions.

8.40.020    Permit – Required.

8.40.030    Permit – Application.

8.40.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified:

A. “Apartment house” means any structure more than one story in height, or any portion of any such structure occupied, or designed, built or rented for occupancy, as a home by three or more families, each living in a separate apartment and cooking within the structure.

B. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, public club, or private club, containing six or more guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by six or more guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.1001)

8.40.020 Permit – Required.
It is unlawful to occupy, or to permit to be occupied, any apartment house or hotel now or hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or moved, as the case may be, or any portion thereof, for human habitation without an annual permit therefor issued by the Health Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.1002)

8.40.030 Permit – Application.
The permit required by this chapter shall be applied for and issued as prescribed in Chapter 8.20 PMC. Every person applying for a permit shall pay the annual inspection fee set forth in PMC 8.20.080. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 17, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 66.1003)

Chapter 8.44
TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
Sections:

Article I. Park Rules and Regulations

8.44.010    Authority.

8.44.020    Definitions.

8.44.030    Park area.

8.44.040    Signs.

8.44.050    Requirements applicable to all parks.

8.44.060    Operating permit fee.

Article II. Use and Storage of Trailers

8.44.070    Definitions.

8.44.080    Trailer coaches regulated.

8.44.090    Zoning ordinance prevails.

8.44.100    Nonconforming trailer coaches must conform.

8.44.110    Health Officer to enforce.

8.44.120    Violation – Penalty.

Article III. Permitted Uses

8.44.130    Storage allowed – Without permit.

8.44.140    Uses allowed – With permit.

Article I. Park Rules and Regulations

8.44.010 Authority.
The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter are adopted pursuant to the authority of Section 18300 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.101)

8.44.020 Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Chapter 1 of Part 2.1 of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, commencing with Section 18200:

A. Lot;

B. Mobile home;

C. Mobile home park;

D. Recreational trailer park;

E. Recreational vehicle;

F. Travel trailer; and

G. Travel trailer park. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.102)

8.44.030 Park area.
Each mobile home park, recreational trailer park and travel trailer park established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall contain a minimum of five acres of land; provided, however, that a park may be operated on a smaller parcel if application for a permit was made on or before May 19, 1969, and a permit was issued by an agency having jurisdiction over such parks and actual construction of the park was begun prior to July 19, 1969. The land shall be properly graded to provide for adequate drainage and freedom from standing pools of water. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.103)

8.44.040 Signs.
Every mobile home park shall be identified as such by a sign displaying the name of the park, which sign shall be clearly visible and readable from the road, street or highway upon which the mobile home park fronts. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.104)

8.44.050 Requirements applicable to all parks.
The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to a mobile home park are equally applicable to a recreational trailer park and travel trailer parks. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.105)

8.44.060 Operating permit fee.
The fee for any operating permit issued by the Health Officer shall be the annual operating permit fee established by Section 18502 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.107)

Article II. Use and Storage of Trailers

8.44.070 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words are defined as follows:

A. “Farm employee mobile home” is a mobile home maintained exclusively for the occupancy of farm employees and their families in connection with farm work being performed on the premises upon which the mobile home is situated. A farm employee is a person other than the owner or lessee of the property who derives more than half of his total livelihood as an “agricultural employee” as defined by the Matorre-Zenovich-Dunlap-Berman Agricultural Labor Relations Act of 1975.

B. “Trailer coach” means any vehicle, with or without motive power, designed or used for human occupancy for residential, recreational, industrial, professional or commercial purposes and includes commercial coach, mobile home, recreational vehicle and travel trailer as said terms are defined in Part 2.1 of Division 8 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC §§ 56.202, 56.202.5)

8.44.080 Trailer coaches regulated.
No person shall use, occupy or store any trailer coach in the City except as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to use, occupancy or storage of trailer coaches in any incidental camping area, mobile home park, recreational trailer park or camping area, temporary trailer park or travel trailer park subject to Part 2.1, commencing with Section 18200, of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code (Mobilehome Park Act) or in any labor camp subject to Chapter 4, commencing with Section 2610, Part 9, Division 2 of the Labor Code or in any supervised public park, public campground or picnic ground owned, operated and maintained by the Federal government, the State or any agency or political subdivision of the State. Nor shall this chapter apply to a mobile home sited on a permanent foundation pursuant to an approved conditional use permit as authorized by the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.201)

8.44.090 Zoning ordinance prevails.
The provisions of this chapter shall not authorize the use, occupancy or storage of a trailer coach contrary to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.203)

8.44.100 Nonconforming trailer coaches must conform.
The use, occupancy or storage of a trailer coach which was lawful on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter but which does not conform to the requirements thereof may be continued until, but not after January 1, 1970. Any change in the use, occupancy or storage of a trailer coach shall conform to all of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.204)

8.44.110 Health Officer to enforce.
It is the duty of the Health Officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Health Officer or any regularly appointed sanitarian or employee of the Department of Health Services shall be empowered to make arrests and issue citations pursuant to Penal Code Sections 836.5 and 853.6 for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.206)

8.44.120 Violation – Penalty.
Any person using, occupying or storing a trailer coach contrary to the provisions of this article or contrary to the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is guilty of an infraction. Any trailer coach so used, occupied or stored is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.205)

Article III. Permitted Uses

8.44.130 Storage allowed – Without permit.
Storage allowed shall be as follows:

A. Trailer coaches may be stored only as follows:

1. Within an enclosed building;

2. On a lot or parcel of property on which there exists a lawfully established and maintained dwelling which is occupied by the owner of the stored trailer coach;

3. On a lot or parcel on which there is conducted lawfully operated business for the sale, rental, storage or repair of trailer coaches and such storage is incidental to the operation of the business.

B. No stored trailer coaches shall be used or occupied and all water, gas, electric and sewer lines shall be and remain disconnected from the trailer coach at all times it is stored except that a stored trailer coach may be connected to the foregoing utilities for a 48-hour period for the purpose of maintenance and repairs or for servicing prior to or upon the return from travel. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.210)

8.44.140 Uses allowed – With permit.
No person shall use or occupy a trailer coach in the City except when authorized by and in accordance with a valid unexpired trailer coach use permit issued by the Health Officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that no trailer coach use permit shall be required for the temporary use of a trailer coach while participating in a trailer roundup for which a permit has been issued by the Health Officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 56.211)

Chapter 8.48
WATER WASTE AND POLLUTION
Sections:

Article I. Waste of Water

8.48.010    Prohibited.

8.48.020    Seepage constitutes evidence of violation.

8.48.030    Responsibility of owner of premises.

Article II. Pollution of Waters

8.48.040    By animals prohibited.

8.48.050    Bathing in waters used for drinking prohibited.

8.48.060    Trespassing near stock watering holes prohibited.

Article I. Waste of Water

8.48.010 Prohibited.
No person shall waste or cause or permit to be wasted any water furnished or delivered by any agency distributing for public benefit any water dedicated to or provided for public use within the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.101)

8.48.020 Seepage constitutes evidence of violation.
It shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this chapter for any person to permit any water supplied from such a source to the premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person to escape, flow or seep therefrom. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.102)

8.48.030 Responsibility of owner of premises.
The person actually or ostensibly in possession, control and ownership of any premises upon which water is wasted or permitted to be wasted in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie responsible for such violation. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.103)

Article II. Pollution of Waters

8.48.040 By animals prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit any horses, cattle, sheep, swine, poultry or any kind of livestock or domestic animals to pollute the waters of tributaries of such waters used or intended for drinking purposes by the inhabitants of any part of the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.201)

8.48.050 Bathing in waters used for drinking prohibited.
No person shall bathe or wash clothes in any spring, stream, river, lake, reservoir, well, flume, or other waters which are used or intended for drinking purposes by the inhabitants of the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.202)

8.48.060 Trespassing near stock watering holes prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person or persons in the City to camp, or to loiter within a radius of 1,500 feet of any established stock watering hole or place whether unenclosed, or enclosed by fence belonging to, or occupied by, another, where signs forbidding trespass are displayed approximately 2,400 feet apart at a distance of approximately 1,500 feet from the watering hole or place, without having first obtained written permission from the owner of such lands or the person in lawful possession of such land where said stock watering hole or place is located. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 42.401)

Chapter 8.52
SWIMMING POOLS
Sections:

Article I. Public Swimming Pool Plans

8.52.010    Review of plans for public swimming pools – Fee.

8.52.020    Permit – Required.

8.52.030    Permit – Not transferable.

8.52.040    Enforcement.

Article II. Swimming Pool Fencing

8.52.050    Adoption of swimming pool, spa and hot tub fencing regulations.

8.52.060    Definitions.

8.52.070    Outdoor swimming pool requirements.

8.52.080    Indoor swimming pool requirements.

8.52.090    Final plaster coat placement.

8.52.100    Enforcement responsibility.

8.52.110    Violation – Penalty.

Article I. Public Swimming Pool Plans

8.52.010 Review of plans for public swimming pools – Fee.
Any person desiring the review and approval of plans and specifications for a public swimming pool by the Director of Public Health pursuant to Section 7780 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code shall submit said plans to the Director accompanied by a fee as set forth in PMC 8.20.080(J), to cover the cost of said review. As soon after the plans and specifications are submitted as is practical, the Director shall review or cause to be reviewed said plans and specifications and shall determine whether they are in accordance with the requirements of Sections 7780, et seq. of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code. In the event that the plans and specifications do not comply with said Administrative Code provisions, amended plans and specifications may be submitted to the Director for re-review and approval, and the fee for each such re-review shall as set forth in PMC 8.20.080(J), payable to the Director in advance. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 19, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.301)

8.52.020 Permit – Required.
A. No person shall maintain or operate any pool except a private pool unless an annual operating permit is issued therefor by the Health Officer. A pool shall be considered a private pool if it is maintained by an individual for the use of his family and friends and for swimming instruction programs of short duration which are conducted by or sponsored by the American Red Cross.

B. An annual operating permit issued by the Health Officer is required for operation of any public pool including, but not limited to, all commercial pools, real estate and community pools, pools at hotels, motels, resorts, auto and trailer parks, auto courts, apartment houses, clubs, public or private schools and gymnasia, and health establishments.

C. Every person applying for a permit as required by this section shall, at the time of making application for such permit, pay an annual inspection fee for the first pool under one ownership and on the same property as set forth in PMC 8.20.080(J), and a fee for each additional pool on the same property and under the same ownership as set forth in PMC 8.20.080(J).

D. The annual operating permit shall be effective for a 12-month period from the date of issuance. The required permit shall be applied for and issued as prescribed in Chapter 8.20 PMC. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 20, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.302)

8.52.030 Permit – Not transferable.
A permit is not transferable from one person or one place to another, and shall be deemed voided if removed from the place or location specified in the written application and in the permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.304)

8.52.040 Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Director of Health Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.307)

Article II. Swimming Pool Fencing

8.52.050 Adoption of swimming pool, spa and hot tub fencing regulations.
There is adopted as the City swimming pool, spa and hot tub fencing code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City for the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all swimming pool, spa and hot tub fencing the following regulations as set forth in PMC 8.52.060, 8.52.070, 8.52.080, 8.52.090, 8.52.100 and 8.52.110. (Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

8.52.060 Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, certain terms, words and phrases are defined as follows:

Above-Ground/On-Ground Pool. See definition of a “swimming pool.”

“Approved safety pool cover” means a manually or power-operated safety pool cover that meets all of the performance standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), in compliance with standard F1346-91.

“Barrier” means a fence, wall, building wall or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.

“Enclosure” means a fence, wall, or other barrier that isolates a swimming pool from access to a home.

“Exit alarms” means devices that make audible, continuous alarm sounds when any door or window, that permits access from a residence to a pool area that is without any intervening enclosure, is opened or is left ajar. Exit alarms may be battery operated or may be connected to the electrical wiring of the building.

“Grade” means the underlying surface such as earth or a walking surface.

Hot Tub. See definition of “swimming pool.”

“Public swimming pool” means a swimming pool operated for the use of the general public with or without charge, or for the use of the members and guests of a private club. Public swimming pool does not include a swimming pool located on the grounds of a private single-family home.

Spa. See definition of “swimming pool.”

“Swimming pool” is any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes, but is not limited to, in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, portable spas, and nonportable wading pools.

Swimming Pool, Indoor. “Indoor swimming pool” means a swimming pool which is totally contained within a residential structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure.

Swimming Pool, Outdoor. “Outdoor swimming pool” means any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool. (Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

8.52.070 Outdoor swimming pool requirements.
A. Outdoor Swimming Pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa, portable spa and nonportable wading pool shall be provided with a barrier and an enclosure which shall comply with the following:

1. The top of the barrier or enclosure shall be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool and shall be constructed to withstand the forces outlined in the Uniform Building Code. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier or enclosure shall be four inches measured to a hard surface, such as concrete, or two inches to earth. This measurement shall be taken on the side of the barrier or enclosure which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier or enclosure may be at ground level, such as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier or enclosure is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and bottom of the barrier or enclosure shall be four inches.

2. Openings in the barrier or enclosure shall not allow passage of a four-inch diameter sphere.

3. Solid barriers or enclosures which do not have openings, such as masonry or stone walls, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for tooled masonry joints.

4. Where the barrier or enclosure is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the barrier or enclosure. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed two inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed two inches in width.

5. Where the barrier or enclosure is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed two inches in width.

6. Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a two-inch square. The wire shall not be less than 11-1/2 gauge. The two-inch square is a nominal dimension and is intended to include standard chain link fencing fabric within construction tolerances.

7. Where the barrier or enclosure is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than two inches square.

8. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of items (A)(1) through (7) of this section and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device no less than 54 inches above grade. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall comply with the requirements of items (A)(1) through (7) of this section and shall be equipped with a locking device.

9. The required enclosure isolating a swimming pool from a house may be a barrier or enclosure complying with items (A)(1) through (8) of this section or may consist of at least one of the following safety features:

a. The pool shall be equipped with an approved safety pool cover.

b. The residence shall be equipped with exit alarms on those doors providing direct access to the pool.

c. All doors providing direct access from the home to the swimming pool shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device with a release mechanism placed no lower than 54 inches above the floor.

d. Other means of protection, if the degree of protection afforded is equal to or greater than that afforded by any of the devices set forth in subsections (A)(9)(a) through (A)(9)(c) of this section, as determined by the Director of Development Services. The safety features listed in subsections (A)(9)(a) through (A)(9)(d) of this section may not substitute for the required barrier around the perimeter of the pool but only for the enclosure required between the house and the swimming pool.

10. Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or enclosure or where the barrier or enclosure is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then (1) the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access or (2) the ladder or steps shall be surrounded with a barrier which meets the requirements of subsections (A)(1) through (A)(8) of this section. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a four-inch diameter sphere.

11. Hot tubs and spas located outdoors and not exceeding 64 square feet may have locking rigid pool covers that comply with the American Society for Testing Materials-Emergency Performance Specification (ASTM-ES 13-89) in lieu of the barriers and enclosures required by this section.

12. Where unusual circumstances exist that make strict enforcement of this section impractical, the Director of Development Services may grant modifications for individual cases as allowed for in Section 106 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, as adopted by Chapter 15.02 PMC. (Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

8.52.080 Indoor swimming pool requirements.
Indoor Swimming Pool. An indoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa, portable spa and nonportable wading pool which is completely contained within the walls of a building shall comply with the enclosure safety requirements found in PMC 8.52.070(A)(9).

EXCEPTION: Hot tubs and spas located indoors and not exceeding 64 square feet may have locking rigid pool covers that comply with the American Society for Testing Materials-Emergency Performance Specification (ASTM-ES 13-89) in lieu of the enclosure safety requirements specified above. (Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

8.52.090 Final plaster coat placement.
Placement of the final plaster coat in any swimming pool shall not be permitted until all fencing, barriers, enclosures and related safety features are installed and inspected. (Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

8.52.100 Enforcement responsibility.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Director of Development Services or his/her designated representative. (Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

8.52.110 Violation – Penalty.
A. Any swimming pool, as defined herein, erected, constructed, or altered after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that is not in conformance with these regulations shall be considered unlawful and a public nuisance, and any failure, refusal or neglect to install the required fencing, barriers, enclosures and related safety features shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a nuisance has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, or alteration of any swimming pool erected, constructed or altered contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The City Attorney may immediately commence necessary proceedings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law.

B. All of the remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not inclusive.

C. Each person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter, and any use or occupation of building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

Chapter 8.56
WELLS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

8.56.010    Purpose and intent.

8.56.020    Definitions.

8.56.030    State reporting.

Article II. Well Standards Advisory Board

8.56.040    Establishment.

8.56.050    Members.

8.56.060    Meetings.

8.56.070    Responsibilities.

Article III. Standards

8.56.080    Generally.

8.56.090    Standards for water wells.

8.56.100    Standards for cathodic protection wells.

Article IV. Nuisances

8.56.110    Investigation.

8.56.120    Order to abate nuisance.

8.56.140    Abatement by City.

8.56.150    Payment of cost by owner.

Article V. Construction, Repair, Reconstruction and Destruction of Wells

8.56.160    Acts prohibited.

8.56.170    Permits.

8.56.180    Person authorized to perform work.

8.56.190    Inspections.

8.56.200    Expiration of permit.

8.56.210    Extension of permit.

8.56.220    Revocation or suspension.

8.56.230    Log of well.

Article I. General Provisions

8.56.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the construction, repair and reconstruction of wells to the end that the groundwater of this City will not be polluted or contaminated and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this City, and for the destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances to the end that such wells will not cause pollution or contamination of groundwater or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.401)

8.56.020 Definitions.
The following words shall have the meaning provided in this section:

A. “Abandoned” or “abandonment” apply to a well which has not been used for a period of one year, unless the owner declares in writing, to the Health Officer, his intention to use the well again for supplying water or other associated purpose (such as an observation well or injection well) and receives approval of such declaration from the Health Officer. All such declaration shall be renewed annually and at such time be resubmitted to the Health Officer for approval. Test holes and exploratory holes shall be considered abandoned 24 hours after construction work has been completed, unless otherwise approved by the Health Officer of the City.

B. “Abatement” means the construction, reconstruction, repair or destruction of a well so as to eliminate a nuisance caused by a well polluting or contaminating groundwater.

C. “Agricultural well” means a water well used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes, including so called stock wells.

D. “Cathodic protection well” means any artificial excavation in excess of 20 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection, electrically, of metallic equipment in contact with the ground. See definitions of deep anode bed and shallow anode bed.

E. “Commercial well” means a water well used to supply a single commercial establishment.

F. “Community water supply well” means water well used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to Chapter 7 of Part I of Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

G. “Construct” or “reconstruct” (construction or reconstruction) means to dig, drive, bore, drill or deepen a well, or to reperforate, remove, replace, or extend a well casing.

H. “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of water to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease.

I. “Deep anode bed” means any cathodic protection well more than 50 feet deep.

J. “Destruction” means the proper filling and sealing of a well that is no longer useful so as to assure that the groundwater is protected and to eliminate a potential physical hazard.

K. “Electrical grounding well” means any artificial excavation in excess of 20 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of establishing an electrical ground.

L. “Health Officer” means the Health Officer of the County.

M. “Individual domestic well” means a water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence.

N. “Industrial well” means a water well used to supply an industry on an individual basis.

O. “Modification, repair or reconstruction” means the deepening of a well or the reperforation or replacement of a well casing and all well repairs and modifications that can affect the groundwater quality.

P. “Observation well” means a well used for monitoring or sampling the conditions of water-bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality.

Q. “Order of abatement” means both mandatory and prohibitory orders requiring or prohibiting one or more acts. Said term also includes those orders effective for a limited as well as an indefinite period of time, and include modifications or restatements of any order.

R. “Permit” means a written permit issued by the Health Officer permitting the construction, reconstruction, destruction, or abandonment of a well.

S. “Person” means any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency.

T. “Pollution” means an alternation of the quality of water to a degree which unreasonably affects:

1. Such waters for beneficial uses; or

2. Facilities which serve beneficial uses.

Pollution may include contamination.

U. “Public nuisance,” when applied to a well, means any well which threatens to impair the quality of groundwater or otherwise jeopardize the health or safety of the public.

V. “Salt water (hydraulic) barrier well” means a well used for extracting water from or injecting water into the underground as a means of preventing the intrusion of salt water into a fresh water bearing aquifer.

W. “Shallow anode bed” means any cathodic protection well more than 20 feet deep but less than 50 feet deep.

X. “Test or exploratory hole” means an excavation used for determining the nature of underground geological or hydrological conditions, whether by seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means.

Y. “Well” means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, for providing cathodic protection or electrical ground conditions, or for any other similar purpose. Wells include, but are not limited to, community water supply wells, individual domestic wells, commercial wells, industrial wells, agricultural wells, cathodic protection wells, electrical grounding wells, test and exploratory holes, observation wells and salt water (hydraulic) barrier wells, as defined in this section, and other wells whose regulation is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. Wells shall not include:

1. Oil and gas wells, geothermal wells or other wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells;

2. Wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during construction, or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments; or

3. Other wells whose regulation is not necessary to fulfill the purpose of this chapter as determined by the Health Officer.

Z. “Well Standards Advisory Board” means the Well Standards Advisory Board appointed by the Health Officer pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.402)

8.56.030 State reporting.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to release any person from compliance with the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 10 of Division 7 of the Water Code of the State or any successor thereto. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.403)

Article II. Well Standards Advisory Board

8.56.040 Establishment.
There is created or established in the County, the well standards advisory board referred to in this chapter as “advisory board.” (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.410)

8.56.050 Members.
The advisory board shall consist of seven members, two of whom shall be from the well drilling industry, all of whom shall be residents of the County. Said members shall be appointed by the Health Officer and each member shall serve until he resigns or is removed by the Health Officer. Members of the advisory board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.411)

8.56.060 Meetings.
A Chairman of the advisory board shall be elected by the members thereof at the first meeting of the advisory board. Such Chairman shall serve for a term and shall have the duties established by rules and regulations to be adopted by the advisory board. The advisory board may prepare and adopt such rules and regulations for the internal government of its business as it may deem necessary or advisable. A staff member of the Department of Health Services designated by the Health Officer shall serve as secretary to the advisory board. The advisory board shall meet from time to time at the request of the Health Officer. Three members shall constitute a quorum. The advisory board shall keep written minutes of its meetings, a copy of which shall be filed with the Health Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.412)

8.56.070 Responsibilities.
The advisory board is an advisory body with respect to the implementation of this chapter. It may make such recommendations to the Health Officer as it may deem reasonable and proper, necessary or advisable. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.413)

Article III. Standards

8.56.080 Generally.
No person shall construct, repair, reconstruct or destroy any well subject to this chapter which does not conform to the standards established in this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.420)

8.56.090 Standards for water wells.
Standards for the construction, repair, reconstruction or destruction of water wells shall be as set forth in Chapter II of State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, three copies of which have been filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors and marked as Document No. 481211, with the following modifications:

A. Part II, Section 8 (A) is amended by adding the following to footnote 1 and reading as follows:

Shallow dug, or bored wells used for community water supply shall be located at least 250 feet from any sewage disposal facility.

B. Part II, Section 9 (A) is amended by substituting “20 ft. 1/” for “none 3/,” automatically deleting the 3/ footnote.

C. Part II, Section 9 (E) is amended by adding the following footnote following section title:

** Exception – where the air-rotary method is used for individual domestic wells 8? in diameter or smaller, the thickness of seal may be reduced to 1?.

D. Part II, Section 10 (B) is amended by deleting the entire section with exception of that portion of the first sentence which states:

Because of their susceptibility to contamination and pollution, the use of well pits should be avoided.

E. Part II, Section 15 (A), Item 3 is amended by deleting the following phrase:

Where the water is to be used for domestic purposes.

F. Part II, Section 16 is amended by deleting from Title 16 title the words “Large diameter” and substituting the words “Bored or dug.”

G. Part II, Section 16 (A) is amended by deleting the word “Underground” from the last sentence so that the sentence reads as follows:

When used for this purpose, these wells shall be located at least 250 feet from any sewage disposal facility.

(Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.421)

8.56.100 Standards for cathodic protection wells.
Standards for the construction, repair, reconstruction or destruction of cathodic protection wells shall be as set forth in Bulletin No. 74-1 of the State Department of Water Resources, three copies of which are filed with the Clerk of the Board and marked as Document No. 481211B, with the following modifications:

A. Chapter II, Part I, Section 1-A is amended by deleting the definition of “Cathodic Protection Well” as printed and adding the following:

A. Cathodic Protection Well: A cathodic protection well means an artificial excavation in excess of 20 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as Cathodic Protection.

B. Chapter II, Part II, Section 8 is amended by deleting the word “Location” in the title and adding the word “Construction” so that the title reads:

WELL CONSTRUCTION WITH RESPECT TO POLLUTANTS

C. Chapter II, Part II, Section 10 is amended by deleting Subsection A-4 and the asterisked footnote in their entirety.

D. Chapter II, Part III, Section 13B is amended, by deleting the phrase “If the casing is 8 inches or larger in diameter” thereby leaving the phrase “The well is covered with an appropriate locked cap.” (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.422)

Article IV. Nuisances

8.56.110 Investigation.
The Health Officer may, upon reasonable cause to believe that an abandoned well or other well is causing a nuisance by polluting or contaminating groundwater, or constitutes a safety hazard, investigate the situation to determine whether such a nuisance does in fact exist. He shall have the power, when in the performance of his duty and upon first presenting his credentials and identifying himself as an employee of the Department of Health Services to the person apparently in control of the premises, if available, to enter upon any such premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to discover or inspect any thing or condition which appears to indicate such a nuisance. He may determine such premises, things or conditions, take such samples and make such tests as needed and take any other steps reasonably necessary for the proper investigation and determination of whether such a nuisance exists. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.430)

8.56.120 Order to abate nuisance.
A. Whenever the Health Officer determines that an abandoned or other well is causing a nuisance by polluting or contaminating groundwater, or constitutes a safety hazard, he may issue a written order requiring that the conditions productive of the nuisance be abated within a period of 10 days thereafter and shall forthwith serve the order upon the person occupying the premises, if any, and if no person occupies the premises, the order shall be posted upon said premises in a conspicuous place. In addition, a copy shall be mailed to the owners of the premises as their names and addresses appear upon the last equalized assessment roll. The Health Officer may for good cause extend the time specified in the order or otherwise modify or rescind the order.

B. The order of abatement shall advise the possessors and owners of the property of their right to appeal to the City Council and to stay the order of abatement pending such appeal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.431)

8.56.140 Abatement by City.
In the event that a nuisance is not abated in accordance with an order of abatement, the Health Officer may, upon securing the approval of the City Council, proceed to abate the nuisance by force account, contract or any other method deemed most expedient by the Council. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.433)

8.56.150 Payment of cost by owner.
A. The Health Officer shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the well is or was located, and the names and addresses of the record owner, the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust of record, and any other person known to have a legal interest in the property.

B. A hearing shall be held on said report and any protests or objections thereto, and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the persons with a legal interest in the property at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The City Council shall determine at the hearing the correct charge to be made for the work.

C. All costs of abatement carried out under the terms of this section shall constitute a charge and special assessment against the parcel of land involved. If such costs are not paid within 60 days, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that property as provided in Government Code Section 25845. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. In addition to its rights to impose said special assessment, the City shall retain the alternative right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession of control jointly and severally. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.434)

Article V. Construction, Repair, Reconstruction and Destruction of Wells

8.56.160 Acts prohibited.
No person shall construct, repair, reconstruct or destroy any well unless a written permit has first been obtained from the Health Officer as provided in this chapter, and unless the work done shall conform to the standards specified in this chapter and all the conditions of the said permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.440)

8.56.170 Permits.
A. Applications. Applications for permits shall be made to the Health Officer and shall include the following:

1. A plot plan showing the location of the well with respect to the following items within a radius of 250 feet from the well:

a. Property lines,

b. Waste disposal systems or works carrying or containing sewage, industrial wastes or solid wastes,

c. All intermittent or perennial, natural or artificial bodies of water or watercourses,

d. The approximate drainage pattern of the property,

e. Other wells,

f. Structures, surface or subsurface;

2. Location of the property, and the Assessor’s parcel number;

3. The name of the person who will construct the well;

4. The proposed minimum and the proposed maximum depth of the well;

5. The proposed minimum depths and types of casings and minimum depths of perforations to be used;

6. The proposed use of the well;

7. Other information as may be necessary to determine if the underground waters will be adequately protected.

B. Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in PMC 8.20.080.

C. Conditions. Permits shall be issued to compliance with the standards provided in this chapter except that such standards shall be inapplicable or modified as expressly provided by the Health Officer in such permit upon his finding that such modifications or inapplicability will accomplish the purposes of this chapter. Permits may also include any other condition or requirement found by the Health Officer to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

D. Grounds for Refusal of Permit. The Health Officer may refuse to issue a permit for any of the following reasons:

1. The applicant is not a person authorized to perform the work as provided in this chapter;

2. The applicant fails to post the required surety bond or cash deposit as provided in this chapter;

3. The permit application is not in proper form;

4. The proposed well would create a water pollution problem or would aggravate a pre-existing water pollution problem or would violate any of the standards established in Chapter 8.48 PMC.

E. Term – Completion of Work. The permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time and before the date set out in the permit. The permittee shall notify the Health Officer in writing upon completion of the work and submit a copy of the well drilling log and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until such written notification and a copy of the well drilling log have been received. A final inspection of the work shall be made by the Health Officer unless such inspection is waived by him, and no permittee shall be deemed to have complied with this chapter or his permit until such inspection has been performed or waived.

F. Guarantee of Performance. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall post with the Health Officer a cash deposit or bond guaranteeing compliance with the terms of this chapter and the applicable permit, such bond to be in an amount deemed necessary by the Health Officer to remedy improper work but not in excess of $2,500. Such deposit or bond may be waived by the Health Officer where other assurances of compliance are deemed adequate by him.

G. Continuous Bond or Cash Deposit. In lieu of furnishing a separate bond for each permit as provided above, a properly licensed contractor may deposit with the Health Officer a surety bond or cash deposit in the amount of $2,500, which bond or cash deposit shall be available to remedy any improper work done by the contractor pursuant to any permit issued under this chapter.

H. Denial of a permit may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 2.20 PMC. (Ord. 492 § 3, 1998; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 22, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.441)

8.56.180 Person authorized to perform work.
Construction, reconstruction, repair and destruction of wells shall be performed by a contractor licensed in accordance with the provisions of the Contractor’s License Law (Business and Professions Code, chapter 9, division 3) unless exempted by that law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.442)

8.56.190 Inspections.
A. Upon receipt of an application, an inspection of the well location may be required by the Health Officer to be made by the Health Officer prior to issuance of a well permit.

B. The Health Officer or any person designated by the Health Officer may inspect the work in progress and may enter the premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing such inspection.

C. After work has been completed pursuant to any permit the Health Officer shall be notified by the person performing the work and the Health Department shall make a final inspection of the completed work to determine compliance with the well standards. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.443)

8.56.200 Expiration of permit.
A. Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized thereby has not been completed within 120 days following the issuance of the permit.

B. Upon expiration of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, no further work may be done in connection with construction, repair, reconstruction or abandonment of a well unless and until a new permit for such purpose is secured in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.444)

8.56.210 Extension of permit.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be extended at the option of the Health Officer. Each individual extension granted by the Health Officer shall be for not longer than 120 days. In no event shall the Health Officer grant an extension which would make the total term of the permit exceed one year. Application for extension shall be made on a form provided by the Health Officer. The fee for submitting such application shall be in an amount as established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 33, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.445)

8.56.220 Revocation or suspension.
A. A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the Health Officer as hereinafter provided if he determines that a violation of this chapter exists, that written notice has been directed to permittee specifying the violation and that the permittee has failed or neglected to make the necessary adjustments within 30 days after receiving such notice.

B. A permit may be so revoked or suspended by the Health Officer if he determines at a hearing for such purpose that the person to whom any permit was issued pursuant to this chapter has obtained the same by fraud or misrepresentation; provided, that notice of the time and place of such hearing is given to the permittee at least five days prior thereto.

C. The suspension or revocation of any permit shall not be effective until notice thereof in writing is mailed to the permittee, and the time for filing an appeal to the Board of Supervisors has expired. The notice shall advise the permittee of his right to appeal to the Board of Supervisors and to stay the suspension or revocation pending such appeal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.446)

8.56.230 Log of well.
Any person who has drilled, dug, excavated or bored a well shall, upon completion of the well, submit to the Health Officer an accurate and complete log to include:

A. A detailed record of the boundaries, character, size distribution and color of all lithologic units penetrated;

B. Type of well casing;

C. Location of perforations and sealing zones; and

D. Any other data deemed necessary by the Health Officer. In areas where insufficient subsurface information is available, the Health Officer may require inspection of the well log prior to any operation. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 67.447)

Chapter 8.60
SEPTIC TANKS AND SEEPAGE PITS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

8.60.010    Title.

8.60.020    Definitions.

Article II. General Requirements

8.60.030    Required sanitary fixtures.

8.60.040    Sewage disposal according to plumbing code and this chapter required.

8.60.050    Plumbing and drainage system to be connected to public sewer if available.

8.60.060    Connection of existing buildings to newly installed sewers.

8.60.070    Director may authorize sanitary toilets in isolated areas.

8.60.080    Chapter not applicable to building for which temporary occupancy permit issued.

8.60.090    Temporary facilities.

8.60.100    Application for permits not to be accepted for lots created on basis of available sewers.

Article III. Installation of Sewage Collection Tanks

8.60.110    Authorization for installation.

8.60.120    Procedure for application.

Article IV. Permits and Inspections

8.60.140    Findings and declaration of intent.

8.60.141    Permit required to construct septic tank.

8.60.150    Application for permit – Fee.

8.60.160    Application for permits requiring no field investigation.

8.60.170    Special project review.

8.60.180    Change of location of work by supplemental permit – Fee.

8.60.190    Investigation by Director – Director may require percolation test – Denial of permit.

8.60.200    Fees required for percolation tests and septic system layout review.

8.60.210    Expiration of permit.

8.60.220    Evapotranspiration type systems – Revocation of permits.

8.60.230    Director to make inspections.

8.60.240    Inspection required – Approval.

8.60.250    Reinspections – Fee.

8.60.260    Inspection of existing subsurface disposal systems – Fee.

Article V. Specifications

8.60.270    Location of subsurface disposal systems.

8.60.280    Construction of house sewer.

8.60.290    Type of subsurface disposal system required.

8.60.300    Minimum requirements for septic tanks for one-family and two-family residences or small institutions or industries where used by not more than 10 persons.

8.60.310    Minimum requirements for distribution box.

8.60.320    Minimum requirements for disposal lines.

8.60.330    Substitution of seepage pit for tile system upon approval of Director.

8.60.340    Minimum requirements for seepage pits.

8.60.350    Minimum standards applicable to systems serving one-family or two-family residences or small institutions or industries where used by not more than 10 persons.

8.60.360    Special approval required for systems serving multiple dwellings or institutions or industries where used by more than 10 persons.

8.60.370    Provisions not to be construed to prevent the Director from imposing additional requirements.

8.60.380    Provisions not to be construed to prevent the Director from reducing requirements.

Article VI. Miscellaneous Provisions

8.60.390    Cross-connections prohibited.

8.60.400    Surface water not permitted in subsurface disposal system.

8.60.410    Covering work before approval prohibited.

8.60.420    Connecting plumbing to unapproved disposal system prohibited.

8.60.430    Disinfection of privy vault, privy, cesspool or water closet.

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

8.60.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “septic tank ordinance.” (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.301)

8.60.020 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A. Approval. Whenever the term “approval” or “approved” appears in this chapter, the approval of the Director is meant, and/or approval shall mean meeting the approval of the Director as the result of investigation and/or tests conducted by the Director or by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities, technical or scientific organizations, or a research laboratory of recognized authority.

B. “Department” means the Department of Health Services.

C. “Director” means the Health Officer.

D. “Drainage system” or “drainage piping” means and includes all the piping within public or private premises which conveys sewage or other liquid wastes to a legal point of disposal, but does not include the mains or laterals of a public sewer system.

E. “Plumbing” includes all drainage systems, both direct and indirect, and all vent piping, water piping and other piping in any building or within the boundaries of any property through which seepage, water, wastewater or any other substance or liquid is conveyed. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC §§ 68.302 – 68.307)

Article II. General Requirements

8.60.030 Required sanitary fixtures.
Every building shall have the sinks, water closets and other sanitary fixtures and facilities required by Chapter 15.12 PMC. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.310)

8.60.040 Sewage disposal according to plumbing code and this chapter required.
It is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit the disposal of sewage, human excrement or other liquid wastes, in any place or manner except through and by means of an approved plumbing and drainage system and an approved sewage disposal system installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 15.12 PMC and this chapter. “Approved sewage disposal system” means a system that is functioning satisfactorily by disposing of all sewage underground. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.311)

8.60.050 Plumbing and drainage system to be connected to public sewer if available.
The plumbing and drainage system of every building hereafter constructed or reconstructed shall be connected to a public sewer if the property on which such building is located abuts a public sewer. When a public sewer is not available for use the plumbing and drainage system of a building shall be connected to an approved private subsurface sewage disposal system. The type of system required shall be determined on the basis of location, area, soil porosity, the groundwater level, the density of population in the area and shall be designed to receive and dispose of all sewage liquid waste from the property served. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.312)

8.60.060 Connection of existing buildings to newly installed sewers.
No person shall maintain a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system on any premises adjacent to a public sewer; provided, however, that where a public sewer is installed adjacent to premises upon which there is located an existing building served by a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface disposal unit or system, the Director may approve the continued use of such subsurface disposal system until such time as he deems that the public health and sanitation require the connection of such building to the public sewer and the discontinuance of the use or maintenance of such subsurface disposal system. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.313)

8.60.070 Director may authorize sanitary toilets in isolated areas.
For the temporary occupancy of buildings in isolated areas remote from any public highway, the Director may authorize the construction and use of an approved type of sanitary toilet in lieu of connection to a public sewer or to a subsurface disposal unit or system installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.314)

8.60.080 Chapter not applicable to building for which temporary occupancy permit issued.
The provisions of this chapter requiring connection to a public sewer or to a subsurface disposal unit or system constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to a trailer, temporary building or an accessory building for which a temporary occupancy permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 15.04 or 15.12 PMC; provided, however, that the violation of any of the provisions or conditions of any such temporary occupancy permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.315)

8.60.090 Temporary facilities.
A. Where the Director determines it is probable that a public sanitary sewer will become available to property within 24 months, he may issue a permit to the owner of such property authorizing the construction of a temporary sewage disposal facility provided the permittee executes and records in the office of the County Recorder an agreement with the Director providing:

1. That the permittee will connect the property to the sanitary sewer within 30 days after it becomes available to the property;

2. That if the sanitary sewer does not become available to the property within a period of time specified by the Director, the permittee will apply for a permit for and construct a septic tank and sewage disposal system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;

3. That the permittee will pump and remove all sewage from said temporary sewage disposal facility and fill said facility with soil or other material in a manner approved by the Director at the time the property is connected to the sanitary sewer or a septic tank and sewage disposal system specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section;

4. That in the event the property is sold or transferred before the connection of the property to said sanitary sewer is made, the said agreement with the Director shall be made a part of the contract to sell or transfer said property;

5. That the property will not be occupied until a sewage disposal facility has been installed and approved by the Director;

6. That the agreement with the Director shall be binding upon the owners, his heirs, administrators, executors, successors and assigns.

B. It is unlawful for any person bound by the terms of such agreement to violate any provision of such agreement. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.316)

8.60.100 Application for permits not to be accepted for lots created on basis of available sewers.
A. No application for a septic tank permit shall be accepted for any lot created by a subdivision in which the tentative map or tentative parcel map was approved or conditionally approved on the basis that sewer service would be available to such lot even if sewer service is, in fact, not available.

B. The Health Officer may waive the provisions of subsection A of this section if the applicant agrees to furnish comprehensive soils analysis data satisfactory to the Health Officer, including hydrology studies where appropriate to determine the cumulative effects of effluent disposal over the entire area subdivided or such larger area as may be determined to be reasonably necessary by the Health Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.317)

Article III. Installation of Sewage Collection Tanks

8.60.110 Authorization for installation.
Where percolation tests have shown that subsurface drainage is not practical, or where the leaching from subsurface disposal systems may drain into a water supply or cause a nuisance, the Director, with the approval of the Board of Health, may permit the installation of sewage collection tanks. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.200)

8.60.120 Procedure for application.
Application for a permit to install a sewage collection tank shall be made in writing to the Director and shall be accompanied by a sketch showing the location and special design features of the proposed installation. The Director shall refer the application to the next succeeding meeting of the Board of Health for approval or disapproval. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.201)

Article IV. Permits and Inspections

8.60.140 Findings and declaration of intent.
The City of Poway has an overriding interest in planning and regulating the use of property within the City. Implicit in any plan or regulation is the City’s interest in maintaining the quality of life and the character of the City’s neighborhoods. Without adequate facilities for sewage disposal, sections of the City can quickly deteriorate, with tragic consequences to social, environmental and economic values.

A concentration of individual structures in certain areas of the City disposing of sewage into septic systems will cause such areas of the City to deteriorate and result in a threat to public health, safety and welfare. It is the City’s intent to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community by instituting a comprehensive ordinance for the issuance of building permits for the construction of any structure which may use for the disposal of sewage a septic system. It is further the intent of the City to assure the compatibility between the proposed structure or facilities and the particular site and other existing and potential uses within the general area.

Without the additional requirements imposed in PMC 8.60.141, the building of additional structures using septic systems constitutes a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the community. (Ord. 160, 1985)

8.60.141 Permit required to construct septic tank.
No septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool, subsurface tile line system, or any other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, or any part thereof, shall be installed, constructed, reconstructed, repaired in any manner, or added to, in the City unless there is in effect a valid permit therefor issued by the Director of Public Services meeting all of the following requirements:

A. The Director of Public Services shall review and approve all septic system applications prior to submittal to the San Diego Health Department.

B. No septic system shall be installed on a parcel of land less than one acre in size, unless the Director of Public Services determines that the parcel cannot be economically served by City sewers and is in an area that has not experienced septic system failures in the past.

C. No septic system shall be installed within 200 feet of an intermittent stream unless the entire system, including leach lines, is a minimum of 10 vertical feet above the high water line. This requirement may be modified to meet the requirements of the San Diego County Health Department. (Ord. 655 § 2, 2007; Ord. 180 § 1, 1985; Ord. 160, 1985)

8.60.150 Application for permit – Fee.
A. Any person desiring to install, construct, reconstruct, repair or add to, a septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool, subsurface tile line system, or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, or any part thereof, shall file with the Director a written application for a permit for such installation, construction, reconstruction, repair or addition. A separate application and permit for each installation shall be required. The application shall be made upon a form prescribed and furnished by the Director and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee set forth in this chapter. The application shall contain the following information and such other information as the Director may require:

1. Street name and number of the premises where the installation is to be made;

2. The name and address of the owner;

3. The name and address of the contractor who is to perform the work;

4. The size and type of the septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system to be installed and the number of people it is to serve.

B. When required by the Health Officer, the application shall include or be accompanied by a plan or diagram showing the character and kind of installation to be made and the manner and location in which the work is to be done. The fee for filing all applications pursuant to this section shall be as set forth in PMC 8.20.080. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 23, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.206)

8.60.160 Application for permits requiring no field investigation.
The permit fee for land development applications that are processed without field investigation shall be as set forth in PMC 8.20.080. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 24, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.206.1)

8.60.170 Special project review.
A. Whenever the Health Officer is requested to review and comment on any special project designated by the Department of Development Services, such as a conditional use permit, or any other special project or land development application, the applicant shall complete a written application furnished by the Health Officer requesting the review. This application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in PMC 8.20.080 and any further documents required by the Health Officer to accomplish said review.

B. The Health Officer shall require an investigation be made to determine whether the special project complies with the rules and regulations of the Health Department and to the codes of the State and any regulations issued pursuant thereto pertaining to particular activities subject to regulation therein and whether the activity will result in a violation of such codes and regulations.

C. The Health Officer shall notify the applicant of his reasons for approval or denial in writing. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 25, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.206.2)

8.60.180 Change of location of work by supplemental permit – Fee.
A permittee to whom there has been issued pursuant to this chapter a permit for an installation to be made at a particular location may apply for a supplemental permit authorizing such work to be performed at a different location provided that no work has been commenced at the location specified in the original permit. The application for a supplemental permit shall be made on a form prescribed and furnished by the Director. On receipt of such application and a fee as set forth in PMC 8.20.080, the Director may issue a supplemental permit authorizing the performance of work at the substituted location. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 26, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.207)

8.60.190 Investigation by Director – Director may require percolation test – Denial of permit.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the Director shall make or cause to be made such investigation as he deems necessary. The Director may require the applicant for the permit to furnish him the report of an engineer registered in the State showing that soil percolation tests have been made by such engineer on the site of the proposed subsurface sewage disposal system or unit and the results of such tests.

B. If the Director determines that the location, area, soil porosity, groundwater level, density of population in the area, the number of persons to be served or other conditions would cause the operation of the subsurface sewage disposal unit or system described in the application to create an unsanitary condition endangering public health, he shall not issue the permit for which application was made. In such case the inspection fee shall be refunded. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.208)

8.60.200 Fees required for percolation tests and septic system layout review.
If, pursuant to PMC 8.60.190, a percolation test or septic tank system layout is performed by the City, there shall be paid to the Department a fee as follows: For each septic tank layout submitted, the examination shall be as set forth in PMC 8.20.080 and any reexamination required shall be as set forth in PMC 8.20.080. For each percolation test the examination fee shall be as set forth in PMC 8.20.080(P). (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 27, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.208.1)

8.60.210 Expiration of permit.
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be void at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.330)

8.60.220 Evapotranspiration type systems – Revocation of permits.
A. The Director may revoke any outstanding permit for the installation of an evapotranspiration type system which in the judgment of the Director is not adequate for the lot and its use.

B. Any permittee whose permit is revoked may file an appeal with the Clerk of the Board and shall be entitled to a hearing as prescribed by PMC 5.04.110. The filing of such an appeal shall not stay the order of the Director revoking the permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.330.1)

8.60.230 Director to make inspections.
The Director shall inspect or cause to be inspected in a thorough manner all septic tanks, settling tanks, cesspools and other subsurface sewage disposal units or systems hereafter installed, constructed or reconstructed in the City. It shall be his duty to see that there is compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.331)

8.60.240 Inspection required – Approval.
As soon as the septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system is installed and ready to receive its cover, the person to whom the permit for such unit or system was issued shall notify the Department that such unit or system is ready for inspection. As soon thereafter as practical, the Director shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the work. If the unit or system is approved by the Director, an inspection certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the property where the unit or system is located, which inspection certificate shall note the date and approval and the signature of the Director or the person making the inspection on his behalf. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.332)

8.60.250 Reinspections – Fee.
When an inspection has been ordered and the work is found to be not ready for inspection and approval, the Director shall cause an official notice to be posted on the job stating the changes necessary in order that the work will comply with the requirements of this chapter. As soon thereafter as practicable the owner or contractor shall cause the changes to be made and upon completion thereof shall notify the department that the unit or system is ready for reinspection. As soon thereafter as practicable the Director shall make or cause a reinspection to be made. If upon reinspection the work is approved, a certificate to that effect shall be posted as specified in this chapter. The fee for each reinspection shall be an amount as established by City Council resolution from time to time, which fee shall be paid to the Director. (Ord. 683 § 34, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.333)

8.60.260 Inspection of existing subsurface disposal systems – Fee.
A. Any person desiring the inspection of an existing septic tank, settling tank, cesspool, or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system by the Director shall file with the Director a written request for such inspection accompanied by an inspection fee of an amount as established by City Council resolution from time to time. A separate request for each unit or system shall be required, and the request shall contain such information as the Director may require and shall be made upon a form prescribed and furnished by the Director.

B. As soon after the request is made as is practical, the Director shall make or cause to be made the requested inspection and shall determine whether the inspected unit or system functions satisfactorily in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event that the unit or system is found not to function satisfactorily the Director shall upon written request make or cause to be made a reinspection, and the fee for each such reinspection shall be an amount as established by City Council resolution from time to time, payable to the Director in advance. (Ord. 683 § 35, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.336)

Article V. Specifications

8.60.270 Location of subsurface disposal systems.
A. Any subsurface sewage disposal unit or system or part thereof hereafter constructed or installed in the City shall be so situated as determined by the Director. In determining what is a “safe distance” the Director shall consider the source of possible pollution, the type of soil, surface and subsurface, the type and source of water supply, the geological formation of the ground, the direction of surface drainage, and the depth and direction of groundwater flow.

B. Under no circumstances shall any part of such subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, except the house sewer line, be located closer than 50 feet from any groundwater supply.

C. No part of such subsurface sewage disposal unit or system except the house sewer line, shall be located less than five feet from every building or structure or less than five feet from every property line. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.340)

8.60.280 Construction of house sewer.
Any house sewer line or part thereof hereafter constructed or installed in the City shall be constructed of bell and spigot cast iron pipe with leaded joints when located less than 50 feet from any well used as a domestic water supply. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.341)

8.60.290 Type of subsurface disposal system required.
Any subsurface sewage disposal unit or system hereafter constructed or installed in the City shall consist of a septic tank with effluent discharging into either:

A. A serial distribution system; or

B. A distribution box connected to a subsurface tile system consisting of at least two lateral absorption lines, each of which lines shall not exceed 100 feet in length; provided, that with the approval of the Director such distribution box may be connected to a seepage pit or pits each having at least four feet inside diameter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.342)

8.60.300 Minimum requirements for septic tanks for one-family and two-family residences or small institutions or industries where used by not more than 10 persons.
Any septic tank hereafter constructed or installed in the City shall meet the following minimum specifications:

A. Such tank shall have an inside diameter of at least five feet with a liquid depth of at least four feet. The length of the tank shall not exceed three times the width of such tank. Such tank shall have a liquid capacity of not less than 1,000 gallons. Such tank shall have at least two compartments, and a manhole with a minimum diameter or width of 22 inches shall be installed in each compartment, over the inlet and outlet pipe.

B. The inlet and the outlet of such tank shall each be a vertical four-inch diameter “T” extending such a distance below the liquid level that 40 percent of the liquid depth is below it, and extending a minimum of six inches above the liquid level of the tank. The outlet shall be two inches below the inlet.

C. Such tank shall be watertight and shall be constructed of concrete, concrete block, brick or tile. The top of such tank shall be constructed of reinforced concrete at least four inches thick. When such tank is constructed, the walls and bottom of the tank shall be at least six inches thick and shall be adequately reinforced with steel or other approved material. The concrete used for such tanks shall contain one part cement, two parts sharp sand and four parts crushed rock or gravel. Where brick, concrete block, or tile is used in the construction of such tank, the inside shall be plastered with Portland cement mortar composed of one part cement and three parts sand. The side walls of such tank shall be adequately reinforced with steel or other approved material so as to withstand any inside or outside pressure.

D. The line from such septic tank to the distribution box shall be constructed of watertight bell and spigot pipe, or such other pipe with watertight joints that the Director may approve. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.343)

8.60.310 Minimum requirements for distribution box.
Any distribution box hereafter constructed or installed in the City shall meet the following minimum specifications:

A. Such distribution box shall be watertight and shall be constructed of the same materials authorized for construction of a septic tank. The inner surface of the distribution box shall have a protective coating of Hunt’s Emulsion, or some other protective coating equal thereto in the opinion of the Director.

B. The outlets from such distribution box shall have exactly the same elevation and shall be located at least two inches above the bottom of the box. The inlet to such distribution box shall be one inch above the elevation of the outlets.

C. Such distribution box shall be connected to a subsurface tile system consisting of at least two lateral absorption lines; provided, that one or more seepage pits may be substituted for or used in conjunction with lateral absorption lines when approved by the Director.

D. All lines leading from the distribution box to the lateral absorption lines or to seepage pits shall be constructed with watertight joints. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.344)

8.60.320 Minimum requirements for disposal lines.
Any subsurface tile system hereafter constructed or installed in the City for the purpose of disposing of the effluent from a septic tank shall meet the following minimum specifications:

A. Such tile system shall consist of at least two lateral absorption lines totaling at least 200 feet in length; provided, however, that no line shall exceed 100 feet in length. The lines shall be approximately equal in length, with a maximum variation of 10 percent between the longest line and the shortest.

B. Lateral absorption lines shall be constructed of tile pipe spaced one-quarter inch apart so as to provide open joints. The upper one-half of each open joint shall be covered with tar paper or copper screen.

C. Each lateral absorption line shall be placed in a trench 36 inches deep and 18 inches wide, which trench shall contain at least 21 inches of rock or gravel grading one to one and one-half inches. At least 12 inches of such rock or gravel shall be beneath the bottom of the line, and four inches of such rock and gravel shall be over the top of the line.

D. Lateral absorption lines shall have a grade of two inches per 100 feet with not more than 50 percent variation either way.

E. Lateral absorption lines shall not be more than 36 inches below the surface of the ground, without the prior approval of the Director.

F. Every lateral absorption line shall be at least 10 feet from every other lateral absorption line. All bends used in the disposal field shall have one tight joint to each end of the bend. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.345)

8.60.330 Substitution of seepage pit for tile system upon approval of Director.
A seepage pit or series of seepage pits may be substituted for or used in conjunction with a subsurface tile system, when such substitution or use is approved by the Director; provided, however, no seepage pit shall be permitted where the Director determines that its use might contaminate or pollute an underground water supply. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.346)

8.60.340 Minimum requirements for seepage pits.
Any seepage pit hereafter constructed or installed in the City shall meet the following minimum specifications:

A. Such seepage pit shall be not less than four feet inside diameter and shall be constructed to a depth where the side wall area of the seepage pit will have sufficient porosity to provide adequate drainage as determined by the Director.

B. Such seepage pit shall be either rectangular or round. In the case of a rectangular shape, such seepage pit shall be constructed of brick, concrete block, and/or two-inch redwood plank securely braced with four-inch by four-inch redwood timber. In the case of a round shape, such seepage pit shall be constructed of brick, concrete block, and/or one-inch redwood boards of full thickness with supporting two-inch by three-inch redwood timbers placed every five feet so as to form a securely braced octagon shape.

C. The top of such seepage pit shall be covered with a concrete slab or cover constructed of concrete reinforced with steel or other approved material, which slab or cover shall extend not less than 18 inches beyond the outside of the side walls of the seepage pit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.347)

8.60.350 Minimum standards applicable to systems serving one-family or two-family residences or small institutions or industries where used by not more than 10 persons.
The minimum standards for septic tanks, distribution boxes, tile lines and seepage pits as set forth in this chapter are the minimum standards for a subsurface sewage disposal system or unit serving a one-family or two-family residence or small institution or industry having sanitary facilities used by not more than 10 persons. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.348)

8.60.360 Special approval required for systems serving multiple dwellings or institutions or industries where used by more than 10 persons.
Every applicant for a permit to install or construct a subsurface sewage disposal system or unit to serve residences, institutions or industries, other than a one-family or two-family residence or a small institution or industry having sanitary facilities used by more than 10 persons, shall submit to the Director for approval the detailed plans and specifications of the proposed subsurface sewage disposal system. Upon the filing of the required application, accompanied by such detailed plans and specifications, the payment of the fee hereinbefore prescribed and the approval of such plans and specifications by the Director, the Director shall issue a permit for the construction of such subsurface sewage disposal system. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.349)

8.60.370 Provisions not to be construed to prevent the Director from imposing additional requirements.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the Director from requiring compliance with higher or more stringent requirements or specifications than those contained in this chapter where compliance with such higher or more stringent requirements or specifications is necessary to maintain a sanitary condition. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.350)

8.60.380 Provisions not to be construed to prevent the Director from reducing requirements.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the Director from establishing lower or less stringent requirements or specifications than those contained in this chapter in such cases where a subsurface sewage disposal unit or system may be maintained at such lower or less stringent requirements or specifications in a sanitary condition without detriment to the public health or safety. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.351)

Article VI. Miscellaneous Provisions

8.60.390 Cross-connections prohibited.
No person shall install or permit to be installed an interconnection between a drinking water supply and any equipment or connection of any kind, class, or description which may contain water or any liquid or substance unfit for human or domestic consumption. The Director shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine if such conditions exist, and if such interconnections are discovered the Director shall require the City to discontinue water service unless the condition is abated within a reasonable period of time fixed by the Director. No device shall be sold in the City which provides such an interconnection as a means of operation unless the water supply is adequately protected. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.240)

8.60.400 Surface water not permitted in subsurface disposal system.
No opening shall be provided in any drainage system or in any septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool or other subsurface disposal unit or system for the purpose of receiving the surface drainage from any yard or building. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.241)

8.60.410 Covering work before approval prohibited.
No person shall cover or cause to be covered any septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool, subsurface tile line system, or other subsurface disposal system or unit prior to its approval by the Director as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.242)

8.60.420 Connecting plumbing to unapproved disposal system prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to connect any house sewer line or other plumbing to a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system hereafter installed, constructed or reconstructed, unless such septic tank, settling tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system has been approved by the Director as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.243)

8.60.430 Disinfection of privy vault, privy, cesspool or water closet.
No privy vault, privy, cesspool, or water closet shall be allowed by the owner or other person in charge of the premises upon which the same may be situated to become foul or offensive; and when, in the opinion of the Director any such privy, vault, or closet or cesspool shall need cleaning or disinfecting, it shall be the duty of said Director to notify such owner or other person having control to abate the same by such disinfecting or cleaning as in the judgment of said Director may be necessary, or in the case of a defective or offensive cesspool the owner, if deemed necessary by the Director, shall connect the premises to an available public sewer or construct a new sewage disposal system that meets the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.244)

Chapter 8.64
SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOL CLEANERS
Sections:

8.64.010    Definitions.

8.64.020    Examination fee.

8.64.030    Delinquent examination fee.

8.64.040    Annual registration fee – Ten percent penalty for delinquency.

8.64.050    Vehicle registration fee – Ten percent penalty for delinquency.

8.64.060    Equipment standards.

8.64.070    Fees deposited in treasury.

8.64.080    Examination of equipment.

8.64.090    Reports to Health Officer.

8.64.100    Dumping sites.

8.64.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall be defined as follows:

A. “Cesspools,” “septic tanks,” “seepage pits” include all manner of sewage disposal other than regular sewage disposal plants and systems operated by a political subdivision and holding a valid permit from the Department of Public Health of the State.

B. “Sewage pumping vehicle” means any vehicle used for the collection and transportation of sewage. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.441)

8.64.020 Examination fee.
Whenever any person not previously registered applies for examination as a septic tank or cesspool cleaner, said examination to be conducted by the Health Officer as provided in Section 25004 of the Health and Safety Code of the State, he shall pay to the Health Officer an examination fee as set forth in PMC 8.20.080(Q). In the event the applicant is unsuccessful in such examination no part of said examination fee shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 28, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.442)

8.64.030 Delinquent examination fee.
In any case where the applicant has failed for a period of 30 days to apply for the examination and pay the examination fee required by this chapter, there shall be added to and collected with the examination fee a penalty equal to 10 percent of the fee; and for each additional month or fraction of a month after the expiration of said 30-day period that the applicant fails to make such application and pay said fee there shall be added to and collected with the examination fee an additional penalty equal to 10 percent of the fee; provided, however, in no event shall the total penalty added to the examination fee pursuant to this section be more than 60 percent of the examination fee. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this code or prosecution for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.443)

8.64.040 Annual registration fee – Ten percent penalty for delinquency.
In addition to the examination fee provided in PMC 8.64.020, there is imposed an annual registration fee upon each person registered as a septic tank or cesspool cleaner under the provisions of Chapter 6, Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code of the State. Said registration fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time and shall be paid to the Health Officer as set forth in PMC 8.20.080. (Ord. 683 § 36, 2008; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 29, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.444)

8.64.050 Vehicle registration fee – Ten percent penalty for delinquency.
There is imposed an annual registration fee, as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, for each seepage pumping vehicle. Said registration fee shall be paid to the Health Officer as set forth in PMC 8.20.080. (Ord. 683 § 37, 2008; Ord. 67 § 1, 1982; CC Ord. 6378 § 30, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.444a)

8.64.060 Equipment standards.
A. All trucks used in the transportation and collection of sewage shall be in good mechanical condition and otherwise maintained in an overall reasonable state of good repair. Said trucks shall have the name, address, and phone number of the permittee displayed on both sides of the vehicle, in letters not less than three inches high. Such lettering shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle by painting, permanent decal, or other method approved by the Department of Health Services.

B. Trucks used exclusively for pumping and servicing chemical toilets shall have a minimum tank capacity of 150 gallons. Trucks used for pumping and servicing cesspools, septic tanks, and seepage pits shall have a minimum tank capacity of 1,000 gallons.

C. Trucks used in the transportation and collection of sewage shall have closed, leakproof steel tanks with watertight main valves. Each truck shall have an approved pumping system operated by manifold vacuum, power takeoff, or auxiliary engine.

D. Vacuum hose shall be maintained in a leakproof condition. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.444b)

8.64.070 Fees deposited in treasury.
All sums received by the Health Officer as fees or charges pursuant to this chapter shall be forthwith deposited with the County Treasurer for the use and benefit of the County. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.445)

8.64.080 Examination of equipment.
The Health Officer shall examine all equipment used in processing septic tanks, cesspools and seepage pits owned or under the control of each person regulated under the provisions of this chapter at regular intervals not to exceed 90 days after said permit is granted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.446)

8.64.090 Reports to Health Officer.
Whenever a person cleans a septic tank or cesspool, he shall notify the Health Officer or his duly authorized representative upon the form adopted by the Director of Public Health. Said form shall contain information such as location of septic tanks, cesspools, and seepage pits, location of the disposal site, where sewage effluent or other material has been finally disposed of, or any other information which the Health Officer may require. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.447)

8.64.100 Dumping sites.
No waste shall be deposited in any location other than those approved in writing by the Health Officer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.448)

Chapter 8.68
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

8.68.010    Findings and intent.

8.68.020    Definitions.

8.68.030    Mandatory separation of recyclables, collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclables.

8.68.040    Accumulation of materials constituting a hazard prohibited.

8.68.050    Solid waste – Disposal in public places prohibited.

8.68.060    Solid waste generated off site – Placement in City waste containers prohibited.

8.68.070    Solid waste – Disposal on private property prohibited – Exception.

8.68.080    Solid waste – Interference with collection and scavenging prohibited.

8.68.090    Solid waste – Burying and burning prohibited.

Article II. Collection, Storage, Processing, Disposal

8.68.100    Residential solid waste collection services – Frequency.

8.68.105    Multifamily central collection services – Frequency.

8.68.110    Residential collection – Special services – Additional services to be provided.

8.68.120    Residential collection – Hours of collection.

8.68.130    Residential collection – Containers.

8.68.145    Residential collection – Placement of containers for collection.

8.68.150    Commercial collection.

8.68.155    Commercial collection services – Frequency.

8.68.160    Commercial collection – Additional services to be provided.

8.68.165    Commercial collection – Hours of collection.

8.68.170    Commercial collection – Solid waste containers.

8.68.175    Commercial collection – Placement of containers for collection.

8.68.180    City facilities collection services – Frequency.

8.68.185    Collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste.

8.68.190    Collection, transportation and disposal – Litter abatement.

8.68.195    Processing of solid waste.

Article III. California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB 939): Operational and Reporting Requirements

8.68.200    Recycling programs.

8.68.210    Solid waste diversion.

8.68.220    AB 939 reporting requirements.

Article IV. Operating Standards

8.68.300    Vehicle and equipment standards.

8.68.305    Performance standards.

8.68.310    Collection standards.

8.68.315    Customer service standards.

8.68.320    Service complaints.

8.68.325    Review of performance and quality of service and industry changes.

Article V. Franchise Regulations

8.68.330    Prohibited collection and transportation.

8.68.335    Contents of franchise agreement – Resolution of conflicts.

8.68.340    Franchisee franchise fee.

8.68.345    Assignment.

8.68.350    Subcontracting.

8.68.360    Revocation or suspension of franchise.

8.68.370    Rates.

8.68.375    Billing and collection of rates, fees and charges.

8.68.380    Failure or refusal to pay.

8.68.385    Collection of charges.

8.68.390    Payment under protest.

Article VI. Exclusions

8.68.400    Scope of franchise – Exclusions.

8.68.410    Exclusions for recyclables.

8.68.420    Franchisee’s inability to provide service.

8.68.430    Commercial collection – Franchisee’s inability to provide specialized service.

8.68.440    Collection in emergencies.

Article VII. Special Permits

8.68.500    Prohibition.

8.68.510    Application.

8.68.530    Permit requirements.

8.68.540    Permit conditions.

Article VIII. Administrative Requirements

8.68.600    Indemnification of City.

8.68.610    Exclusion for other government agencies.

8.68.620    Insurance.

8.68.630    Faithful performance security.

8.68.640    Penalty.

8.68.650    Severability.

Article I. General Provisions

8.68.010 Findings and intent.
A. The City Council finds and determines as follows:

1. The City is responsible to protect its citizens against nuisances derived from solid waste by providing solid waste handling services including, but not limited to, source reduction, recycling, composting activities, and the collection, transfer and disposal of solid waste and litter.

2. In order to meet the requirements of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, including source reduction of the solid waste stream, diversion of solid waste from landfills, and conservation of natural resources, it is necessary to regulate the collection of solid waste from residential and commercial premises, and to require recycling of solid waste materials.

3. The mandates of the Environmental Protection Agency and other regulatory agencies, with respect to air pollution and traffic congestion management, require the regulation, and, where possible, reduction in the number of waste collection vehicles and vehicle trips which cause the discharge of air contaminants and create air pollution.

4. A reduction in the number of heavy waste collection vehicles using the City streets daily will reduce traffic hazards and congestion and promote safety.

5. The storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of solid waste, including, without limitation, garbage, trash, debris, litter, and other discarded materials is a matter of substantial public concern in that improper control of such matters may create a public nuisance, air pollution, fire hazard, rat and insect infestation, and other problems affecting the public health, safety and welfare.

6. Regulation of the collection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables in the City will provide the most orderly and efficient solution to such problems and will promote the public health, safety and welfare.

7. The regulation of solid waste handling services in the City will also promote the public health, safety and welfare by requiring the use of newer and safer vehicles, the regular maintenance of such vehicles, and the reduction of spillage and litter in the public streets, by establishing accountability for the cleaning of solid waste bins and containers, and by providing for accountability to the public.

8. The public health, safety and welfare will best be served by providing for an exclusive franchise for residential and commercial solid waste and recyclable materials collection services.

B. This chapter is enacted by the City Council pursuant to the following statutory authorization and in order to accomplish the objectives set forth in this section:

1. Public Resources Code Section 40059 authorizes the City to determine (i) all aspects of solid waste handling which are of local concern, including, but not limited to, frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of services, charges and fees, and nature, location and extent of providing solid waste handling services; and (ii) that the services are to be provided by means of an exclusive franchise. The City Council finds that the public health, safety and well-being require that the services be provided by exclusive franchise, with or without competitive bidding.

2. Public Resources Code Section 49300 provides that the City may, pursuant to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by its legislative body, contract for the collection or disposal, or both, of garbage, waste, refuse, offal, trimmings, or other refuse matter.

3. It is the intent of this chapter to set forth terms and conditions pursuant to which authorization may be granted by the City Council to provide solid waste handling services, and to promote the public health, welfare and safety of the community by establishing reasonable regulations relating to the storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables.

4. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws. If any Federal or State agency shall hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt only those provisions hereof necessary and indispensable to the exercise of such paramount jurisdiction; all other provisions hereof shall be severed from the provisions preempted and shall remain in full force and effect. Modification of a Federal or State law or regulation shall, to the extent applicable to the City, be deemed a part of this chapter as of the effective date of such modification. (Ord. 659 §§ 2, 3, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as hereafter defined, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended by the legislative body.

“Bulky items” means stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, water heaters, washing machines, broken or discarded furniture, rubbish and debris from building construction, rocks, sod, earth and other bulky materials. Bulky items eligible for curbside pickup on normal collection days include items weighing no more than 50 pounds, no longer than four feet in length, and no greater than three feet in diameter. Larger items will be collected, but only “on call” and at an additional, published, one-time expense.

“City” means the City of Poway, a municipal corporation of the State of California.

“City Council” means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Poway.

“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Poway or City Manager’s designee.

“Collection” means the operation of gathering together within the City, and transporting by means of motor vehicle to the point of disposal or processing, any solid waste recyclables, yard waste, or other compostables.

“Commercial occupant” means every owner of, and every tenant or person who is in possession of or has the care and control of, a place of business.

“Commercial premises” means all occupied real property in the City, except property occupied by Federal, State or local governmental agencies which do not consent to their inclusion, and except residential premises as defined in this section, and shall include, without limitation, wholesale and retail establishments, restaurants and other food establishments, bars, stores, shops, offices, industrial establishments, manufacturing establishments, service stations, repair, research and development establishments, professional services, sports or recreational facilities, construction and demolition sites, and any other commercial or industrial business facilities, structures, sites, or establishments in the City.

“Compostables” means organic wastes that are source separated from the solid waste stream or which are separated at a centralized facility that can be biologically decomposed under controlled, aerobic or anaerobic conditions to produce a product that can be reused.

“Container” means any vessel, tank, receptacle, box or bin used or intended to be used in the storage or collection of recyclable materials or in the process of recycling, or for the purpose of holding solid waste for storage or collection.

“Contractor” means any person or business concern authorized by the City’s special permit or business license, separate from the exclusive franchise, to provide solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables collection and disposal services.

“Director of Public Works” means the Director of Public Works for the City of Poway or Director’s designee.

“Disposal” means the management of solid waste through landfill disposal or transformation at a permitted solid waste facility after the collection thereof.

“Disposal site” means the permitted place, location, tract of land, area or premises in use, intended to be used, or which has been used, for the disposal of solid waste.

“Franchisee” means any person or business concern who has been awarded an exclusive franchise by the City to provide residential and commercial/industrial solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables collection services.

“Garbage” includes, but is not restricted to, all animal and vegetable refuse from kitchens and household waste that shall have been prepared for, or intended to be used as, or shall have resulted from the preparation of food; all table refuse; every accumulation of animal and vegetable refuse that attends the preparation, consumption, decay, dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fruits or vegetables; and offal, animal excreta or the carcasses of animals, fish or fowl.

Hazardous Waste.

1. “Hazardous waste” means a waste, or combination of wastes as defined by Federal or State guidelines, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may do each of the following: (i) cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; (ii) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed.

2. “Hazardous waste” includes extremely hazardous waste and acutely hazardous waste, and such other waste as may hereafter from time to time be designated as such by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or other agency of the United States Government, or by the California Legislature or any agency of the State of California empowered by law to classify or designate waste as hazardous, extremely hazardous or acutely hazardous.

“Holiday” means the following holidays: New Year’s Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Thanksgiving Day; Christmas Day, and President’s Day. “Holiday” also means any other day designated as such in a contract between a contractor and the labor union serving as the exclusive representative of said contractor’s employees, provided such holiday is established or recognized by the City.

“Household hazardous waste” means those wastes resulting from products purchased by the general public for household use which, because of their quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may pose a substantial known or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, disposed, or otherwise managed.

“Local agency” means any county, city or district having the authority to provide solid waste handling services either by the agency itself or by authorizing or permitting other local agencies or solid waste enterprises to provide solid waste handling services.

“Person” means an individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever.

“Pollutants” means and includes, but is not limited to, solid waste, sewage, garbage, medical waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, radioactive materials, dredged spoil, rock, sand, sediment, silt, industrial waste, and any organic or inorganic substance defined as a pollutant under 40 CFR 122.2 whose presence degrades the quality of the receiving waters in violation of basin plan and California ocean plan standards such as fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, enterococcus, volatile organic carbon, surfactants, oil and grease, petroleum hydrocarbons, total organic carbon, lead, copper, chromium, cadmium, silver, nickel, zinc, cyanides, phenols, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and other biocides. A pollutant also includes any contaminant which degrades the quality of the receiving waters in violation of basin plan and California ocean plan standards by altering any of the following parameters: pH, total suspended and settleable solids, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), nutrients, temperature, and other narrative standards of the basin plan.

“Recyclable” means recyclable materials and refers to materials generated on or emanating from residential or commercial premises and no longer useful or wanted thereon that are separated from other types of solid waste, or collected separately from other types of solid waste and made available for reuse, or which may be used as raw material in the manufacture of new products. The following materials are currently recyclable: glass bottles and jars – any food or beverage container (excluding dishware, ceramics and chemical containers); aluminum cans, foil, pie tins and similar items; steel or bimetal cans not to exceed one gallon size; PET – plastic soda bottles or other bottles with the designated “PET” symbol; HDPE – plastic milk and water bottles with the designated “HDPE” symbol (excluding detergent or bleach bottles); newspaper; cardboard – separated and not having waxed surfaces; mixed paper including magazines, junk mail, catalogs, paper bags, and telephone books; computer printout (excluding carbon); and white ledger – white bond paper, office paper, white envelopes (excluding coated paper); and such additional materials as the City Manager may designate from time to time.

“Refuse” means garbage, commercial garbage and rubbish, excepting therefrom hazardous or bulky items.

“Residential occupant” means every owner of, and every tenant, or person who occupies or is in possession of or has the care and control of, residential premises.

“Residential premises” means each place used for residential purposes for a single family, including, without limitation, multiple-unit residential complexes, such as rental housing projects, condominiums, apartment houses, mixed condominiums and rental housing, and mobile home parks. No places used primarily for business purposes shall be considered as a residential unit.

“Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible solid waste.

Solid Waste.

1. “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, pollutants, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge, grit and screenings which are not hazardous, residue or nonprocessable waste from solid waste disposal facilities including material recovery, composting and transformation facilities, sod, concrete and similar materials.

2. “Solid waste” does not include hazardous waste or low-level radioactive waste regulated under Chapter 7.6 (commencing with Section 25800) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code.

Solid Waste Management Facility.

1. “Solid waste management facility” means the operations premises of a duly licensed solid waste handling operator who receives, stores, transfers, or otherwise processes wastes as an activity incidental to the conduct of a solid waste collection and disposal business in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to Section 43309 of the California Public Resources Code.

2. “Solid waste management facility” includes a solid waste transfer or processing station, a composting facility, a transformation facility, and a disposal facility.

“Source separated” means the segregation, by the generator, of materials designated for separate collection for some form of materials recovery, recycling, or special handling.

“Stormwater” means surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events and snowmelt that flows across a surface to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters. For the purposes of this chapter, stormwater runoff and drainage from areas that are in a natural state, have not been significantly disturbed or altered, either directly or indirectly, as a result of human activity, and the character and type of pollutants naturally appearing in the runoff have not been significantly altered, either directly or indirectly, as a result of human activity, shall be considered “unpolluted” and shall satisfy the definition of “stormwater” in this chapter.

“Stormwater conveyance system” means private, natural and publicly owned facilities within the City of Poway by which stormwater may be conveyed to receiving waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, pipes, natural and manmade channels or storm drains.

“Waste diversion” means to divert solid waste, in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local requirements, from disposal at solid waste landfills or transformation facilities through source reduction, recycling or composting.

“Waste generator” means any person whose act or process produces solid waste, or whose act first causes solid waste to become subject to regulation.

“White goods” means kitchen or other large enameled appliances which includes, but is not limited to, refrigerators, washers, and dryers.

“Wood wastes” means solid waste consisting of wood pieces or particles which are generated from the manufacturing or production of wood products, harvesting, processing or storage of raw wood materials, or construction and demolition activities.

“Yard waste” means green waste or any wastes generated from the maintenance or alteration of public, commercial, or residential landscapes including, but not limited to, yard clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, prunings, brush and weeds. (Ord. 659 § 4, 2007; Ord. 496 § 2, 1998; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.030 Mandatory separation of recyclables, collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclables.
A. Mandatory Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials. All solid waste created, produced or accumulated in or about residential premises or commercial premises in the City shall be mandatorily collected from the residential premises and commercial premises at least once per week. The San Diego County Health Department may require more frequent collections. Every residential occupant and commercial occupant shall use the services of the franchisee having the exclusive franchise for collecting solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables. The City Council may authorize the collection of solid waste to prevent its entry into the stormwater conveyance system and the waters of the State through contracts for services or through the use of City forces. No residential occupant or commercial occupant shall enter into an agreement for residential solid waste collection services or commercial solid waste collection services with a person other than the exclusive franchisee, except as specified otherwise in this chapter. It is declared to be unlawful for the occupant of any of the above-described premises to fail or neglect to provide for the removal of solid waste, or the reasonable separation of recyclables, yard waste and other compostables as required herein. Each day’s violation of this section shall be treated and considered as a separate and distinct offense.

B. Exemptions. An exemption to the mandatory collection requirement of this section shall be granted upon application by the residential occupant or commercial occupant with sufficient proof of use of a City-approved solid waste and recyclables collection alternative. Said exemption shall be obtained in accordance with the process established and implemented by the City. An exemption shall be granted only under specifically enumerated administrative circumstances. All exemptions shall be subject to renewal annually. Those who have been granted exemptions may, from time to time, be required to provide proof-positive of their using an acceptable alternative to the franchise. An individual property owner’s or tenant’s failure to provide sufficient proof of use of a City-approved solid waste and recyclable materials collection alternative shall be a violation of this section. An exemption is nontransferable to any new owner of any given residence or commercial/industrial establishment. (Ord. 659 § 5, 2007; Ord. 496 § 2, 1998; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.040 Accumulation of materials constituting a hazard prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to create, or allow to be created or maintained upon any premises in the City, owned, occupied or managed by such person, any accumulation of materials that are dangerous as a fire menace or hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.050 Solid waste – Disposal in public places prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to place, dump, deposit or throw any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, compostables, or other refuse or debris of any kind or character whatsoever upon or along the right-of-way of any public highway, street, lane, alley or upon any other public place within the City.

Dumping, depositing, or throwing any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, compostables, or other refuse or debris of any kind or character whatsoever, outside the City and in an unauthorized manner may be subject to prosecution by that jurisdiction’s authority. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.060 Solid waste generated off site – Placement in City waste containers prohibited.
City waste containers are placed in City parks and other public areas for the use of the public to control trash, litter and garbage which is generated at their respective location. Such waste containers are not to be used as disposal sites for trash or rubbish which is generated off site. It is unlawful for any person to place, dump, deposit or throw away solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, or other refuse or debris of any kind or character whatsoever in City waste containers if such was generated at a location other than where the waste container is located. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.070 Solid waste – Disposal on private property prohibited – Exception.
It is unlawful for any person to place, dump, deposit or throw away any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other refuse or debris of any kind or character whatsoever, upon any private property adjacent to or abutting upon any public highway, or public place, or upon any private property whatsoever, within the City unless such person first obtains the permission of the owner of such property to do so. It is unlawful for such person to deposit or place such materials in any waste container owned or used by the owner of such property unless such person first obtains the permission of the owner to do so. It is further unlawful for such persons to commingle their solid waste materials with that of another thereby avoiding payment for solid waste and recycling services under the franchise. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.080 Solid waste – Interference with collection and scavenging prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person other than the franchisee to interfere in any manner with any container or receptacle containing solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other refuse or debris of any kind or character, or the contents thereof, or to remove any such container from the location where the same was placed by the owner thereof or the occupant of the property, or to remove the contents of any such container. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.090 Solid waste – Burying and burning prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to burn or bury any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other compostables as a means of disposing of said solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other compostables. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

Article II. Collection, Storage, Processing, Disposal

8.68.100 Residential solid waste collection services – Frequency.
A. Franchisee shall collect and deliver to the appropriate solid waste facility, not less frequently than once per week, all solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables generated at single- and multi-unit residential premises within the City and placed for collection. Rates (fee) shall be established for weekly curbside collection of at least two variable sizes of solid waste carts for automated collection service. Customers shall place all solid waste within the franchisee-provided waste cart, which shall remain the property of the franchisee.

B. Service to residential customers shall also include an annual community clean-up event for nonhazardous bulky items. The date(s) for the community clean-up event shall be determined and announced by the City Council.

C. Recyclable materials shall be placed by residents in a separate collection cart(s) provided by the franchisee for automated collection service, which shall remain the property of the franchisee. The cart shall be placed at the curb, except as otherwise specified in the franchise agreement or this chapter. It is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor for the occupant to fail or neglect to reasonably and routinely separate recyclables as required herein. Occupants of residential premises shall be required to bundle and tie all wood waste in lengths not to exceed four feet with a diameter of three feet. Franchisee shall also include the collection and recycling, at no additional charge, of telephone books and Christmas trees. The City may, at its discretion, add other materials to be recycled at any time during the term of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 592 § 2, 2004; Ord. 496 § 2, 1998)

8.68.105 Multifamily central collection services – Frequency.
Franchisee shall provide weekly pickup of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables at central locations on the complex premises from standard bins for multifamily residential premises where bills for service are sent to a complex owner, central manager, or association. Additional pickups (unscheduled) shall be made available as requested by the complex management. Multifamily residents shall be provided one container to place within their unit for commingled recyclables. Multifamily residents shall further sort recyclables into centrally located containers. The City may, at its discretion, add other materials to be recycled during the term of the franchise agreement.

Where multifamily, centrally billed customers find it convenient to their residents and acceptable to the franchisee, curbside collection of general refuse and recyclables can be provided similar to the service provided to single-family residential premises. Rates (fees) may be adjusted to accommodate the offset in administrative expense not borne by the franchisee under this centrally billed arrangement. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.110 Residential collection – Special services – Additional services to be provided.
A. Franchisee shall provide special on-call collection and disposal service of bulky items, and special roll-out “scout” services for those residents requesting such services at such rates as may be established and approved in the franchise agreement.

B. Special bin service and special container service shall be made available to all customers on the same basis as that provided to commercial customers under PMC 8.68.160.

C. During the term of the franchise agreement, when such is declared by the City Council to be part of an annual clean-up campaign, the franchisee shall coordinate an annual clean-up event for the disposal of bulky items such as, but not limited to, the following: furniture – chairs, sofas, mattresses, rugs, etc.; appliances – washers, dryers, water heaters, plumbing fixtures, refrigerators, TV’s, small household appliances, etc.; residential wood waste – tree branches, scrap wood, etc.; and scrap metal. Franchisee’s obligations and the determination of materials to be collected or specifically excluded from collection shall be delineated in the franchise agreement. This annual clean-up event will be conducted at no cost to the customer (except that a surcharge may be applied to the disposal of refrigerators or other appliances containing freon or similar contaminants, or monitors containing lead or other contaminants requiring special handling). Those residents exempted from using the mandatory franchise service, as described in PMC 8.68.030(B), are not eligible to participate in the “free” clean-up event nor are residents from outside the City. (Ord. 592 § 2, 2004; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.120 Residential collection – Hours of collection.
Unless the City Council determines and directs otherwise, the franchisee shall not allow the collection of any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other compostables to be made except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. within or near residential areas, and only Monday through Friday. Collection may be made on Saturday if a holiday occurs within the preceding week or if inclement weather precludes collection on a weekday. There shall be no pickup on Sundays. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.130 Residential collection – Containers.
Franchisee shall provide residential customers appropriate containers for automated collection of solid waste and recyclables. Two variable container sizes shall be made available to residential customers for the storage and collection of solid waste.

Until implementation of any automated service program for the collection of yard waste or other compostables as may be later directed, the standard size container for residential yard waste collection services shall not exceed a standard 32-gallon container or 50 pounds, unless otherwise agreed to by the City Council. The combined weight of the container and contents shall not exceed 50 pounds unless the container is designed and franchisee equipped for mechanical lifting. Franchisee shall affix to every metal or plastic waste container which no longer holds yard waste or other compostables without spilling or leaking, a bilingual, Spanish/English red tag advising that such a container is unsuitable for presenting yard waste or other compostables for collection and the continued use of that container will result in its disposal. (Ord. 592 § 2, 2004; Ord. 496 § 2, 1998)

8.68.145 Residential collection – Placement of containers for collection.
Occupants and owners of residential premises shall set out or place containers for the collection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other compostables as follows:

A. Proper Placement of Containers. Any container or receptacle for the purpose of storage and removal of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables shall be placed at the curb in front of the owned or occupied premises, there to be collected by the franchisee; provided, that the franchisee may designate some other location for the placement of containers and receptacles when such placement will expedite collection.

B. Improper Placement of Containers. No residential owner or occupant shall place, or permit to be placed, any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, or other compostables containers in any public highway or in any place or in any manner other than provided in subsection A of this section. Any containers and materials not properly placed for collection shall be tagged by the franchisee with a Spanish/English red tag explaining the reason for noncollection.

C. Timing of Placement and Removal of Containers. Residential owners or occupants shall not place containers for solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other compostables for collection at any time other than the days established by the franchisee, and then, no earlier than sunset of the day preceding the day designated for collection. All containers for solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables shall be removed from the place of collection prior to midnight of the day the containers have been emptied. Residents shall be mindful (and the franchisee shall make periodic announcements to confirm) that services are not provided on certain recognized holidays and that service normally scheduled for that holiday will be provided the following normal working day.

D. Repair and Replacement. Each owner or occupant of residential premises shall provide reasonable supervision over the containers for yard waste and other compostables on the premises and shall maintain the same in a sanitary condition. Franchisee shall repair or replace all customer-owned residential containers damaged by collection operations, normal wear and tear excluded. Franchisee shall retain ownership of automated containers provided to residents for the purpose of storing solid waste and recyclables. Franchisee shall replace and/or repair damaged automated containers during the term of the franchise agreement. If the containers or receptacles should not be emptied and the contents removed on the date and time scheduled by the franchisee, occupant shall immediately notify the franchisee and it shall be the duty of the franchisee to forthwith arrange for the collection and disposal of the solid waste, yard waste, and other compostables, and/or collection of recyclables. However, should the owner or occupant fail to place the materials at the designated location in time for regular collection, the franchisee is not obligated to make a special, separate collection for the convenience of the occupant and may require payment of an additional fee for such late collection. (Ord. 592 § 2, 2004; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.150 Commercial collection.
Franchisee shall collect and dispose of all solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables generated and presented for collection at each commercial premises in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any such collection and disposal shall be in accordance with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations and any controlling permit or franchise agreement between the franchisee and the City. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.155 Commercial collection services – Frequency.
Franchisee shall collect and deliver to the appropriate solid waste management facility all solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables generated by customers at commercial premises within the City who have contracted for services and delivered their materials to a bin or otherwise properly placed for collection; service shall be provided not less than once per week.

Franchisee may subcontract with commercial firms (subcontractors) to collect and dispose of waste materials which franchisee is not licensed to remove and which present specialized problems. Such collections shall be performed with suitably licensed collection/disposal firms in accordance with PMC 8.68.350.

Service to commercial customers shall include providing suitable bins for the collection and disposal of general refuse according to a frequency as individually contracted by the customer. This service shall also include collection and recycling of green waste, aluminum, newspaper, glass, plastic, metal cans, cardboard, mixed paper, and office ledger paper. The City may, at its discretion, add other materials to be recycled during the term of the franchise agreement. The franchisee shall provide consultative services, at no additional charge, to commercial, industrial and multifamily (central collection bins) customers to assist in setting up effective recycling and waste minimization programs. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.160 Commercial collection – Additional services to be provided.
A. Special Bin Service. Three cubic yard bins and roll-off containers shall be made available to customers on a rental basis for one-time, short-term requirements.

B. Special Container Service. Bins and containers shall be offered to customers on special or regular service with locking lid set-up. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.165 Commercial collection – Hours of collection.
Collection at commercial premises shall be permitted beginning at 6:00 a.m. provided that there are no complaints from residents about the early morning noise disruption. Commercial collections may continue until 6:00 p.m. and shall be allowed Monday through Saturday. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.170 Commercial collection – Solid waste containers.
Franchisee shall provide bins and debris boxes for storage of solid waste which shall be designed and constructed to be watertight and prevent the leakage of liquids. All containers with a capacity of one cubic yard or more shall meet applicable Federal regulations on solid waste bin safety. All containers shall be painted the franchisee’s standard color and shall prominently display the name and telephone number of the franchisee in letters and numbers no less than two and one-half inches high. Similarly, the words “Serving the City of Poway” shall be displayed beneath the franchisee’s name. Franchisee shall not place the City’s logo on its containers. To attain certain economies, some customers may request specialized services such as compactors, roll-off, or custom-built containers, etc. The sale, lease, rental of such equipment, or their provision by the customer, may be negotiated by the latter and the franchisee. Information relating to any such agreements shall be forwarded to the Director of Public Works.

A. Cleaning, Painting, Maintenance. Once every 12 months franchisee shall replace, clean or repaint all commercial containers as needed so as to present a clean appearance. In addition, franchisee shall do the same upon 48 hours’ oral notice by the Director of Public Works. Franchisee shall maintain all containers in a functional condition and shall remove graffiti immediately.

B. Repair and Replacement. Franchisee shall repair or replace all customer-owned nonresidential containers damaged by collection operations, normal wear and tear excluded. (Ord. 659 §§ 6, 7, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.175 Commercial collection – Placement of containers for collection.
Every commercial occupant shall provide a solid waste container location on the commercial premises and shall keep said area in good repair, clean and free of refuse outside of the container. Container enclosures shall be provided when required by the City’s zoning ordinance and shall be of sufficient size to accommodate recycling as well as solid waste bins. Franchisee shall remove any solid waste or litter that is spilled or deposited on the ground as a result of the franchisee’s emptying of the container or other activities of the franchisee. Upon collection of solid waste by the franchisee, all containers shall be replaced, upright, where found, with the lids closed. Containers shall be properly returned to enclosures where applicable. No person shall in any manner, break, damage, roughly handle or destroy containers placed on the premises of a commercial occupant. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.180 City facilities collection services – Frequency.
At no cost to the City, franchisee shall collect and dispose of all solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and compostables generated at premises owned and/or operated by the City, including all City parks and bus stops, or as otherwise designated by the City. Franchisee shall make collections from cans Monday through Friday or on Saturdays following nonworking holidays at the frequency set out in the franchise agreement. The City may request bins, pickup and disposal or diversion for up to six community events per year sponsored at least in part by the City. In addition, franchisee shall pick up any bulky items discarded on or along City right-of-way, open space or other City property within 24 hours of oral request from the City requesting such service. The City will exhaust all other avenues so as to limit such requests, but estimates that such items amount to no more than 15 40-cubic-yard containers annually. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.185 Collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste.
Franchisee shall be obligated to provide the lawful collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste from within the City to a permitted disposal site, consistent with the policies, goals, procedures and requirements of the Regional Solid Waste Authority JPA (the “Authority”), of which City is a member, and which controls the flow of all solid waste in the City. Solid waste collected to prevent its entry into the stormwater conveyance system shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with applicable laws, permits and regulations. However, City reserves the right, upon a determination that the public interest requires a collection, transportation or disposal program different from what franchisee has established, to direct franchisee to change its collection, transportation or disposal program, including but not limited to the location of the disposal site. City shall select the most cost-effective facility, including tipping fees, operating and hauling costs, consistent with fulfilling all of franchisee’s other obligations under the franchise agreement. (Ord. 659 § 8, 2007; Ord. 496 § 2, 1998)

8.68.190 Collection, transportation and disposal – Litter abatement.
A. Minimization of Spills. Franchisee shall use due care to prevent solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables from being spilled or scattered during the collection or transportation process. If any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables are spilled during collection, the franchisee shall promptly clean up all spilled materials.

B. Clean-Up. During the collection transportation process, the franchisee shall clean up litter in the immediate vicinity of any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables storage area (including the areas where collection bins and debris boxes are delivered for collection) where the materials have been spilled or deposited on the ground as a result of the franchisee’s emptying of the container or other activities of the franchisee. The franchisee shall discuss instances of repeated spillage not caused by it directly with the customer responsible and will report such instances to the City. The City shall attempt to rectify such situations with the customer if franchisee has already attempted to do so without success.

C. Covering of Loads. Franchisee shall cover all open transportation equipment, including debris boxes and compactor openings, during transport from one collection region of the City to another (over major arterials), to the disposal site or any processing facility. No material shall be transported to the disposal site or any processing facility in vehicle hoppers. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.195 Processing of solid waste.
Subject to the requirements of PMC 8.68.185, franchisee, prior to disposal, may direct any or all portions of the waste collected under the franchise agreement to a landfill, material recovery, composting, transformation or any other permitted solid waste processing facility, for processing of any materials contained therein. The City reserves the right to designate such a facility or may disapprove franchisee’s choice. Franchisee shall identify loads suitable for processing at material recovery, composting, transformation or any other solid waste processing facilities, and modify routes or storage and collection procedures, as directed by the Director of Public Works, to increase the quality or recoverability of materials generated by customers. (Ord. 659 § 9, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

Article III. California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB 939): Operational and Reporting Requirements

8.68.200 Recycling programs.
The franchisee shall maintain existing residential curbside recycling and yard waste collection programs until such time as the franchisee develops and the City Council approves an equivalent or improved recycling program. Should the City determine that under its California Recycling Market Development Zone (RMDZ) designation, recyclable materials should be provided exclusively for sale to a business or industry that uses said recyclables in a remanufacturing process and is located within the RMDZ, the City may direct franchisee to make said recyclables exclusively available to such business or industry. Documented financial losses (if any) resulting from such direction of the City may be considered through negotiations for rate adjustment.

In addition to residential curbside and commercial recycling programs, franchisee shall develop and, following City Council approval, implement programs to achieve the goals of the AB 939 Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) including, but not limited to: public recycling bins for a limited number of parks, apartments, commercial areas or other strategic community areas to be provided without charge to the City; City Hall recycling program; debris box materials; commercial cardboard; bar and restaurant glass; complete commercial green waste; office paper and other business recycling; school recycling program, including education, containers and pickup; and recycling/diversion at the source. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.210 Solid waste diversion.
Franchisee shall guarantee to the City that the diversion requirements of applicable State and Federal law will be fully satisfied at all times during the term and any extended term of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.220 AB 939 reporting requirements.
To assist the City in its planning to meet the requirements of AB 939 as it presently exists and as it may be amended from time to time, franchisee shall submit to the Director of Public Works monthly reports on the amount of disposal and diversion tonnages – separated into product components – and totaled among the sources of generation; and an annual waste disposal and diversion report based upon daily records to be submitted by the thirty-first of January (and at other times as may be requested). These reports and other documents containing information that is required for AB 939 documentation submittals to the California Integrated Waste Management Board (CIWMB) shall be periodically reviewed for thoroughness and usefulness. All reports shall be adequate to meet the City’s reporting requirements to the CIWMB, and to the County of San Diego (or other local jurisdiction) throughout the term of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 659 § 10, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

Article IV. Operating Standards

8.68.300 Vehicle and equipment standards.
A. General. Franchisee shall provide a fleet of collection vehicles sufficient in number and capacity to perform efficiently the work required by the franchise agreement in strict accordance with its terms. All such vehicles shall have watertight bodies designed to prevent leakage, spillage or overflow. All such vehicles shall comply with the noise abatement requirements of this chapter.

B. Specifications. All vehicles used by franchisee in providing solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables collection services shall be registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles and shall meet or exceed all legal standards. Franchisee shall maintain all of its collection vehicles in compliance with the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. Routine inspections by the California Highway Patrol shall be required annually on all vehicles, and certificates for said inspection shall be filed with the Director of Public Works.

C. Vehicle Identification. Franchisee’s name, local telephone number, and a unique vehicle identification number designed by franchisee for each vehicle shall be prominently displayed on all vehicles, in letters and numbers no less than two and one-half inches high. Similarly, the words “Serving the City of Poway” shall be displayed beneath the franchisee’s name. Franchisee shall not place the City’s logo on its vehicles. The Director of Public Works reserves the right to reinspect any and all collection vehicles with a 24-hour notice.

D. Cleaning and Maintenance. Franchisee shall maintain all of its properties, facilities, and equipment used in providing service under the franchise agreement in a safe, neat, clean and operable condition at all times. All trucks, trailers, and other conveyances or equipment, including bins, used to collect, haul, and transport solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables shall at all times be kept clean, in good repair, and well and uniformly painted, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 659 §§ 11, 12, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.305 Performance standards.
A. General. Franchisee shall furnish such qualified drivers, mechanical, supervisory, clerical and other personnel as may be necessary to provide the services required by the franchise agreement in a safe and efficient manner.

B. Driver Qualifications. All drivers shall be trained and qualified in the operation of collection vehicles and must have in effect a valid license, of the appropriate class, issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. The franchisee shall furnish photostat copies of the licenses for all vehicle operators.

C. Identification Badge. Franchisee shall require its drivers, and all other employees who come into contact with the public, to wear a badge as a means of identifying the employee.

D. Safety Training. Franchisee shall provide suitable operational and safety training for all of its employees who utilize or operate vehicles or equipment for collection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables or who are otherwise directly involved in such collection. Franchisee shall train its employees involved in solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables collection to identify, and not to collect, hazardous or infectious waste.

E. No Gratuities. Franchisee shall not permit its employees to demand or solicit, directly or indirectly, any additional compensation or gratuity from members of the public for the collection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables under the franchise agreement.

F. Employees’ Appearance and Conduct. All employees, while engaged in the collection or gathering of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables within the City, shall be attired in suitable and acceptable uniforms which are subject to approval by the Director of Public Works. Franchisee shall use its best efforts to assure that all employees present a neat appearance and conduct themselves in a courteous manner. Franchisee shall regularly train its employees in customer courtesy, shall prohibit the use of loud or profane language, and shall instruct collection crews to perform the work as quietly as possible. If any employee is found not to be courteous or not to be performing services in the manner required by this chapter, franchisee shall take all appropriate corrective measures.

G. Provision of Field Supervision. Franchisee shall designate one qualified employee as on-site supervisor of field operations who shall be equipped with a vehicle and mobile telephone. The field supervisor will devote all of his or her time in the field, within the City of Poway, checking on collection operations, coordinating improvements to service, resolving field problems, and responding to complaints of customers either in person or by telephone. The field supervisor shall be expected to respond to complaints within two working hours and to correct field deficiencies within one working day. (Ord. 659 § 13, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.310 Collection standards.
A. Care of Private Property. Reasonable care shall be used by the franchisee’s employees in handling all privately owned collection containers and enclosures, and all damage caused by the negligence or carelessness of the franchisee’s employees shall be promptly adjusted with the owner thereof. All collection containers after emptying thereof by the franchisee’s employees shall be returned to within five feet of the location from which the same were picked up by the franchisee’s employees, upright with lids properly placed to ensure same are not deposited in any driveway, sidewalk, or street. Franchisee shall ensure that its employees close all gates opened by them in making collections, unless otherwise directed by the customer, and avoid crossing landscaped areas and climbing or jumping over hedges and fences. City shall refer complaints about damage to private property to franchisee.

B. Noise. All solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables collection operations shall be conducted as quietly as possible and shall conform to applicable Federal, State, County and City noise level regulations. The City may conduct random checks of noise emission levels to ensure such compliance. Franchisee will promptly resolve any complaints of noise to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

C. Record of Noncollection. When any solid waste, recyclable, yard waste or other compostable material deposited for collection is not collected by the franchisee because it fails to meet the requirements of the Poway Municipal Code or the franchise agreement, franchisee shall leave a bilingual Spanish/English red tag (provided at franchisee’s cost) at least three inches by six inches in size, on which franchisee shall indicate the reasons for refusal to collect the solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, or other compostables, giving reference to the section of the municipal code or to the section of the franchise agreement which has been violated, and which gives grounds for franchisee’s refusal as well as the franchisee’s address, phone number and business hours. This information shall either be in writing or by means of a checklist system. Contractor shall tag those containers where recyclables are not routinely separated and notify the City who will take further action.

In addition thereto, franchisee shall maintain, at the franchisee’s place of business, a log book listing all complaints and taggings. Said log book shall contain the names and addresses of parties involved, date of such complaint or tagging, nature of same and date and manner of disposition of each case. Such log shall be kept so that it may conveniently be inspected by the Director of Public Works upon request. Such log shall be retained for at least two years after the last entry. The Director of Public Works may request this log at any time. (Ord. 659 §§ 14, 15, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.315 Customer service standards.
A. Public/Customer Service and Accessibility.

1. Office Location. Franchisee shall provide a business office available to its customers for purposes of carrying out its obligations under the franchise agreement.

2. Office Hours. Franchisee’s office shall be open to the public from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. The office may be closed on Saturdays and Sundays and those holidays recognized by the franchisee. The franchisee shall notify the Director of Public Works of the holidays recognized by the franchisee.

3. Availability of Representatives. A representative of the franchisee shall be available at the franchisee’s office during office hours to communicate with the public in person and by telephone. A suitable drop box or collections mechanism shall be provided in the franchisee’s office for the receipt of payments.

4. Telephone. Franchisee shall maintain a toll-free telephone system in operation at its office at all times. Franchisee shall install telephone equipment, and have available service representatives sufficient to handle the volume of calls typically experienced on the busiest days. Telephone service shall be provided from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Franchisee shall also maintain an after-hours telephone number for use during other than normal business hours. Franchisee shall have a representative or voice mail available at said after-hours toll-free telephone number during all hours other than normal office hours. If customers are unable with reasonable effort to reach franchisee’s office by phone, or are subject to waiting time “on hold” of more than two minutes prior to reaching a customer service representative, the Director of Public Works may require that franchisee install additional telephone lines or hire additional customer service representatives.

The Director of Public Works and Director of Safety Services shall be provided with an emergency phone number.

5. Consumer Information. The City Manager may direct franchisee to prepare bilingual information cards containing information about the amounts of solid waste which will be collected, times for special collection events, curbside recycling and household hazardous waste drop-off programs, collection schedules, rates and complaint procedures. Franchisee shall distribute such information cards to the occupants of all residential and commercial premises. Information cards shall be revised and distributed if there is any material change in the information and, in any event, whenever a new customer is first billed. Information cards shall also be mailed to City residents upon request and shall be provided to the Poway Chamber of Commerce in quantities required by the Poway Chamber of Commerce. Franchisee shall submit printer’s proofs of the information cards to the Director of Public Works prior to distribution and will incorporate City’s comments in the final version distributed to the public. (Ord. 659 §§ 16, 17, 18, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.320 Service complaints.
Franchisee shall maintain a written log of all oral and written service complaints registered with the franchisee from customers within the City. Franchisee shall be responsible for the prompt and courteous attention to, and prompt and reasonable resolution of, all customer complaints. Franchisee shall record in a separate log all written and oral complaints, noting the name and address of complainant, date and time of complaint, nature of complaint, and nature and date of resolution. This complaint log shall be retained by the franchisee for at least one year after the last entry. The Director of Public Works may review the log at any reasonable time.

Franchisee shall respond to all complaints from customers within two hours and correct deficiencies within 24 hours, weekends and holidays excluded. In particular, if a complaint involves a failure to collect solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables from a premises, required by the franchise agreement, franchisee shall collect the solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables in question within such 24-hour period, provided it has been delivered for collection in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 659 § 19, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.325 Review of performance and quality of service and industry changes.
At the City Council’s sole option, with 60 days’ written notification to the franchisee, it may conduct a public hearing at which the franchisee shall be present and shall participate, to review the franchisee’s performance and quality of service and to provide for technological and regulatory changes. The reports required by this chapter and the franchise agreement regarding customer complaints shall be utilized as one basis for review. In addition, any customer may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Such hearings may be scheduled by the City Council at its discretion throughout the term of the franchise, but not more often than annually.

Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall issue a report with respect to the matters raised at the hearings. If any noncompliance with the franchise is found, the Director of Public Works may direct the franchisee to correct the inadequacies in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the franchise agreement. Any change in scope of services or equipment shall be reflected in an amendment to the franchise agreement. (Ord. 659 § 20, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

Article V. Franchise Regulations

8.68.330 Prohibited collection and transportation.
A. Except as specified herein, no person shall collect or transport solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other compostables within the boundaries of the City unless such person has been granted a franchise therefor or a permit pursuant to PMC 8.68.510, or the waste or material is excluded pursuant to PMC 8.68.400, or an exemption has been granted pursuant to PMC 8.68.030(B).

B. No person shall allow, permit or enter into any agreement to allow or permit another person to collect or transport solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other compostables within the boundaries of the City unless the person collecting or transporting the waste or material has been granted a franchise therefor or a permit or pursuant to PMC 8.68.510, or the waste or material is excluded pursuant to PMC 8.68.400.

C. When there is in force a franchise granted by the City pursuant to this chapter, any container placed within the boundaries of the City in violation of this section shall be deemed a nuisance. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to cause the abatement thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this section. When the City Council has granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter, such franchisee shall be the City Manager’s designee for purposes of causing the abatement of such nuisance and shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property, in a manner consistent with the United States and California Constitutions, to cause the abatement of such nuisance. Upon notification to the City Manager of a violation of this section, franchisee may, at franchisee’s option, remove any container placed within the boundaries of the City in violation of this section, dispose of the contents thereof, and store the container at franchisee’s place of business. Franchisee shall promptly mail written notice of its actions to the owner of the container and advise how the owner may recover the container. Franchisee may bill the owner of the container for transportation and disposal costs, and daily impound fees, as prescribed in the rate schedule established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. All amounts due to the franchisee for transportation, disposal and storage must be paid in full before the owner may recover the container. If the owner does not recover the container within 60 days of the date of the notice of abatement, the container shall be determined to be abandoned, at which time it shall become the property of the franchisee. The action abating the nuisance may be appealed by the filing of a written notice of appeal in the office of the City Manager within 10 days of the date of written notice thereof. The City Manager shall set the time and place for the hearing of the appeal that shall be within twenty days of the notice of appeal. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. The indemnification of PMC 8.68.600 shall extend to the abatement process. (Ord. 659 § 21, 2007; Ord. 592 § 2, 2004; Ord. 496 § 2, 1998)

8.68.335 Contents of franchise agreement – Resolution of conflicts.
A. The terms and provisions of any franchise agreement for solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables collection services may contain those requirements, conditions, policies and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and which will, in the judgment and discretion of the City Council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

B. In the event of any conflict between the franchise provisions of a franchise agreement which is authorized and approved by the City Council and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall control. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.340 Franchisee franchise fee.
Franchisee shall pay a franchise fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council or established in the franchise agreement authorizing the collection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.345 Assignment.
Except as provided in PMC 8.68.030(B), franchisee shall not assign its rights nor delegate or otherwise transfer its obligations under the franchise agreement to any other person without the prior written consent of the City. Any such assignment without the consent of the City shall be void and the attempted assignment shall constitute a material breach of the franchise agreement. For purposes of this section, “assignment” shall include, but not be limited to (i) a sale, exchange or other transfer of substantially all of the franchisee’s assets dedicated to service under the franchise agreement to a third party; (ii) a sale, exchange or other transfer of 50 percent or more of the outstanding common stock of franchisee; unless the change results merely in one of several proof owners increasing his or her ownership; (iii) any reorganization, consolidation, merger recapitalization, stock issuance or reissuance, voting trust, pooling agreement, escrow arrangement, liquidation or other transaction to which franchisee or any of its shareholders is a party which results in a change of ownership or control of 50 percent or more of the value or voting rights in the stock of franchisee unless the change results merely in one of several prior owners increasing his or her ownership; and (iv) any combination of the foregoing (whether or not in related or contemporaneous transactions) which has the effect of any such transfer or change of ownership. For purposes of this section, the term “proposed assignee” shall refer to the proposed transferee(s) or other successor(s) in interest pursuant to the assignment.

If franchisee requests City’s consideration of and consent to an assignment, the City Council may deny or approve such request in its complete discretion. No request by franchisee for consent to an assignment need be considered by City Council unless and until franchisee has met the following requirements:

A. Franchisee shall undertake to pay City the amount, as determined by the Director of Public Works, of its reasonable direct and indirect administrative expenses, including but not limited to consultant costs and attorney’s fees, investigation costs necessary to investigate the suitability of any proposed assignee, and to review and finalize any documentation required as a condition for approving any such assignment;

B. Franchisee shall furnish Director of Public Works with audited financial statements of the proposed assignee’s operations for the immediately preceding three operating years;

C. Franchisee shall furnish Director of Public Works with satisfactory proof:

1. That the proposed assignee has at least five years of solid waste management experience of a scale equal to or exceeding the scale of operations conducted by franchisee under the franchise agreement;

2. That in the last five years, the proposed assignee has not suffered any citations or other censure from any Federal, State or local agency having jurisdiction over its waste management operations due to any significant failure to comply with State, Federal or local waste management laws and that the assignee has provided the Director of Public Works with a complete list of such citations and censures;

3. That the proposed assignee has at all times conducted its operations in an environmentally safe and conscientious fashion;

4. That the proposed assignee conducts its solid waste management practices in accordance with sound waste management practices in full compliance with all Federal, State and local laws regulating the collection and disposal of waste, including hazardous waste as identified in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations; and

5. Of any other information required by the Director of Public Works to ensure the proposed assignee can fulfill the terms of the franchise agreement in a timely, safe and effective manner.

Any application for a franchise transfer shall be governed by the following conditions:

Any application for a franchise transfer shall be made in a manner prescribed by the Director of Public Works. The application shall include a deposit in an amount determined by the Director of Public Works sufficient to meet the costs identified above. Additional bills in excess of the amount deposited shall be supported with evidence of the expense or cost incurred. The applicant shall pay such bills within 30 days of receipt. Any such amounts are over and above any franchise fee specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 659 §§ 22, 23, 24, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.350 Subcontracting.
Franchisee shall not engage any subcontractors for collection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, or other compostables without the prior written consent of the Director of Public Works. Subcontracted collections shall require complete documentation of services provided including materials collected and disposal site, and shall specify that the City of Poway shall suffer no liabilities for said collections and disposals. Said liabilities shall be fully the responsibility of the generator (customer of industrial or commercial firm) and the licensed collector/disposer of the materials. All of the requirements of PMC 8.68.600 and 8.68.620 shall apply to subcontractors. (Ord. 659 § 25, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.360 Revocation or suspension of franchise.
A. City May Terminate. A franchise may be terminated at the option of the City Council in the event there is a change of ownership of any kind or nature of the operating company, unless approval therefor has been obtained in writing from the City. If it is determined by the City Manager following an inspection of the franchisee’s place of business, after reasonable notice to the franchisee that the operator or manager has not complied with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the State and City, the City Manager shall notify the franchisee in writing of noncompliance and shall order compliance within 30 days. If noncompliance is not corrected, the City Council, after a hearing, shall be empowered to revoke or suspend the franchise, or take other action as the Council shall determine.

B. Notice of Hearing – Revocation. The City Manager shall mail notice of a hearing to revoke a franchise to the collector not less than 15 days prior to such hearing. In the event of the revocation of a franchise, the City Manager shall notify the franchisee in writing of the reasons for the revocation. Such notification may be made in person or by mail.

C. Appeals. Within 15 calendar days after notice by the City Manager of revocation of a solid waste franchise has been sent to the franchisee, the franchisee may file with the City Clerk an appeal of such decision to the City Council.

D. Council Action. The City Council may either affirm the action of the City Manager, send the matter back to the City Manager for further consideration, or set the matter for hearing by the City Council. If the City Council sets the matter for hearing, it shall base its action upon the standards delineated in subsection A of this section. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the franchisee not less than 15 days prior to the hearing.

E. Interim Suspension. The City Manager, without a hearing, may suspend a franchise for not more than 60 days, if the City Manager finds that continued operation by the franchisee will constitute a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.370 Rates.
The City Council may, by resolution, establish rates, including AB 939 fees, to be charged to residential occupants and to commercial occupants for the collection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, other compostables and State-mandated AB 939 solid waste diversion requirements. The City Council may also include under the rates and charged recovered by the franchisee those costs incurred by the City for the removal of solid waste and pollutants from stormwater and other water runoff to prevent the further pollution of the waters of the State. Every commercial occupant and residential occupant shall pay the rates established from time to time by the City Council for collection services rendered pursuant to this chapter and in the manner set forth in PMC 8.68.375. Following City Council approval of a rate adjustment, the franchisee shall provide immediate written notice to customers of rate changes, which notice may be provided with, or as part of, regular billing. (Ord. 659 § 26, 2007; Ord. 496 § 2, 1998)

8.68.375 Billing and collection of rates, fees and charges.
A. The billing and collection of the rates, fees and charges authorized by the City Council for residential and commercial solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables collection services, and costs incurred by the City for the removal of solid waste from stormwater, shall be the responsibility of the franchisee. The franchisee shall neither charge nor collect any sum or sums in excess of, or in addition to, the amounts specified by resolution or in the franchise agreement for any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables collection services. The City shall be under no obligation to collect or enforce collection of any sums due to the franchisee for services rendered under the franchise agreement except as may be specifically provided in the franchise agreement or in this chapter, and franchisee shall release the City from any and all liability for the payment of any sum or sums which may become due to the franchisee for the collection or removal of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, or other compostables under the terms of the franchise agreement.

B. The franchisee shall bill residents no less frequently than on a quarterly basis. The franchisee shall have the right to bill and collect for its services in advance of the rendering of services, but shall refund any unused portion equal to one month or more of the amount collected in the event of disruption, revision, or termination of the services or when residential premises are vacant for at least a one-month period and prior notice of such vacancy has been given to the franchisee. Termination of services as referred to in this subsection shall refer to customer-requested termination of service pursuant to relocations, extended absences, etc. (Ord. 659 § 27, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.380 Failure or refusal to pay.
Should a residential customer or commercial customer fail or refuse to pay the rates, fees and charges established in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement and this chapter, then the franchisee shall, after 45 days’ delinquency, notify the customer of its intent to terminate service for reason of nonpayment. A copy of the notification shall be provided to the Director of Public Works. Should payment remain delinquent after 60 days, a second notification, with copy to the Director of Public Works, shall be issued to the customer specifying the exact date that service will be discontinued. Services terminated due to nonpayment of collection fees may be reinstated with the payment of the delinquent amount(s) plus a reinstatement charge as specified in the franchise agreement. Customers may, on an individual basis, request annual or monthly payment schedules, and the franchisee shall work in good faith with individual customers to reasonably satisfy such requests.

If the City Council determines and declares that the noncollection of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables from a residential premises or a commercial premises may be a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and which condition is declared to be, if permitted to exist, a public nuisance, the City Manager shall direct the franchisee to make collection, and the City shall utilize remedies available to obtain compliance and recover the expenses and charges of collection, including penalties. The franchisee shall continue to collect solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables when directed to do so by the City Manager even though there be nonpayment. (Ord. 659 § 28, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.385 Collection of charges.
All costs incurred by the City arising from nonperformance of any of the requirements of this chapter by an owner or occupant or property and paid by the City to the franchisee shall be recoverable by the City and charged against the property from which the solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables were collected. The City Manager shall notify all parties concerned of the costs of any such collection by directing a letter to the occupant at the address shown on the latest tax roll. Any such notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to a public hearing. The City Council shall conduct the public hearing, determine if a nuisance exists, and review and approve an assessment against the property for the costs incurred in abating the public nuisance. If the total assessment determined and confirmed by the City Council is not paid within 10 days after the determination by the City Council, then there shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder a statement of the total balance due together with the legal description of the property affected. From and after the date of such recording, the balance due shall be a special assessment against the parcel plus a City administrative fee that shall be set by the City Council from time to time. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as County taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for in ordinary County taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of County taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.390 Payment under protest.
Any residential occupant or commercial occupant who has been billed for service and desires to contest the extent or degree or reasonableness of the charge billed, shall make payment of such charges under protest and, at the same time, file a written statement of such protest with the City Manager. Within 30 days after date of filing, the City Manager shall notify the protesting occupant of the findings and adjudication and adjustment in the matter. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed by any person upon submittal of an appeal fee that shall be set by the City Council from time to time. Such appeal shall be directed to the City Council whose determination, in regular meeting, shall be final. The appeal fee shall be refunded to the protesting occupant in those cases where the City Council finds in favor of the protest. Nothing provided herein shall authorize the City Council to set rates charged by the franchisee. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

Article VI. Exclusions

8.68.400 Scope of franchise – Exclusions.
The franchise granted to franchisee shall be exclusive except as to the following categories of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables listed in this section. The granting of a franchise shall not preclude the categories of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and other compostables listed below from being delivered to or collected or transported by others, provided that nothing is intended to or shall be construed to excuse any person from obtaining any authorization from the City which is otherwise required by law:

A. Manure, yard waste and other compostables removed from a premises by a manure removal, gardening, landscaping or tree trimming contractor as an incidental part of total service offered by that contractor rather than as a hauling service;

B. Household hazardous waste and hazardous waste;

C. Auto parts and bodies;

D. Medical waste (as defined in the California Waste Management Act) which shall be handled in the manner prescribed by the County Health Officer and in accordance with the California Health and Safety Code;

E. Solid waste exempted pursuant to PMC 8.68.030(B);

F. Solid waste collected to prevent its entry into the stormwater conveyance system and the waters of the State, through contracts for services or through the use of City forces. (Ord. 659 § 29, 2007; Ord. 496 § 2, 1998)

8.68.410 Exclusions for recyclables.
The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude residential or commercial occupants or owners from disposing of recyclable materials through other recycling methods, provided that such residential or commercial occupants shall nonetheless pay the recycling service fee of franchisee. The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude or prohibit the City or any officer or employee thereof or any public entity delegated the ability to do so by the City from itself collecting, removing, disposing or diverting of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, and other compostables in the regular course of their respective duties as such officers or employees; notwithstanding, the City shall be responsible for reporting all such diversion. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.420 Franchisee’s inability to provide service.
If, at any time during the effective period of an exclusive franchise agreement, a customer of the franchisee requests from the franchisee a collection service that is not defined in the franchise agreement as a special pickup service which the franchisee cannot render within two full working days from the date of the customer’s initial request for service, the Director of Public Works reserves the right to direct such customer to seek such service from another provider who can provide such collection service pursuant to a special permit issued by the City for such collection services. (Ord. 659 § 30, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.430 Commercial collection – Franchisee’s inability to provide specialized service.
If, at any time during the effective period of an exclusive franchise agreement, a commercial customer of the franchisee requests a specialized collection and recycling service that the franchisee is not equipped or licensed to provide, or for which the franchisee has not subcontracted to provide, the Director of Public Works reserves the right to allow another provider to provide such collection service pursuant to special permit issued by the City for such collection services, until such time as the franchisee is equipped and licensed to provide such service, or until such time as the franchisee has subcontracted with a suitably licensed provider to provide such service. (Ord. 659 § 31, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.440 Collection in emergencies.
In emergencies such as work stoppages, the breakdown of equipment, a natural disaster, or other unforeseen or unpreventable circumstances, or when in the judgment of the City Manager the preservation of the public health and safety justifies such action, the City Manager may issue a special permit to one or more persons other than the franchisee to perform any of the services covered by this chapter, subject to such reasonable fees, charges and conditions as the City Manager shall establish. Such fees, charges, and conditions in effect under this section for any period exceeding 15 days duration shall be approved by the City Council. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

Article VII. Special Permits

8.68.500 Prohibition.
No person shall provide any solid waste collection or transportation services for which a special permit is required by the chapter without first obtaining the special permit. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.510 Application.
Application for a special permit shall be made in writing to and on the form provided by the Director of Public Works. The application shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager. The terms of a permit shall be for one year. Renewals of the permit shall be for periods of one year. (Ord. 659 § 32, 2007; Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.530 Permit requirements.
The permittee shall comply with the following: unless the permit is solely for the purpose of serving other governmental agencies, in which case, the permittee shall be required to comply only with subsections C, D and E of this section. For purposes of this section, references in the following subsections to the “franchise agreement” and to the “franchisee” shall be deemed to be references to the special permit and to the permittee.

A. The collection and transportation requirements of PMC 8.68.100 through 8.68.195, inclusive;

B. The operating standards of PMC 8.68.300 through 8.68.325, inclusive;

C. The indemnification and insurance provisions of PMC 8.68.600 and 8.68.620;

D. The franchise fee (permit fee) for such special permit in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council;

E. The reporting requirements of PMC 8.68.220. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.540 Permit conditions.
Each special permit shall be expressly limited to the provision of services to:

A. Customers of the franchisee when the franchisee is unable to serve pursuant to PMC 8.68.420; or

B. Customers of the franchisee requiring special services not provided by the franchisee pursuant to PMC 8.68.430; or

C. Customers of the franchisee in an emergency pursuant to PMC 8.68.440; or

D. Other governmental agencies pursuant to PMC 8.68.610. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

Article VIII. Administrative Requirements

8.68.600 Indemnification of City.
A. Indemnification Generally. Separate and distinct from any insurance or liquidated damages provisions found in the franchise agreement, franchisee shall defend, with counsel to be agreed upon by both parties, indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its agents, officers, servants, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, damages, liabilities, costs or expenses for any damages or injuries to any person or property, including but not limited to, injury to franchisee’s or City’s employees, agents or officers which arise from or are connected with or are caused or claimed to be caused by acts or omissions of City, franchisee, or their agents, officers or employees, in the preparation, bidding, execution, administration, or performance of the franchise agreement, or in performing the work or services therein, and all costs and expenses of investigating and defending against same; provided, however, that franchisee’s duty to indemnify and hold harmless shall not include any claims or liability arising from the negligence or intentional tort of the City, its agents, officers or employees, determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.

B. Hazardous Materials Indemnification. Franchisee shall indemnify, defend, with counsel to be agreed upon by both parties, protect and hold harmless City, its officers, employees, agents, assigns and any successor or successors to City’s interest from and against all claims, actual damages (including but not limited to special and consequential damages), natural resources damages, punitive damages, injuries, costs, response, remediation and removal costs, losses, demands, debts, liens, liabilities, causes of action, suits, legal or administrative proceedings, interest, fines, charges, penalties and expenses (including but not limited to attorneys and expert witness fees and costs incurred in connection with defending against any of the foregoing or in enforcing this indemnity) of any kind whatsoever paid, incurred or suffered by, or asserted against, City or its officers, employees, or agents arising from or attributable to any repair, clean-up or detoxification, or preparation and implementation of any removal, remedial, response, closure or other plan (regardless of whether undertaken due to government action) concerning any hazardous substance or hazardous wastes at any disposal or processing facility where solid waste is or has been transported, transferred, processed, stored, disposed of or has otherwise come to be located by franchisee or its activities pursuant to the franchise agreement resulting in a release of any hazardous substance into the environment. The foregoing indemnity is intended to operate pursuant to Section 107(e) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, “CERCLA,” also known as “Superfund” 42, U.S.C. Section 9607(e), and California Health and Safety Code Section 25364, to defend, protect, hold harmless and indemnify City from all forms of liability under CERCLA, other statutes, or common law for any and all matters addressed in this provision. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.610 Exclusion for other government agencies.
The provisions of this chapter shall not require the collection or transportation by the franchisee of solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, or other compostables generated within the City by any school district, special district, or agency of County, State, or Federal government, provided that any person collecting or transporting such waste or material shall obtain a special permit therefor pursuant to the terms of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or transport such waste or material in the City without first obtaining a special permit. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.620 Insurance.
A. Franchisee shall maintain limits of insurance no less than:

1. Comprehensive general liability: $5,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage;

2. Automobile liability: $5,000,000 combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage;

3. Worker’s compensation and employers liability: worker’s compensation limits as required by the Labor Code of the State of California.

B. Any significant deductibles or self-insured retention must be declared to and approved by the City’s Risk Manager. At the option of the City’s Risk Manager, either: the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the City, its officials, employees, agents or volunteers; or the franchisee shall procure an additional letter of credit or bond guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration and defense expenses.

C. Franchisee shall comply with all other insurance requirements delineated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.630 Faithful performance security.
Upon execution of a franchise agreement, franchisee shall file with the City Clerk an Irrevocable Letter of Credit payable solely to the City of Poway, in the amount of at least $100,000 and a surety bond for the balance to a total of $500,000, both of which shall be immediately available to the City in the event of any failure of the franchisee to well and faithfully perform all of its duties and obligations under the franchise agreement or to provide full service in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement. Such funds shall be available to City upon the City’s unilateral determination of default, and prior to a judicial determination of default. The bond shall be issued by a surety admitted to do business in the State of California. The letter of credit shall be issued by a local bank. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.640 Penalty.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by imprisonment in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.08 PMC. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

8.68.650 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions, which shall be severed and continue in full force and effect. The City Council declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional, and would have passed and adopted the same even though any parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases that may be held invalid had been omitted therefrom. (Ord. 448 § 2, 1995)

Chapter 8.72
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
Sections:

8.72.010    Findings.

8.72.020    Nuisance defined.

8.72.030    Procedure.

8.72.010 Findings.
California Government Code Sections 38773 through 38773.7 allow the City to establish a procedure for the abatement of a nuisance and charge the cost of said abatement upon a parcel of land by way of lien or special assessment. The City Council finds that this procedure under certain circumstances would be in the best interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the City in that a nuisance may be eliminated at no cost to the public. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 57 § 1, 1982)

8.72.020 Nuisance defined.
A “nuisance” includes but is not limited to the violation of any ordinance, resolution, regulation or policy adopted by the City Council, as defined within any such ordinance, resolution, regulation or policy, or any condition within the City found to be a potential threat to the general health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 57 § 3, 1982)

8.72.030 Procedure.
A. The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall notify, in writing, the responsible person(s) of any parcel upon which is believed to exist a public nuisance that said nuisance exists. Said nuisance may be directly upon said parcel, an easement, or license benefiting said property or adjacent thereto if, in the opinion of the City Manager, or his/her designee, the nuisance was created by, or for the direct or indirect use or benefit of, the parcel or parcel owner. If a nuisance is believed to exist within the City and, in the opinion of the City Manager or his/her designee, is caused by or created for, directly or indirectly, the owner of a parcel of land within the City, then, in that event, the owner of that parcel, in addition to being notified to abate the nuisance, shall be notified that if said nuisance is abated with cost to the City, that the cost shall be reimbursed to the City, and, if not, shall be assessed to that owner’s parcel.

B. The notice referred to in this chapter shall be sent first class mail to the owner of record on the last published assessment tax roll of the County Assessor’s office. The notice shall specify the nuisance believed to exist together with a request to abate same and advise the responsible person of the right to a public hearing before the hearing officer as described in Chapter 2.20 PMC.

C. If the owner timely requests a hearing and, following the hearing, a nuisance is determined to exist, the hearing officer shall specify in his/her decision the time allowed to abate the same by the responsible party and/or owner.

D. If the nuisance is not abated within the time specified by the hearing officer or, if the owner does not request a hearing and fails to fully abate the violations within the deadline established by the notice described in subsection A of this section, then a hearing may be held before the City Council to declare the property a public nuisance. If the City Council determines that a public nuisance exists, it shall adopt a resolution declaring the property a public nuisance. The City shall provide the owner a copy of the resolution, and if the owner fails to fully abate the public nuisance within 30 days of the adoption of the resolution, the City may abate the nuisance.

E. Following abatement of any public nuisance, the City may place before the City Council invoice(s) for any abatement costs for City Council confirmation, including administrative costs, attorneys’ fees, expenses, and reasonable interest therefor, from the date of said abatement.

F. If the abatement costs are not reimbursed to the City within 60 days of the date of the City Council confirmation, the City may assess a lien on the property or a special assessment against the property owner or responsible person. The lien and/or special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of liens and special assessments shall be applicable. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 57 § 2, 1982)

Chapter 8.76
DEFENSIBLE SPACE, VEGETATION MANAGEMENT AND WASTE ACCUMULATIONS
Sections:

8.76.010    Purpose and intent.

8.76.015    Definitions.

8.76.020    Discretion.

8.76.030    Defensible space – Highly flammable chaparral vegetation.

8.76.035    Vegetation management – Weeds and dry grasses.

8.76.040    Waste matter.

8.76.050    Notice to clean premises.

8.76.060    Service of notice to clean premises.

8.76.080    Time limit for abatement of nuisance.

8.76.090    Abatement of nuisance by Director of Development Services or Fire Marshal.

8.76.100    Obligation of City Clerk.

8.76.110    Hearing before City Council.

8.76.120    Payment prior to hearing.

8.76.130    Government Code provisions adopted, and collection of assessments.

8.76.010 Purpose and intent.
The City of Poway is at serious risk of wildfire due to its terrain, with steep mountainous slopes and valleys; a warm, dry climate; and highly flammable chaparral vegetation. For this reason, a comprehensive strategy for reducing the risk of wildfire is necessary. This strategy includes the creation of defensible space by clearing highly flammable chaparral vegetation around structures, and the Vegetation Management Program, involving the removal of weeds and dry grasses from private property.

The public health and safety are also threatened by the accumulation of waste material that is left out in the open, such as rubbish, crates, cartons, metal and glass containers, and vehicle bodies and parts. This chapter also provides for the abatement of accumulated waste material that has been determined to be a public nuisance.

The portions of this chapter related to defensible space shall be interpreted and implemented in a manner consistent with the City’s Wildfire Defensible Space Program Policy. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 818 § 1, 2018; Ord. 677 § 2, 2008; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.403)

8.76.015 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

“Clearing,” “brushing” or “grubbing” means the complete removal of vegetation to bare soil and is not a permitted activity to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

“Defensible space” means an area that is either natural or manmade, where material capable of allowing a fire to spread unchecked has been treated or modified to slow the rate and intensity of an advancing wildfire, and to allow an area for fire suppression operations. Defensible space does not require clearing, brushing, grubbing, grading or the exposure of bare soil.

“Director of Development Services” means the Director of Development Services or his or her designee.

“Fire Marshal” means the Fire Marshal or his or her designee.

“Fuel, light” means vegetation consisting of herbaceous plants and round wood less than one-quarter inch in diameter. Light fuels include, but are not limited to, western grasslands vegetated by annual or perennial grasses and/or weeds.

“Heritage tree” means any mature tree or mature stand of trees designated by the City Council as having historic or cultural significance.

“Highly flammable chaparral vegetation” means species that provide large fuel loads such as sumac, scrub oak, chamise, and sage. It does not include low-fuel-load species such as toyon, yucca, lemonade berry, and other similar types of plants.

“Structure” means any of the following: (1) buildings designed primarily for human use, including attached structures such as garages; or (2) buildings designed to house large animals. “Structure” does not include sheds, storage buildings, or detached garages that are not designed for human use or the housing of large animals.

“Thinning” means the reduction of fuel by methods such as mowing and trimming that leave the plant root intact to stabilize the soil. Thinning includes the cutting of highly flammable chaparral species to within six to 12 inches of the soil.

“Waste material” means unused or discarded matter having no substantial market value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any structure or otherwise concealed from public view, and which consists, without limitation or exclusion by enumeration, of such matter and material as:

1. Rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile;

2. Rubbish, crates, cartons, metal and glass containers;

3. Vehicle bodies and parts. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 3, 2008)

8.76.020 Discretion.
Where discretion is given in this chapter to determine a public nuisance or reasonable probability thereof or any material question of fact raised in this chapter, that discretion shall lie with the Director of Development Services or Fire Marshal. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 4, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 457 § 2(B), 1996; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.414)

8.76.030 Defensible space – Highly flammable chaparral vegetation.
A. Declaration of Nuisance. All highly flammable chaparral vegetation, and dead or dying trees or shrubs, growing upon the streets, sidewalks, or upon private property within the City, which by reason of their size, manner of growth, and location constitute a fire hazard to any structure, improvements, crops or other property, are declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance. A dead or dying tree or shrub shall not be classified as a public nuisance unless the tree or shrub is in a condition that constitutes a fire hazard.

B. Nuisance Per Se. Any vegetation of a type described in subsection A of this section that is located within 100 feet of a structure shall constitute a public nuisance per se.

C. Exceptions. The following types of vegetation shall not be subject to reduction or removal pursuant to this chapter:

1. Low-flammability plant species, including but not limited to toyon, yucca, and lemonade berry.

2. Ornamental landscaping.

3. Heritage trees.

4. Vegetation within streambeds, banks, and vernal pools.

D. Reduction or Removal of Highly Flammable Chaparral Vegetation.

1. All vegetation which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to this section shall be reduced or removed as determined necessary by the Director of Development Services or Fire Marshal. Highly flammable chaparral vegetation shall be reduced only by thinning, and not by clearing, brushing, grubbing or grading.

2. In the case of light fuel vegetation which is located on a slope of less than 40 percent, the Fire Marshal may require a defensible space area of less than 100 feet from a structure. However, in no case shall the required defensible space area be less than 50 feet from a structure.

3. In the case of vegetation that is within a recorded biological conservation easement, any habitat that is required to be removed pursuant to this chapter shall be mitigated in kind by the property owner at a 1:1 ratio. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 5, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 457 § 2(B), 1996; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.401)

8.76.035 Vegetation management – Weeds and dry grasses.
A. All weeds, dry grasses, dead shrubs, dead or dying trees, rubbish, or any material growing upon the streets, sidewalks, or upon private property within the City, which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature or which by reason of their size, manner of growth, and location constitute a fire hazard to any buildings, improvements, crops or other property, and weeds and grasses which, when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute such a fire hazard, are declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.

B. Cultivated and useful grasses and pasture will not be declared a public nuisance. However, if the Director of Development Services or Fire Marshal determines it necessary to protect adjacent improved property from fire exposure, vegetative management may be required. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 6, 2008)

8.76.040 Waste matter.
Waste matter as defined in this chapter, which by reason of its location and character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises, or the abatement of a nuisance, is declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 7, 2008; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.402)

8.76.050 Notice to clean premises.
If it is determined that a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists on any lot or premises, or upon any sidewalk, parking lot or street adjacent to such lot or premises, the Director of Development Services or Fire Marshal shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed:

NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES

in letters not less than one inch in height and which shall, in legible characters, direct the abatement of the nuisance and refer to this chapter and section for particulars. Notices served by means of other than posting as provided by this chapter shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 8, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; amended during 8/96 supplement; Ord. 457 § 2(B), 1996; Ord. 97 § 1, 1983; Ord. 46 § 1, 1981; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.404)

8.76.060 Service of notice to clean premises.
The notice required by PMC 8.76.050 may be served in any of the following manners:

A. By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property or by posting the property;

B. By regular mail addressed to the owner or person in charge and control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known;

C. By posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting public right-of-way and insertion of an advertisement at least once a week for the period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Said newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice that property in the City has been posted in accordance with this chapter and contain a general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of such newspaper advertisements shall not be considered in computing the appeal periods provided by this chapter. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.405)

8.76.080 Time limit for abatement of nuisance.
It shall be the duty of the owner, the agent of the owner, or the person in possession of any lot or premises in the City to abate the nuisance within the time frame set forth in the notice. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 9, 2008; Ord. 482 § 2(A), 1997; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.407)

8.76.090 Abatement of nuisance by Director of Development Services or Fire Marshal.
If the owner, agent of the owner, or the person in possession of the lot or premises fails or neglects to abate the nuisance as defined in this chapter, within the time specified in this chapter, the Director of Development Services or Fire Marshal shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may be done by City crews or by private contractor. A report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost of abating the nuisance on each separate property shall be filed with the City Council. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 10, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 457 § 2(B), 1996; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.408)

8.76.100 Obligation of City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall thereupon set the report and account for hearing by the City Council at the first regular or adjourned meeting which will be held at least seven and no more than 30 calendar days after the date of filing, and shall post a copy of said report and account and notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of City Hall. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 11, 2008; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.409)

8.76.110 Hearing before City Council.
The City Council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any written objections or protests by any owner or authorized agent of the property. Any owner of land or person interested therein may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the City Council. The amounts so approved shall be liens or special assessments upon the respective lots or premises, and the City Council shall adopt a resolution assessing said amounts as liens or assessments upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll, and determining that such vegetation and/or waste matter constitute a public nuisance. The City Clerk shall prepare and file with the County Assessor a certified copy of such resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 12, 2008; Ord. 482 § 2(B), 1997; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.410)

8.76.120 Payment prior to hearing.
The City Clerk may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the City Council hearing, as called for in PMC 8.76.110. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.411)

8.76.130 Government Code provisions adopted, and collection of assessments.
The provisions of Sections 39580 through 39586, inclusive, of the Government Code of the State, and any amendments thereto, are incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. The County Auditor shall enter each assessment in the County tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and, if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 677 § 13, 2008; Ord. 41 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 35.412)

Chapter 8.80
ACCUMULATION OF JUNK*
Sections:

8.80.010    Purpose.

8.80.020    Definitions.

8.80.030    Prohibitions.

8.80.040    Regulations.

8.80.050    Junkyards.

8.80.060    Disposal of junk.

8.80.070    Firewood.

8.80.080    Enforcement.

*    Prior legislation: CC §§ 68.708, 68.709, 68.711, 68.712 and 68.713.

8.80.010 Purpose.
This chapter provides the regulations to control litter and junk accumulation within the City of Poway. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019)

8.80.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Accumulation” means acquisition, dumping or gathering of something whether gradually or suddenly, including one or more items.

B. “Junk” means any combustible or noncombustible nonputrescible waste, including, but not limited to, trash; refuse; paper; glass; cans; bottles; rags; fabrics; bedding; ashes; natural aggregate, manure or animal waste; trimmings from lawns, shrubbery or trees, except when used for mulch or like agricultural purposes; household refuse other than garbage; lumber, metal, plumbing fixtures, bricks, building stones, plaster, wire or like materials from the demolition, alteration or construction of buildings or structures; tires or inner tubes; auto, aircraft or boat parts; plastic or metal parts or scraps; damaged or defective machinery, whether or not repairable; and damaged or defective toys, recreational equipment or household appliances or furnishings, whether or not repairable.

C. “Litter” means waste material or similar, including, but not limited to, junk, convenience food, beverage and other product packages or containers, cigarettes or smoking devices (partial or whole), steel, aluminum, glass, paper, plastic or other materials, thrown, deposited or left on property or right-of-way within the City. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.701. Formerly 8.80.010)

8.80.030 Prohibitions.
A. No responsible person as defined in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC shall accumulate junk on the exterior areas of any lot which is not fully enclosed by a lawful building, unless stored in compliance with PMC 8.80.040.

B. No person shall throw, deposit, cause to be deposited, or leave litter or junk in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way or public place within the City except in public receptacles or authorized private receptacles.

C. No person shall throw, deposit, cause to be deposited, or leave any litter in or upon any private property within the City, vacant or occupied, except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.702. Formerly 8.80.020)

8.80.040 Regulations.
A. All exterior areas where junk is stored shall comply with Chapter 13.09 PMC, PMC Title 15, PMC Title 16, Division VI, and each of the following:

1. The following structural best management practices (BMPs) shall be incorporated into areas where junk is to be stored:

a. Grade impervious surfaces to drain to vegetated areas;

b. Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roofs and concrete driveways;

c. Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff;

d. All exposed junk shall be elevated above the ground with nonmetallic or other nonpolluting materials so that no sediment runoff will occur; and

e. All exposed junk shall be covered by an impervious fabric.

2. Long-term maintenance of all structural BMPs is required in accordance with Chapter 16.104 PMC.

3. Compliance with stormwater BMPs shall be adhered to.

4. Areas shall be maintained so as to not be conducive to the breeding, shelter or harborage of insects, rodents, vermin or pests.

5. Junk and operations associated with junk shall not create any odor, generate any airborne particulate matter, or generate any excessive noise for adjacent property.

6. Junk shall not be visible from adjacent public rights-of-way, any street, and any area accessible to the public.

7. Junk shall not constitute a danger or potential danger to, or otherwise be detrimental to, the public health, safety or general welfare.

8. Junk shall not be maintained in a manner that constitutes a fire hazard, in the opinion of the Director of Development Services or his/her designee.

9. Junk shall not be strewn about or maintained in an unsightly condition.

10. Junk shall not invite vandalism or otherwise constitute an attractive nuisance.

11. No person shall accumulate junk, or permit junk to be accumulated:

a. Within four feet of any building or structure, except that junk may be accumulated within two feet of a fence or wall which is constructed of nonflammable material and is not used for structural support of a building;

b. Within 15 feet of any rear lot line;

c. Within 10 feet of any side lot line; or

d. In the front yard. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.703. Formerly 8.80.030)

8.80.050 Junkyards.
This chapter does not prohibit the accumulation of junk in the course of the lawful operation of a junkyard, motor vehicle storage or wrecking yard, or salvage yard conducted in the manner authorized by the zoning ordinance and/or this code. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize the establishment or maintenance of a junkyard, motor vehicle storage or wrecking yard, or salvage yard. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.704. Formerly 8.80.040)

8.80.060 Disposal of junk.
This chapter does not prohibit the accumulation of junk in accordance with the conditions and requirements of, and for the purposes authorized by, PMC 8.68.150, or for a reasonable time prior to disposal thereof in a public dump or other place where disposal lawfully may be made. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.705. Formerly 8.80.050)

8.80.070 Firewood.
This chapter does not prohibit the accumulation of used lumber, lumber scraps and/or materials fabricated out of wood for use as firewood or fuel; provided, however, that any such accumulation shall be neatly stacked and shall be maintained in the manner authorized by the zoning ordinance and/or this code; and provided further, that the components of such an accumulation shall be sawed or otherwise reduced in size so that no piece thereof exceeds five feet in length or two feet in width. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.706. Formerly 8.80.060)

8.80.080 Enforcement.
The Director of Development Services or his/her designee shall enforce this chapter, pursuant to Chapters 1.08, 1.10 and 8.72 PMC. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.707. Formerly 8.80.070)

Chapter 8.84
CONDEMNATION OF UNSANITARY PREMISES
(Repealed by Ord. 827)

Chapter 8.88
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND HAZARDOUS WASTE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

Article I. Hazardous Materials

8.88.010    Findings and purpose.

8.88.020    Definitions.

8.88.030    Review of designation as carcinogens or reproductive toxins.

8.88.040    Hazardous materials advisory committee.

8.88.050    Filing of a hazardous substance disclosure form.

8.88.060    Maintenance of files.

8.88.070    Content of disclosure form.

8.88.080    Emergency response information.

8.88.090    Exemptions to disclosures.

8.88.100    Confidentiality.

8.88.110    Fees.

8.88.120    Enforcement officer – Authority – Exceptions.

8.88.130    Violation – Penalty.

Article II. Hazardous Waste Establishments

8.88.140    Purpose.

8.88.150    County Health Officer to enforce State hazardous waste control law.

8.88.160    Inspection of places or establishments where hazardous waste is produced, stored, handled, disposed of, treated or recycled.

8.88.170    Reporting.

8.88.180    Permit – Required.

8.88.190    Permit – Application.

8.88.200    Fee.

8.88.210    Investigation by Department of Health Services.

8.88.220    Penalty for delinquent payment.

8.88.230    Renewal of permit or license – Penalty for delinquency.

8.88.240    Transfer of permit prohibited.

Article I. Hazardous Materials

8.88.010 Findings and purpose.
The City Council finds and declares that:

A. Hazardous substances and hazardous wastes present in the community may pose acute and chronic health hazards to individuals who live and work in the City, and who are exposed to such substances as a result of fires, spills, industrial accidents, or other types of releases or emission.

B. The people who live and work in the City have a right and need to know of the use and potential hazards of hazardous materials.

C. Basic information on the location, type, quantity and the health risks of hazardous materials used, stored, or disposed of in the City is not now available to firefighters, health officials, health care providers, planners, elected officials, and residents.

D. It is the intent of the City Council that this section through PMC 8.88.130 recognize the community’s right and need for basic information on the use and disposal of hazardous materials in the City and that it establish an orderly system for the provision of such information including appropriate education and training for use of information.

E. It is further the intent of the City Council that the system of disclosure set forth in this section through PMC 8.88.130 shall provide the information essential to firefighters, health officials, health care providers, planners, elected officials and residents in meeting their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the community in such a way that the statutory privilege of trade secrecy is not abridged. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.641)

8.88.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130, the terms listed in this section shall be defined as follows:

A. “Carcinogen” means a substance or agent which can cause cancer. For purposes of PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130, carcinogens are chemicals for which there is sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity as specified in guidelines prepared by the International Agency for Research on Cancer and the National Cancer Institute and are listed on the list of hazardous substances established by the Director of Industrial Relations pursuant to Section 6380 of the Labor Code.

B. “Chemical name” means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Service.

C. “Common name” means any designation or identification such as code name, code number, trade name, or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name.

D. “Disclosure form” means the written request for information prepared by the Health Officer pursuant to PMC 8.88.080.

E. “EPA Waste Stream Code” means the identification number assigned pursuant to the regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to specific types of hazardous waste.

F. “Establishment” means a single business operation conducted on the same or contiguous parcels of property under the same ownership or entitlement to use.

G. “Hazardous material” means any hazardous substance or hazardous waste.

H. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or product:

1. For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare an MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Section 6360, Chapter 2.5, Part 1 of Division 5 of the Labor Code) or pursuant to any applicable Federal law or regulation; or

2. Which is listed as a radioactive material set forth in Chapter 1, Title 10, Appendix B, of the Code of Federal Regulations as maintained and updated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

I. “Handle” means to generate, treat, store, or dispose of a hazardous waste in any fashion.

J. “Hazardous waste” means hazardous or extremely hazardous waste as defined in Sections 25115 and 25117 of the Health and Safety Code and set forth in Title 22 of the California Administrative Code.

K. “MSDS” means Material Safety Data Sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the Labor Code.

L. “Person” means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, City, County or district.

M. “Proprietary information” means information regarding compounds or ingredients used in a process or production which does not qualify as trade secrets but which provides an industry or business with a competitive advantage.

N. “Release” means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment.

O. “Reproductive toxins” means a substance or agent which can affect reproductive functions causing birth defects, spontaneous abortions, impaired spermatogenesis, reduced fertility and/or intrauterine growth retardation, and appears on the list of hazardous substances prepared by the Director of Industrial Relations pursuant to Section 6380 of the Labor Code.

P. “Sensitive hazardous materials” means hazardous materials recognized by the Health Officer which if deliberately misused would present an imminent threat to public health and safety.

Q. “SIC code” means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification Code to a specific type of business.

R. “Use” includes the handling, processing, or storage of a hazardous substance.

S. “User” means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.642)

8.88.030 Review of designation as carcinogens or reproductive toxins.
By July 1st of each year, beginning with the year 1983, the Health Officer may recommend to the City Council materials which should be added or deleted from the designation as carcinogens or reproductive toxins described in PMC 8.88.020(A) and (O). (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.643)

8.88.040 Hazardous materials advisory committee.
The Health Officer shall establish an advisory committee representing health care providers, industry, labor, fire suppression, law enforcement, community and environmental interests. The purpose of the committee shall be to advise the Health Officer on the implementation of PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130 including effective methods of public information and education. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.644)

8.88.050 Filing of a hazardous substance disclosure form.
A. Based on SIC Codes and other similar classifications, the Health Officer shall identify establishments which are potential users of hazardous materials.

B. Every person who owns or operates an establishment that is identified by the Health Officer as a potential user shall complete, within 30 days of receipt from the Health Officer, a form requesting the following information:

1. Name;

2. Address;

3. Type of business;

4. Whether the person uses or handles hazardous materials.

C. Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must annually submit a completed disclosure form to the Health Officer by September 1st of each year.

D. Within 30 days of any:

1. Major change in the use of new hazardous materials in reportable quantities,

2. Change of business address,

3. Change of business ownership, or

4. Change of business name;

the user shall submit a disclosure form detailing the new use or handling or other appropriate information. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.645)

8.88.060 Maintenance of files.
A. The Health Officer shall maintain files for at least 30 years of all disclosure forms received and provide for a data bank of generic MSDS health and safety information. These files shall be open to the public for inspection and reproduction during normal business hours. The disclosure forms shall be filed by street address.

B. Any person may request information regarding hazardous materials at an establishment from the City Department of Health Services. In situations involving potential or actual exposures, the department shall, within two working days of the person’s request, examine the records of any establishment made available or submitted pursuant to PMC 8.88.070(C) to obtain the information requested. The department shall release the information to the requesting person within five working days of the person’s request consistent with the requirements of PMC 8.88.100. In the event of a medical emergency, the department shall take all measures necessary to obtain the information immediately.

C. In situations involving nonimminent public health concerns, or requests for large amounts of information, the department shall provide the information within a reasonable period of time, given the nature and extent of the request. The department may collect fees, as established by City Council resolution from time to time, to recover costs for providing information under this subsection. (Ord. 683 § 38, 2008; Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.646)

8.88.070 Content of disclosure form.
A. The disclosure form shall be prepared by the Health Officer with the assistance, if necessary, of fire personnel, the Department of Development Services and other interested parties. The disclosure form shall include requests for the following:

1. A listing of the chemical name or any common name of each carcinogen or reproductive toxin used by the person completing the disclosure form;

2. A listing of the chemical name, or common name of every hazardous substance used by the person completing the disclosure form;

3. A listing of every hazardous waste handled by the person completing the disclosure form;

4. The maximum amount of each and every hazardous material disclosed in subsections (A)(1), (2) and (3) of this section which is stored at any one time by the user over the course of the year. Quantities are to be reported within specified ranges.

5. An indication that the user possesses appropriate discharge permits for any intentional releases of the hazardous materials disclosed in subsections (A)(1), (2) and (3) of this section into the air, water, sewers, or land to enable the community to understand the sources, quantity and content of hazardous material releases.

B. The Health Officer may accept forms required by State or Federal law in lieu of portions of the disclosure form specified in this section provided that such State or Federal forms contain equivalent information.

C. Any person who is required to maintain and make available an MSDS pursuant to California Administrative Code, Title 8, Section 5194 shall make such document available to the Health Officer upon request within two working days.

D. Upon request, all users must provide information beyond that specifically requested in the disclosure form to the Health Officer, if the Health Officer determines that such information is necessary to protect health and safety or the environment. Such additional information shall be subject to the trade secret provisions of PMC 8.88.100. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.647)

8.88.080 Emergency response information.
A. Each establishment shall provide the Health Officer with a list of names, addresses, and phone numbers (office and home) of all persons qualified and authorized to act as an emergency contact.

B. When necessary, the Health Officer may request additional information on how and where hazardous materials are stored, for the purpose of distribution to Fire Departments and other emergency response teams that may be called upon to provide emergency services in connection with the handling and use of hazardous materials.

C. All emergency response information submitted or made available to City agencies pursuant to this section shall be kept confidential and shall not be disclosed to the public unless required by compelling circumstances constituting an imminent danger to public health. The City Council finds and declares that this information, were it accessible to the general public, may be potentially used to sabotage, destroy, or otherwise damage industrial facilities. The City Council further declares pursuant to Government Code Section 6255, that the public interest served by not making such information public, clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosure of such information. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.648)

8.88.090 Exemptions to disclosures.
A. A substance designated as a hazardous substance by PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130 solely by its presence on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission list of radioactive materials, shall be exempt from the requirement that these materials be listed on the disclosure form.

B. Hazardous substances contained only in consumer products packaged for distribution to, and use by, the general public shall be exempt from disclosure under PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130.

C. Any person using or handling a hazardous material in amounts not exceeding 500 pounds or 55 gallons, whichever is the lesser, in any month in one location, shall be exempted from the requirement of disclosure of that use or handling unless the Health Officer upon approval by the City Council has provided notice that he or she has changed the weight or volume limits of this exemption for a specific class of acutely or extremely hazardous materials in response to public health concerns. This exemption shall not apply to laboratories involved in chemical synthesis and production. Known carcinogens or reproductive toxins of any quantity shall not be exempted pursuant to this subsection unless used or intended to be used for medical or therapeutic purposes. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.649)

8.88.100 Confidentiality.
A. If a user believes that a request for information made by either the disclosure form or pursuant to PMC 8.88.070(C) and (D) involves the release of a trade secret, the user shall stamp, mark or designate the information as a trade secret and shall submit the information requested to the Health Officer.

B. The Health Officer shall protect from disclosure any and all trade secrets coming into his or her possession, as defined in subsection (d) of Section 6254.7 of the Government Code and Section 1060 of the Evidence Code, when requested in writing by the user.

C. Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the Health Officer, or any of his representatives or employees, which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection B of this section, shall not be disclosed to anyone except an officer or employee of the City, the County, the State or the United States of America, in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health, or to contractors with the County or medical service providers and their employees, if in the opinion of the Health Officer such disclosure is necessary for the satisfactory performance of their duties.

D. For the purposes of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and County health personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the City shall be considered employees of the City.

E. Information certified by appropriate officials of the United States, as necessarily kept secret for national defense purposes, shall be accorded the full protection against disclosure as specified by such official or in accordance with the laws of the United States.

F. Release of Information.

1. The Health Officer upon his or her own initiative or upon receipt of a request for the release of information designated as a trade secret by a user, shall determine whether any or all of the information so submitted is properly designated as a trade secret.

2. If the Health Officer determines that the information is not a trade secret, the Health Officer shall notify the user by certified mail.

3. The user shall have 15 days after receipt of notification to provide the Health Officer with a complete justification and statement of the grounds on which the trade secret privilege is claimed. This justification and statement shall be submitted by certified mail.

4. The Health Officer shall determine whether such information is protected as a trade secret within 15 days after receipt of the justification and statement or, if no justification and statement is submitted, within 30 days of the original notice. The Health Officer shall notify the user and any party who has requested the information of that determination. The final notice shall also specify a date, not sooner than 15 days after the date of mailing of the final notice, when the information shall be made available to the public.

5. Prior to the date specified in the final notice, a user may institute an action in an appropriate Superior Court for a declaratory judgment as to whether such information is subject to protection under subsection A of this section and the information shall not be disclosed pending final judgment in such action.

G. The provisions of this section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required pursuant to this chapter to the Health Officer.

H. A user may designate, when appropriate, information made available to the Health Officer by either the disclosure form or pursuant to PMC 8.88.070(C) and (D) as proprietary information or as information regarding sensitive hazardous materials. The Health Officer will disclose this information only to health care providers or other individuals, including but not limited to neighborhood residents, after the Health Officer determines that this information is needed for legitimate health concerns.

I. In situations involving extremely sensitive materials, such as national defense work, which are normally protected by elaborate security systems, the Health Officer may issue a variance to omit the listing of certain hazardous substances from the disclosure form to protect such information from inadvertent disclosure; provided, that the user satisfies the following requirements:

1. The user must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Health Officer that there is the potential for misuse if the hazardous substances or information regarding them are obtained by the public.

2. The user must indicate on the appropriate place on the disclosure form that a hazardous substance is being omitted from the form.

3. The user must provide the following information from the MSDS for each hazardous substance omitted: Fire and Explosive Hazard Data; Health Hazard Data; Reactivity Data; Spill or Leak Procedures; Special Protection Information; and Special Precautions.

4. The user must agree to an inspection of all facilities by the Health Officer to ensure that all hazardous materials are being handled in a safe manner.

5. The user must make provisions to allow for immediate independent 24-hour access to the hazardous materials records of the establishment by the Health Officer.

6. The user must establish to the Health Officer’s satisfaction that an emergency coordinator will be available on a 24-hour basis to supply information on hazardous materials at the establishment to the Health Officer.

7. The user must keep at least one listing of hazardous substances omitted from the disclosure form at a separate location from the establishment.

8. The user may be required to pay a higher permit fee to cover the extra cost of additional inspections and administrative procedures required by the above requirements.

J. Any officer or employee of the City, or former City officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position has obtained possession of or has access to material the disclosure of which is prohibited by this section, and who knowing that disclosure of the material is prohibited, knowingly and wilfully discloses the material in any manner to any person known not to be entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of an infraction. Any contractor with the City and any employee of such contractor, who has been furnished information as authorized by this section, shall be considered to be an employee of the City for purposes of this section.

K. The City Council finds and declares, pursuant to Section 6255 of the Government Code, that the public interest served by not making information regarding trade secrets, proprietary information, and sensitive hazardous materials public clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosure of such information to members of the general public, except as provided by this section. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.811)

8.88.110 Fees.
The City Council may establish a schedule of fees to be paid by persons using or handling hazardous materials which is sufficient to cover the costs to the County of administering PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130 and conducting investigations to ensure compliance. The schedule of fees shall include a provision for collection of delinquency fees. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.812)

8.88.120 Enforcement officer – Authority – Exceptions.
The Health Officer is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130 and to inspect such activities as are regulated in PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130 for the purpose of determining compliance with PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the Health Officer in his performance of these duties. The Health Officer shall be empowered to make such arrests and issue citations pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5 and 833.7 for violations of PMC 8.88.010 through 8.88.130. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.813)

8.88.130 Violation – Penalty.
A. Any person who, upon receiving written notice from the Health Officer, fails to comply with the provisions of PMC 8.88.050 is guilty of an infraction. Each day on which a failure to file occurs shall be considered a separate violation.

B. Such person may also be civilly liable for injuries to persons or property caused by the failure to comply with PMC 8.88.050. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.810)

Article II. Hazardous Waste Establishments

8.88.140 Purpose.
It is the intent of the City Council that the Health Officer establish a program to monitor establishments where hazardous wastes are produced, stored, handled, disposed of, treated or recycled. It is further the intent of the City Council that the Health Officer provide health care information and other appropriate technical assistance on a 24-hour basis to emergency responders in the event of a hazardous waste incident involving community exposure. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.901)

8.88.150 County Health Officer to enforce State hazardous waste control law.
The Health Officer, in addition to his other duties, is designated as the officer to enforce the provisions of the State Hazardous Waste Control Law and the minimum standards of management of hazardous and extremely hazardous waste as specified in Chapter 30, Division 4, Title 22 of California Administrative Code pertaining to the safe production, storage, handling, disposal, treatment and recycling of such waste. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.902)

8.88.160 Inspection of places or establishments where hazardous waste is produced, stored, handled, disposed of, treated or recycled.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to make periodic inspections of all hazardous waste establishments where hazardous waste and extremely hazardous waste are produced, stored, handled, disposed of, treated or recycled. Such establishments shall be referred to in PMC 8.88.140 through 8.88.240 as hazardous waste establishments. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.903)

8.88.170 Reporting.
The Health Officer is empowered to request all persons believed by him to be owners or operators of hazardous waste establishments to, within 30 days, complete a form specifying the person’s name, address and information concerning general hazardous waste management activities. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.904)

8.88.180 Permit – Required.
It is unlawful for a person to establish, operate or maintain a hazardous waste establishment without first obtaining a hazardous waste establishment permit from the Health Officer. Owners and operators of permitted hazardous waste establishments shall report in writing any change of business address or change of business name. The report shall be filed with the Health Officer within 30 days of any such change. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.905)

8.88.190 Permit – Application.
Every applicant for a permit or license required by PMC 8.88.140 through 8.88.240 shall file with the Department of Health Services a written application on a form prescribed by said department. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the description of the property by street and number wherein or whereon it is proposed to conduct the activity for which the permit or license is required, the nature of the permit or license for which application is made, the character of the activity proposed to be conducted and such other information as the Department of Health Services may require. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.906)

8.88.200 Fee.
Every applicant for a permit or license required by PMC 8.88.140 through 8.88.240 shall at the time of making application pay the annual fee prescribed for such permit or license. Such annual permit fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.907)

8.88.210 Investigation by Department of Health Services.
A. Upon receipt of such application, and the required fee, it shall be the duty of the Health Officer to investigate the matters set forth in such application, and the hazardous waste conditions in and about the place where it is proposed to conduct the activity specified in the application, and if it shall appear to the Health Officer that the statements contained in the application are true, and that the existing hazardous waste conditions in the place specified in said application comply with the provisions of this code and State laws, a permit or license shall thereupon be granted.

B. Such permit or license shall be subject to revocation or suspension by said Health Officer upon a showing satisfactory to said Health Officer of a violation by the holder of such permit, his employee, servant or agent, or any other person acting with his consent or under his authority, of any provision of this code or any law of the State. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.908)

8.88.220 Penalty for delinquent payment.
Applicants who are delinquent in filing the application and obtaining the required permit or license shall be subject to payment of the original fee plus late fees. Late fees will be 10 percent of the required fee if delinquent by more than 30 days. Late fees will be 100 percent of the required fee if delinquent by more than 60 days. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this code or any ordinance or prosecution for violation of this code or any ordinance. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.909)

8.88.230 Renewal of permit or license – Penalty for delinquency.
A. A permit or license issued pursuant to PMC 8.88.140 through 8.88.240 shall expire on the last day of the month of the one year anniversary month in which the permit was issued and shall be renewed annually. At the time application is made, there shall be paid to the Department of Health Services the required annual fee, which fee is due and payable each year. The annual fee, if unpaid, is delinquent on the first day of the second month after the month in which the permit expires and thereafter a penalty equal to 10 percent of the annual fee shall be added thereto, and shall be collected at the time application for renewal is made.

B. If the annual fee and penalty is not paid the first month it is due there shall be added to and collected with the annual fee, an additional penalty equal to 10 percent of the annual fee for each month or fraction of a month during which the annual fee or any penalty continues to remain unpaid; provided, however, in no event shall the total penalty added to the annual fee pursuant to this section be more than 60 percent of the annual fee. The imposition of, or payment of the penalty imposed by this section, shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this code, or any ordinance, or prosecution for violation of this code, or any ordinance. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.910)

8.88.240 Transfer of permit prohibited.
No permit or license issued pursuant to PMC 8.88.140 through 8.88.240 shall be transferable. (Ord. 95 § 2, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 68.911)

Chapter 8.89
MEDICAL WASTE
Sections:

8.89.010    Definitions.

8.89.020    Medical solid wastes.

8.89.030    Biohazardous wastes – Small generators.

8.89.040    Biohazardous wastes – Large generators.

8.89.050    Sharps containers and red bags – Additional requirements.

8.89.060    Management plan – Preparation and filing.

8.89.070    Exemption.

8.89.080    Criminal penalty.

8.89.090    Civil penalty.

8.89.100    Additional remedies.

8.89.110    Enforcement.

8.89.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:

A. “Biohazardous waste” means any of the following:

1. Laboratory waste, including, but not limited to, specimen cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biological agents, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures or material which may contain infectious agents and may pose a substantial threat to health;

2. Recognizable fluid blood elements and regulated body fluids, and containers and articles contaminated with blood elements or regulated body fluids that readily separate from the solid portion of the waste under ambient temperature and pressure. Regulated body fluids are cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluids, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and amniotic fluid;

3. Sharps, which are objects or devices having acute rigid corners, edges, or protuberances capable of cutting or piercing, including, but not limited to, hypodermic needles, blades and slides;

4. Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, excrement and bedding of animals including materials resulting from research, production of biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals which are suspected of being infected with a disease communicable to humans;

5. Any specimens sent to a laboratory for microbiologic analysis;

6. Surgical specimens including human or animal parts or tissues removed surgically or by autopsy;

7. Such other waste materials that result from the administration of medical care to a patient by health care providers and are found by the administering agency or the Local Health Officer to pose a threat to human health or the environment. If there is a difference in opinion between the administering agency and the Local Health Officer, the Local Health Officer’s view will prevail.

B. “Biomedical waste” means any waste which is generated or has been used in the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, in the production or testing of biologicals, of which may contain infectious agents and may pose a substantial threat to health. Biomedical waste does not include hazardous waste and medical solid waste. Biomedical waste does not include hazardous waste (as defined California Health and Safety Code Section 25117 and California Code of Regulations Title 22 Articles 9 or 11) or radioactive waste (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25805 (e)).

C. “Biomedical waste management plan” is a document which shall be completed by generators of biomedical waste on forms prepared by the environmental health division of the Department of Health Services and shall contain the following information:

1. Name, address, telephone number, establishment, number of the generator, the responsible person, and an emergency telephone number which will provide 24-hour access to the responsible person.

2. Descriptions of the type and quantity of biomedical wastes generated and the containers used to store and dispose of the wastes.

3. Methods used to store, treat and dispose of biohazardous wastes.

4. Methods used to store and dispose of medical solid wastes.

5. A statement assuring that all personnel handling biomedical wastes have received training in aspects of handling the wastes in accordance with this chapter and the biomedical waste management plan.

D. “Medical solid waste” shall include, but not be limited to, waste such as empty specimen containers, bandages, dressings containing nonliquid blood, surgical gloves, decontaminated biohazardous waste, and other materials which are not biohazardous.

E. “Permitted biohazardous waste hauler” is a hauler who has received a permit from the appropriate agency to haul biohazardous waste.

F. “Putrescible biohazardous waste” means biohazardous waste subject to decomposition by microorganisms which produces a foul odor. Putrescible biohazardous waste includes, but is not limited to, blood and urine specimens and cultures.

G. “Red bag” means a disposable plastic bag which is impervious to moisture and has a strength sufficient to preclude ripping, tearing or bursting under normal conditions of usage and handling of the waste-filled bag. Each bag shall be constructed of material of sufficient single thickness strength to pass the 165-gram dropped dart impact resistance test as prescribed by Standard D 1709-75 of the American Society for Testing and Materials and certified by the bag manufacturer. The bags shall be securely tied so as to prevent leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid wastes during storage, handling or transport. The bag shall be red in color and conspicuously labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word “Biohazard.” The bag shall be labeled so that the producer’s name, address, and phone number are legible and easily visible on the outside of the bag.

H. “Sharps containers” are: leakproof, rigid, puncture-resistant containers which when sealed cannot be reopened without great difficulty. These containers must be labeled with either “biohazard” or “infectious waste” on the outside of the container. These containers must also be labeled so that the producer’s name, address and phone number are legible and easily visible on the outside of the container.

I. “Solid waste hauler” is a hauler licensed by the appropriate agency to haul solid waste.

The responsible person shall certify by his or her signature that the biomedical waste management plan is true, and that the generator will comply with the provisions thereof. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.020 Medical solid wastes.
Any person who is a generator, or an employee of a generator of medical solid wastes, shall store such wastes prior to disposal in an area secured as to deny access to unauthorized persons, animals, wind, rain, insects, and rodents. If such wastes are placed in a trash receptacle or compactor which is accessible at any time to unauthorized persons, such receptacle or compactor shall be locked to prevent access to the contents thereof to anyone other than authorized persons or refuse collection personnel. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.030 Biohazardous wastes – Small generators.
A. It is unlawful for any generator of biohazardous wastes who produces less than 200 pounds of such waste per month to store or dispose of such wastes without an annual permit therefor from the Deputy Director of Environmental Health Service.

B. Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall make application therefor as prescribed by the County.

C. Any person who is a generator, or any employee of a generator, of biohazardous wastes, and produces less than 220 pounds of such waste per month, shall store and dispose of such waste in the manner provided for in Sections 66840(f) through (h) and 66845(a) through (c) of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, and shall maintain on the premises a copy of the current biomedical waste management plan, and documentation verifying the manner of disposal used. Unless approved by the Deputy Director of Environmental Health Services, putrescible biohazardous waste shall not be maintained by the generator for more than seven days. Nonputrescible biohazardous waste (including sharps) shall not be maintained by the generator for more than six months. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.040 Biohazardous wastes – Large generators.
Any person who is a generator, or an employee of a generator, of biohazardous wastes, and produces 220 pounds or more of such wastes per month, shall store and dispose of such waste in the manner provided for in Section 66480(a) – (m), 66845(a) – (c), 66850(a) – (h), 66855(a) – (d), 66860, and 66865 of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, and shall maintain on the premises a copy of the current biomedical waste management plan and documentation verifying the manner of disposal used. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.050 Sharps containers and red bags – Additional requirements.
In addition to the requirements of PMC 8.89.030 and 8.89.040, all generators of biohazardous wastes shall meet the following requirements:

A. All sharps containers and red bags used in complying with PMC 8.89.030 and 8.89.040 shall be of the type defined in PMC 8.89.010(G) and (H).

B. All sharps containers and red bags shall be labeled in accordance with PMC 8.89.010(G) and (H) prior to placing any materials in the containers or bags.

C. When wastes are to be processed in an autoclave prior to disposal by the generator, they may be placed in a single red bag which must be placed in a clear autoclave bag which is labeled in the same manner as required for red bags in PMC 8.89.010(G). More than one red bag may be placed in an autoclave bag.

D. Wastes which are not processed in an autoclave prior to disposal by the generator shall be stored and disposed of in a red bag which is sealed inside of a second red bag.

E. Needles and syringes shall not be clipped prior to disposal.

F. Red bags, as defined in PMC 8.89.010, shall be used only for the storage and disposal of biohazardous wastes.

G. All materials disposed of in sharps containers shall be managed in the manner prescribed for biohazardous wastes in PMC 8.89.030 whether or not the materials are actually biohazardous wastes as defined in PMC 8.89.010(A). (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.060 Management plan – Preparation and filing.
A. All generators of biomedical wastes shall prepare a biomedical waste management plan as defined in PMC 8.89.010(C). The plan shall be filed with the Deputy Director of the Environmental Health Services Division of the San Diego County Department of Health Services, and a copy shall be kept at all times on the premises of the facility in which biomedical wastes are being generated.

B. Every biomedical waste management plan shall be updated and refiled annually, or when any of the information contained therein has changed, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.070 Exemption.
PMC 8.89.020 through 8.89.050 shall not be applicable to biomedical wastes produced by individuals through personal use at their residences and which are disposed of through residential service as required by PMC 8.68.140(A). (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.080 Criminal penalty.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County jail not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding $10,000, or both. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.090 Civil penalty.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $15,000 for each violation. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.100 Additional remedies.
The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter are remedies in addition to any existing remedy authorized by law and are not to be construed as conflicting with or in dereliction of, any provisions of this chapter or of this code or of law. The provisions are to be construed as independent and nonexclusive and in no way conditioned upon each other. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

8.89.110 Enforcement.
The Deputy Director of the Environmental Health Services division of the Department of Health Services shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The Environmental Health Services division of the San Diego County Department of Health Services shall be administering agency. (Ord. 291 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 8.90
RENTAL OF HOUSING USED FOR DRUG ACTIVITY
Sections:

8.90.010    Definitions.

8.90.020    Prohibition.

8.90.030    Notice of violation.

8.90.040    Failure to comply with notice of violation.

8.90.050    Declaration of public nuisance.

8.90.060    Construction.

8.90.070    Severability.

8.90.010 Definitions.
A. “Controlled substance” means a drug, substance, or immediate precursor, as listed in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Health and Safety Code Section 11054 et seq.

B. “Drug related nuisance” means the holding, maintenance, or use of a rental unit for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, manufacturing or giving away any controlled substance.

C. “Drug related use” means any use in a rental unit of a controlled substance.

D. “Illegal drug dealing activity” means any possession for sale, any sale, storage, possession, or manufacturing of a controlled substance from or in a rental unit.

F. “Landlord” means an owner, lessor or sublessor (including any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity) who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit, or the agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing.

G. “Rental unit” means any dwelling unit, efficiency dwelling unit, guest room, and suite, as defined in Chapter 17.04 PMC, including any single family residence, duplex and condominium in the City, the land and buildings appurtenant thereto, including common areas, garage facilities, alleyways, stairwells, and elevators. This term shall also include mobile homes, whether rent is paid for the mobile home and the land upon which the mobile home is located, or the rent is paid for the land alone. Further it shall include recreational vehicles, as defined in California Civil Code Section 799.24, if located in a mobile home park, whether rent is paid for the recreational vehicle and the land upon which it is located, or rent is paid for the land alone.

H. “Tenant” means a tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, any person entitled to use or occupancy or a rental unit, or any other person who is using or occupying a rental unit. (Ord. 297, 1989)

8.90.020 Prohibition.
A landlord shall not knowingly cause or permit any rental unit to be used or maintained for any drug-related use, illegal drug dealing activity, or drug-related nuisance. (Ord. 297, 1989)

8.90.030 Notice of violation.
If the City Attorney determines that a rental unit is being used or maintained in violation of PMC 8.90.020, then the City Attorney or any law enforcement agency may order the landlord to comply with the section. This order shall be presented to the landlord either by personal service or by a letter sent certified mail with a return receipt requested. The order shall contain as enclosures sufficient documentation to establish that the premises are being used or maintained for any drug-related use, illegal drug dealing activity or drug-related nuisance. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as authorizing the release of documentation which would violate an individual’s rights to privacy or any other applicable provision of law that precludes the release of public records. Nothing herein shall authorize a search of any rental unit or seizure of any property by a landlord under color of authority of the City or any employee or official thereof. (Ord. 297, 1989)

8.90.040 Failure to comply with notice of violation.
A landlord shall in good faith comply with the notice prescribed by PMC 8.90.030. If the landlord fails to comply with the notice, then the City Attorney or any law enforcement agency may take any lawful action to enforce PMC 8.90.020 hereof. Good faith compliance may be shown by the landlord’s obtaining the voluntary surrender of the premises by the tenant; or the landlord’s commencement and prosecution of unlawful detainer proceedings; or the landlord’s demonstration in writing to the satisfaction of the City Attorney that commencement of unlawful detainer proceedings is not supported by the evidence received by the City and by the landlord, taken as a whole. (Ord. 297, 1989)

8.90.050 Declaration of public nuisance.
In addition to any other enforcement action, the City Attorney may declare an alleged violation of PMC 8.90.020 or the activities described therein to constitute a public nuisance and may commence abatement of the conditions giving rise thereto in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 11570 et seq. (Ord. 297, 1989)

8.90.060 Construction.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted in such a way as to create a principal-agent relationship between the City and the landlord. (Ord. 297, 1989)

8.90.070 Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, part or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. It is declared that this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part or portion thereof, would have been adopted or passed irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 297, 1989)

Chapter 8.92
RENTAL OF SUBSTANDARD HOUSING
Sections:

8.92.010    Prohibition.

8.92.010 Prohibition.
No person as owner, manager, or lessor shall provide, rent or lease, or allow to be used, rented or leased to another, for the purpose of human habitation, any “substandard building” as that term is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. (Ord. 191 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 8.94
WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
Sections:

8.94.010    Declaration of necessity and intent.

8.94.020    Definitions.

8.94.030    Application.

8.94.040    Water use efficiency measures.

8.94.050    Conservation levels.

8.94.060    City-maintained parks, landscaped areas, and facilities.

8.94.065    Poway Unified School District-maintained landscaped areas and facilities.

8.94.070    Golf courses.

8.94.080    Commercial growers and nurseries.

8.94.090    Correlation between Drought Management Plan and water shortage response levels.

8.94.100    New landscaping and postponement of required landscaping.

8.94.110    Hardship variance.

8.94.120    Appeals.

8.94.130    Supersedure.

8.94.140    Enforcement.

8.94.010 Declaration of necessity and intent.
A. This chapter establishes water management requirements necessary to conserve water, enable effective water supply planning, assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, prevent unreasonable use of water, prevent unreasonable methods of use of water within the City of Poway in order to assure adequate supplies of water to meet the needs of the public, and further the public health, safety, and welfare, recognizing that water is a scarce natural resource that requires careful management not only in times of drought, but at all times.

B. This chapter establishes water use efficiency measures applicable to all persons or businesses using City of Poway water at all times to increase water efficiency.

C. This chapter establishes regulations to be implemented during times of declared water shortages, or declared water shortage emergencies. It establishes four levels of water conservation actions to be implemented in times of shortage, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening water supply conditions and decreasing available supplies.

D. Level 1 water conservation measures are voluntary and will be reinforced through local and regional public education and awareness measures. During water conservation Levels 2 through 4, conservation measures and water use restrictions are mandatory and become increasingly restrictive in order to attain escalating conservation goals. Violations may be subject to criminal, civil, and administrative penalties and remedies specified in this chapter and as provided in the Poway Municipal Code. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A. “Active park and school ground areas” means those areas designated by public agencies and private schools for specific sporting and recreational activities and areas traditionally used for active play or recreation, where turf is an integral part of the activity. All other turf areas shall be considered ornamental.

B. “Agency” means the City of Poway.

C. “City Manager” means the City of Poway City Manager or the City Manager’s designee.

D. “Devices” shall mean any method utilized to conserve potable or reclaimed water supplies or to offset existing potable or reclaimed water supplies.

E. “DMP” means the Water Authority’s Drought Management Plan in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and as readopted or amended from time to time, or an equivalent plan of the Water Authority to manage or allocate supplies during shortages.

F. “Fire protection” means actions for prevention or suppression of fires as directed by the Fire Marshal or fire prevention officer with jurisdiction over the local area involved.

G. “Golf courses” means the ground or course over which golf is played for commercial recreational use. A standard full-scale golf course encompasses 125 to 175 acres, usually with 18 holes varying from 100 to 650 yards in length from tee to cup. Shall also be defined to include areas owned by the same entity associated with the golf course for practice, ornamentation, recreation, and/or hospitality, including structures.

H. “Greywater” means household water other than toilet water, including, but not limited to, water from the laundry, shower, tub, bathroom, and kitchen sinks. The exception mentioned for greywater depends solely upon approval of such use by the San Diego County Department of Health Services.

I. “Grower” refers to persons engaged in the growing or raising, in conformity with recognized practices of husbandry, for the purpose of commerce, trade, or industry, or for use by public educational or correctional institutions, of agricultural, horticultural or floricultural products, and produced (1) for human consumption or for the market, or (2) for the feeding of fowl or livestock produced for human consumption or for the market, or (3) for the feeding of fowl or livestock for the purpose of obtaining their products for human consumption or for the market. “Grower” does not refer to customers who purchase water subject to the Metropolitan Interim Agricultural Water Program or the Water Authority Special Agricultural Rate programs.

J. “Metropolitan” means the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California.

K. “Micro-irrigation systems/equipment” means low-pressure, low-volume methods of water application. These devices include drip emitters, T-tape, microsprayers, a-jets, mini-sprinklers, twirlers, and spaghetti tubing. Pop-up sprinklers are not considered low-volume, low-pressure irrigation systems/equipment.

L. “Person” means any natural person, corporation, public or private entity, public or private association, public or private agency, government agency or institution, school district, college, university, or any other user of water provided by the City of Poway.

M. “Potable water” means water delivered by the City, which meets drinking water standards, or raw water delivered by the San Diego County Water Authority.

N. “Reclaimed water” means water which, as a result of treatment of wastewater, is suitable for a direct beneficial use or controlled use that would not otherwise occur.

O. “Recreational and ornamental lakes and ponds” means bodies of water which are not swimming pools or water storage reservoirs for potable water or irrigation purposes.

P. “Water Authority” means the San Diego County Water Authority.

Q. “Water used for agriculture” means water used to irrigate an agricultural crop or trees. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.030 Application.
A. The provisions of this chapter apply to any person using any water, other than reclaimed water, provided by the City of Poway.

B. This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of Federal, State, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff.

C. Nothing in this chapter is intended to affect or limit the ability of the City of Poway to declare and respond to an emergency, including an emergency that affects the ability of the City of Poway to supply water.

D. In the event of a local water supply emergency, for reasons that may or may not be related to the San Diego County Water Authority and/or its Drought Management Plan, the City Manager, acting as Director of Emergency Services, may immediately declare the appropriate water shortage response level pursuant to his or her powers under PMC 2.12.060, to be confirmed by the City Council at the earliest practical time.

E. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to use of water from private wells or to reclaimed water.

F. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to use of water that is subject to a special supply program, such as the Metropolitan Interim Agricultural Water Program or the Water Authority Special Agricultural Rate programs. Violations of the conditions of special supply programs are subject to the penalties established under the applicable program. A person using water subject to a special supply program and other water provided by the City of Poway is subject to this chapter in the use of the water that is not subject to the special supply program. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.040 Water use efficiency measures.
A. No water customer of the City of Poway shall knowingly make, cause, use or permit the use of water from the City for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by the conservation stages hereinafter designated, which are in effect pursuant to action taken by the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Good water management practices dictate that water be used wisely and not wasted at any time. The following water use efficiency measures apply on a voluntary basis at all times, apply on a mandatory basis during a Water Shortage Level 1 based upon separate action of the City Council; and apply on a mandatory basis automatically during a Water Shortage Level 2, 3, or 4:

1. Do not wash down paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or patios, except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitation hazards.

2. Do not allow water waste from inefficient landscape irrigation, such as runoff, low head drainage, or overspray and do not allow water flows onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

3. Irrigate residential and commercial landscape before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. only.

4. Use only a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle or bucket to water landscaped areas, including trees and shrubs located on residential and commercial properties that are not irrigated by a landscape irrigation system.

5. Irrigate nursery and commercial grower’s products before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. only. Watering is permitted at any time using a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, a bucket, or when a drip/micro-irrigation system/equipment is used. Irrigation of nursery propagation beds is permitted at any time. Water for livestock is permitted at any time.

6. Use only recirculated water to operate ornamental fountains.

7. Wash vehicles only using a bucket and a hand-held hose with positive shut-off nozzle, mobile high pressure/low volume wash system, or at a commercial site that recirculates (reclaims) water on site. Do not wash vehicles during hot conditions when additional water is required due to evaporation.

8. Offer guests in hotels, motels, and other commercial lodging establishments the option of not laundering towels and linens daily.

9. Do not use single-pass cooling equipment in new commercial applications, including, but not limited to, air conditioners, air compressors, vacuum pumps, and ice machines.

10. Use a water recirculation system for commercial conveyor car washes and all new commercial laundry systems.

11. Run only fully loaded dishwashers and washing machines.

12. Repair all water leaks within five days of notification by the City of Poway, unless other arrangements are made with the City Manager.

13. Use recycled or nonpotable water for construction purposes to the fullest extent possible when available. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.050 Conservation levels.
A. Level 1 – Water Shortage Watch.

1. Activation. A Water Shortage Response Level 1 condition is also referred to as a “Water Shortage Watch” condition. A Level 1 condition applies when the Water Authority notifies its member agencies that, due to drought or other supply reductions, there is a reasonable probability there will be supply shortages and that a consumer demand reduction of up to 10 percent is required in order to ensure that sufficient supplies will be available to meet anticipated demands.

2. Procedure. A Water Shortage Response Level 1 condition may be declared by the City Manager upon a written determination of the existence of facts and circumstances supporting the determination. A copy of the written determination shall be filed with the City Clerk and provided to the City Council. The City Manager shall publish a notice of the determination of the existence of the Water Shortage Response Level 1 condition in one or more newspapers, including a newspaper of general circulation used for publication of official notices. The City of Poway may also post notice of condition on its website.

During a Level 1 Water Shortage Watch condition, the City of Poway will increase its public education and outreach efforts to:

a. Ask customers to voluntarily reduce water use by 10 percent.

b. Inform customers of the water use efficiency measures listed in PMC 8.94.040.

c. Encourage customers to utilize the water conservation incentives and programs offered by the City of Poway and its suppliers.

During a Level 1 Water Shortage Watch condition, the water use efficiency measures identified in PMC 8.94.040 may become mandatory upon separate action of the City Council and are subject to the enforcement provisions identified in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC, and PMC 8.94.140.

The City Council may declare an end to a water shortage response level by adoption of a resolution at any regular or special meeting held in accordance with State law.

3. Water Use Restrictions. During a Level 1 Water Shortage Watch condition, in addition to the measures listed in PMC 8.94.040, the following measures are applicable on a voluntary basis to increase water use efficiency, unless made mandatory by action of the City Council:

a. Reset irrigation clocks as necessary to water once per week in winter, and not more than three times per week in summer.

b. Add water to maintain the level of water in swimming pools and spas only when necessary (to ensure proper operation of the pool filter). A cover shall be installed on all single-family residential pools and spas.

c. Serve and refill water in restaurants and other food service establishments only upon request.

B. Level 2 – Water Shortage Alert.

1. Activation. A Water Shortage Level 2 condition is also referred to as a “Water Shortage Alert” condition. A Level 2 condition applies when the Water Authority notifies its member agencies that due to cutbacks caused by drought or other reduction in supplies, a consumer demand reduction of up to 20 percent is required in order to have sufficient supplies available to meet anticipated demands.

2. Procedure. The City Manager may declare a Water Shortage Response Level 2 and implement the mandatory Level 2 conservation measures identified in this chapter, with ratification by the City Council by resolution at their next regularly scheduled City Council meeting held in accordance with State law. The mandatory conservation measures applicable to a Water Shortage Response Level 2 condition shall take effect on the tenth day after the date the response level is declared, or upon an identified date thereafter. Within five days following the declaration of the response level, the City shall publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper of general circulation used for publication of official notices. The City of Poway may also post notice of condition on its website.

The City Council may declare an end to a water shortage response level by adoption of a resolution at any regular or special meeting held in accordance with State law.

3. Water Use Restrictions. During a Level 2 Water Shortage Alert, the water use efficiency measures identified in PMC 8.94.040 and at Level 1 Water Shortage Watch are mandatory for all persons using City of Poway water in addition to the following mandatory conservation measures:

a. Landscape watering shall be conducted only in conformance with landscape watering schedules and restrictions for commercial and residential properties approved by the City Manager. The watering schedule and restrictions may address factors such as how many days during the week, which days of the week, the amount of time per watering station, and other pertinent details. Watering of landscaped areas that are not irrigated by a landscape irrigation system shall be subject to the same watering schedule and restrictions, using a bucket, hand-held hose with positive shut-off nozzle, or low-volume non-spray irrigation.

b. All leaks shall be repaired within 72 hours of notification by the City of Poway, unless other arrangements are made with the City Manager.

c. If the mandatory reduction level is less than 15 percent, ornamental fountains or similar decorative water features shall not be operated for more than six hours per day. If the mandatory reduction level is more than 15 percent, ornamental fountains shall not be operated unless reclaimed water is used.

d. If the mandatory reduction level is less than 15 percent, pool covers shall be encouraged but not required. If the mandatory reduction level is more than 15 percent, pool covers shall be required.

4. Allocation. During a Level 2 Water Shortage Alert, the City of Poway is authorized by action of the City Council to establish a water allocation for property receiving water service from the City of Poway, and to establish a penalty for any person that uses water in excess of their allocation.

5. Rate Structure. During a Water Shortage Response Level 2 condition, in addition to water use restrictions, the City is authorized by action of the City Council to implement a conservation rate structure designed to encourage water conservation. This rate structure may also include penalties to be used during periods of water allocation.

C. Level 3 – Water Shortage Critical.

1. Activation. A Water Shortage Level 3 condition is also referred to as a “Water Shortage Critical” condition. A Level 3 condition applies when the Water Authority notifies its member agencies that due to increasing cutbacks caused by drought or other reduction of supplies, a consumer demand reduction of up to 40 percent is required in order to have sufficient supplies available to meet anticipated demands.

2. Procedure. The City Manager may declare a Water Shortage Response Level 3 and implement the mandatory Level 3 conservation measures identified in this chapter, with ratification by the City Council by resolution at their next regularly scheduled City Council meeting held in accordance with State law. The mandatory conservation measures applicable to a Water Shortage Response Level 3 condition shall take effect on the tenth day after the date the response level is declared, or upon an identified date thereafter. Within five days following the declaration of the response level, the City shall publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper of general circulation used for publication of official notices. The City of Poway may also post notice of condition on its website.

The City Council may declare an end to a water shortage response level by adoption of a resolution at any regular or special meeting held in accordance with State law.

3. Water Use Restrictions. All persons using City of Poway water shall comply with Level 1 Water Shortage Watch and Level 2 Water Shortage Alert water conservation practices during a Level 3 Water Shortage Critical condition and shall also comply with the following additional mandatory conservation measures:

a. Landscape watering shall be conducted only in conformance with landscape watering schedules and restrictions for commercial and residential properties approved by the City Manager, which may be further restricted from the Level 1 requirements. The watering schedule and restrictions may address factors such as how many days during the week, which days of the week, the amount of time per watering station, and other pertinent details. Watering of landscaped areas that are not irrigated by a landscape irrigation system shall be subject to the same watering schedule and restrictions, using a bucket, hand-held hose with positive shut-off nozzle, or low-volume non-spray irrigation.

b. Vehicles shall not be washed except at commercial carwashes that recirculate water, or by high pressure/low volume wash systems.

c. Emptying and refilling of swimming pools and spas is prohibited unless approved by the City Manager.

d. All leaks shall be repaired within 48 hours of notification by the City of Poway unless other arrangements are made with the City Manager.

4. Upon the declaration of a Water Shortage Response Level 3 condition and by separate action of the City Council, the City of Poway is authorized to mandate that no new potable water service shall be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters shall be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as will serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability) shall be issued, unless findings are made that one or more of the following circumstances applies:

a. A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or

b. The project is necessary to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare; or

c. The applicant provides substantial evidence prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset to the satisfaction of the City of Poway; or

d. The City may allow new development to utilize conservation offsets and/or water-efficient technology in order to connect to the City’s water system and access the City’s water supply.

This provision shall not be construed to preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or to restore service that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less.

5. Upon the declaration of a Water Shortage Response Level 3 condition and by separate action of the City Council, the City of Poway is authorized to suspend consideration of annexations to its service area.

6. Allocation. During a Level 3 Water Shortage Alert, the City of Poway is authorized by action of the City Council to establish a water allocation for property receiving water service from the City of Poway, and to establish a penalty for any person that uses water in excess of their allocation.

7. Rate Structure. During a Water Shortage Response Level 3 condition, in addition to water use restrictions, the City is authorized by action of the City Council to implement a conservation rate structure designed to encourage water conservation. This rate structure may also include penalties to be used during periods of water allocation.

D. Level 4 – Water Shortage Response Emergency.

1. Activation. A Water Shortage Level 4 condition is also referred to as a “Water Shortage Emergency” condition. A Level 4 condition applies when the Water Authority Board of Directors declares a water shortage emergency pursuant to California Water Code Section 350 and notifies its member agencies that Level 4 requires a demand reduction of more than 40 percent in order for the City of Poway to have sufficient supplies available to meet anticipated demands.

2. Procedure. The City of Poway shall declare a water shortage emergency in the manner and on the grounds provided in California Water Code Section 350. The mandatory conservation measures applicable to a Water Shortage Response Level 4 condition shall take effect on the tenth day after the date the response level is declared, or upon an identified date thereafter. Within five days following the declaration of the response level, the City shall publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper of general circulation used for publication of official notices. The City of Poway may also post notice of condition on its website.

The City Council may declare an end to a water shortage response level by adoption of a resolution at any regular or special meeting held in accordance with State law.

3. Water Use Restrictions. All persons using City of Poway water shall comply with conservation measures required during Level 1 Water Shortage Watch, Level 2 Water Shortage Alert, and Level 3 Water Shortage Critical conditions, and shall also comply with the following additional mandatory conservation measures:

a. Do not irrigate landscape, except crops and landscape products of commercial growers and nurseries. This restriction shall not apply to the following categories of use (unless the City of Poway has determined that recycled water is available and may be lawfully applied to the use to the fullest extent possible):

i. Maintenance of trees and shrubs that are watered on the same schedule set forth at Level 3 by using a bucket, hand-held hose with a positive shut-off nozzle, or low-volume non-spray irrigation;

ii. Maintenance of existing landscaping necessary for fire protection as specified by the Poway Fire Marshal;

iii. Maintenance of existing landscaping for erosion control, as determined by the City Manager;

iv. Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well-being of rare animals, as determined by the City Manager;

v. Maintenance of landscaping within active playing fields, day care centers, and school grounds; provided, that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week according to the schedule established by the City Manager;

vi. Water for livestock; and

vii. Public works projects and actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects.

b. All leaks must be repaired within 24 hours of notification by the City of Poway unless other arrangements are made with the City Manager.

4. Allocation. During a Level 4 Water Shortage Alert, the City of Poway is authorized by action of the City Council to establish a water allocation for property receiving water service from the City of Poway, and to establish a penalty for any person that uses water in excess of their allocation.

5. Rate Structure. During a Water Shortage Response Level 4 condition, in addition to water use restrictions, the City is authorized by action of the City Council to implement a conservation rate structure designed to encourage water conservation. This rate structure may also include penalties to be used during periods of water allocation. (Ord. 696 § 1, 2009; Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.060 City-maintained parks, landscaped areas, and facilities.
The provisions of this chapter apply to City-maintained parks, athletic fields, landscaped areas, and facilities, with the exception of the watering schedule restrictions. Aggregate water use for these properties shall be restricted at the same level as required of the City of Poway as a water agency. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.065 Poway Unified School District-maintained landscaped areas and facilities.
The provisions of this chapter apply to Poway Unified School District-maintained landscaped areas and facilities, with the exception of watering schedule restrictions. Water use shall be restricted at the same level as required of the City of Poway as a water agency. (Ord. 696 § 2, 2009)

8.94.070 Golf courses.
The provisions of this chapter apply to golf courses, with the exception of watering schedule restrictions. Golf course water use shall be restricted at the same level as required of the City of Poway as a water agency, including raw and potable water. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.080 Commercial growers and nurseries.
The provisions of this chapter apply to commercial growers and nurseries, with the exception of watering schedule restrictions. Water use by commercial growers and nurseries shall be restricted at the same level as required of the City of Poway as a water agency, including raw and potable water. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.090 Correlation between Drought Management Plan and water shortage response levels.
A. The correlation between the Water Authority’s Drought Management Plan (DMP) stages and the City of Poway’s water shortage response levels identified in this chapter is described herein. Under DMP Stage 1, the City of Poway would implement Water Shortage Response Level 1 actions. Under DMP Stage 2, the City of Poway would implement Water Shortage Response Level 1 or Level 2 actions. Under DMP Stage 3, the City of Poway would implement Water Shortage Response Level 2, Level 3, or Level 4 actions.

B. The water shortage response levels identified in this chapter correspond with the Water Authority DMP as identified in the following table:

Water Shortage Response Levels

Use Restrictions

Conservation Target

DMP Stage

1 – Water Shortage Watch

Voluntary

Up to 10%

Stage 1 or 2

2 – Water Shortage Alert

Mandatory

Up to 20%

Stage 2 or 3

3 – Water Shortage Critical

Mandatory

Up to 40%

Stage 3

4 – Water Shortage Emergency

Mandatory

Above 40%

Stage 3

(Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.100 New landscaping and postponement of required landscaping.
A. New Landscaping. The City Manager may grant an exemption or a modification to the required watering schedule restrictions to property owners who have installed new low water use landscaping in order to establish the plants.

B. Postponement of Required Landscaping. The City Manager is authorized to direct developers of approved projects to postpone installation of required landscaping plant materials upon written agreement to install said improvements within six months of a change in the designated conservation stage. The developer’s condition of approval to install landscaping shall be deemed satisfied by the execution of an agreement guaranteed by cash deposit, surety bond, letter of credit, or other security form acceptable to the City Attorney and in an amount equal to 150 percent of the installation cost as estimated by the City Manager. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.110 Hardship variance.
A. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using agency water or to property upon which agency water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to City of Poway water users generally or to similar property or classes of water uses, then the person may apply for a variance to the requirements as provided in this section.

B. The variance may be granted or conditionally granted, only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using agency water or to property upon which agency water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to City of Poway water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user’s property.

1. Application. Application for a variance shall be on a form prescribed by the City of Poway and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the Poway City Council.

2. Supporting Documentation. The application shall be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and/or other information, including a written statement of the applicant.

3. Required Findings for Variance. An application for a variance shall be denied unless the approving authority finds, based on the information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for the property shown by the records of the City of Poway, all of the following:

a. That the variance does not constitute a grant or special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other City of Poway water customers.

b. That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to customers generally.

c. That the authorizing of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the City of Poway to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest.

d. That the condition or situation of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the variance is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature.

4. Approval Authority. The City Manager shall exercise approval authority and act upon any completed application no later than 10 days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the variance. The applicant requesting the variance shall be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a variance is approved, the variance applies to the subject property during the term of the mandatory water shortage response. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.120 Appeals.
A. An appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk to review any action taken by the City Manager hereunder within 15 days of the date of service or mailing of the written decision made pursuant to PMC 8.94.110. Appeals filed late shall be denied. Appeals shall be conducted using an independent hearing officer, according to the appeal procedure set forth for administrative citations in Chapter 2.20 PMC, except that the deposit required by PMC 2.20.050 shall not be applicable.

B. The appeal shall be granted in whole or in part, or denied, in accordance with the following standards:

1. Protection of the public health, safety and welfare;

2. The existence of special circumstances creating an undue or unreasonable hardship on appellant; provided, that granting of the appeal, in whole or in part, shall not constitute a privilege to the appellant not enjoyed by others in the same circumstances, shall not cause water to be wasted or used in an unreasonable manner, and shall not be contrary to the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.130 Supersedure.
If any provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with previous actions of the City Council pertaining to plans to respond to drought conditions, the provisions hereof shall supersede such inconsistent provisions. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

8.94.140 Enforcement.
In addition to the penalties set forth in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC for the violation of a City ordinance, the following penalties shall apply to any person, corporation, or association violating any provision of this chapter:

A. A first violation shall result in a letter of warning accompanied by a copy of this chapter.

B. A second violation shall result in a $100.00 surcharge, which will be added to the water bill.

C. A third violation within a 12-month period shall result in a $200.00 surcharge, which will be added to the water bill.

D. Any subsequent violation occurring within one year of any third violation shall result in a $500.00 surcharge, which will be added to the water bill, and possible installation of a flow restrictor, until the sunset of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

E. Any further violation may result in the water service being turned off.

The City Manager shall determine if and when violations occurred. Any person disagreeing with the notice of violation may appeal in accordance with PMC 8.94.110 and 8.94.120 hereafter by written notice received by the City Clerk within 15 days of the date of notice of violation. Any notice of violation not timely appealed shall be final. Pending any appeal provided for herein, the City Manager may take appropriate steps to prevent the unauthorized use of water as appropriate to the nature and extent of the violation and the current declared water condition.

Any surcharge hereunder shall be in addition to the basic water rates or other charges of the City for the account, shall appear on and be payable with the first billing statement for the period during which the violation occurred, and be subject to the same remedies that are imposed by the City for the failure to pay other charges.

In addition to any surcharges mentioned above, all costs for installing or removing any flow restrictor devices and/or any charges to discontinue or restore service shall be the sole cost of the customer whose service is affected and shall be paid promptly upon being billed. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.96
WATER CONSERVATION ENFORCEMENT MEASURES
Sections:

8.96.010    Purpose.

8.96.020    Definitions.

8.96.030    Establishment of allocations and base level usage.

8.96.040    Establishment of administrative fines and penalties.

8.96.050    Charge of administrative fines and penalties.

8.96.060    Administrative review of administrative fines and penalties.

8.96.070    Failure to pay administrative fines or penalties.

8.96.080    Initiation and termination of water allocation – Administrative fines or penalties.

8.96.090    Water usage data.

8.96.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the framework for identifiable administrative fines and penalties that may be imposed by the City for customers of the City’s water services whose consumption of water exceeds the amount allocated by the City Council for the billing cycle being charged. Fines and penalties collected may be used for any governmental purpose of the City; however, it is the intent of this chapter that the use of the fines and penalties collected should be the initial source of revenues to address State or regional water conservation mandates and directives.

The imposition of the administrative fines and penalties are subject to those procedures established by Chapter 1.10 PMC, as amended from time to time, except as supplemented in this chapter. The amount of administrative fines and penalties shall not exceed the amounts set forth in this chapter, but because the City experiences varying degrees of water supply restrictions (due to, adversely, sustained drought conditions or, favorably, improvements in the supply of potable water as a result of successful conservation efforts and other conditions) they shall be based upon a determination of allocation or base level usage as set by resolution of the City Council from time to time and consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

8.96.020 Definitions.
In addition to those terms previously defined in this chapter, for the purposes of this chapter, and for the purpose of any resolution to implement this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Administrative fine” or “administrative penalty” means a fine or penalty imposed on the responsible party as an incentive measure, and as permitted by this chapter, for water usage above the customer’s water allocation, in the amount as may be adopted by the City Council by resolution.

B. “Administrative review” means the procedures for imposing administrative fines and penalties as set forth in Chapter 1.10 PMC. Administrative review includes all procedures involving the appeal of the administrative fines or penalties charged, but shall not include any judicial review of a final decision.

C. “Allocation” or “water allocation” means the amount by which a customer shall be limited in its use of raw, potable, or reclaimed water during any billing cycle, as determined by resolution of the City Council.

D. “Base level usage” means an amount of water that is fixed by resolution of the City Council to be an allowable amount to be consumed by single-family or multifamily residential customers during any billing cycle and below which conservation is not required.

E. “Billing cycle” means the period of time that water is delivered to a customer through the City’s water facilities. The billing cycle may be monthly, bimonthly, or whatever period of time is established between the City and the customer by agreement. The billing cycle may be prorated based on the date of the opening or closing of account, including upon the termination of services following a “shut off” notice issued by the City.

F. “Conservation” refers to a temporary change in behavior of how water is used due to water use restrictions. Water use restrictions are often imposed due to a drought or other type of emergency that temporarily constrains supply availability.

G. “Customer” means the party responsible (whether person, persons, or entity) for the payment of charges for water delivered by the City to the residence, business, or property. The customer does not need to own the property where the water is delivered.

H. “End use water efficiency” focuses on reducing water waste, not just restricting its use to establish conservation. For example, not flushing the toilet as often would be considered water conservation; replacing a 3.5 gallon/flush toilet with a 1.28 gallon/flush toilet would be considered water end use efficiency.

I. “Enforcement officer” means the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager, the Director of Public Works, and the Director of Finance, or any other person authorized by the City Manager to enforce the provisions of any City ordinance.

J. “Incentive measures” refers to policies that use economic penalties and/or economic benefits to encourage water users to make decisions sooner rather than later to invest in end use efficiency methods and/or to restrict current water use.

K. “Responsible party” or “party responsible” means the customer, the property owner (if either arrangements are made between the property owner and the City, or if by law, allowing a lien to attach to the property), or such persons responsible for payment of water charges for the account.

L. Unit of Water. A “unit of water” is the equivalent of 748 gallons or 100 cubic feet (HCF).

M. “Variance” means an exception to the allocated amount of water that may be consumed by a customer without incurring an administrative fine or penalty due to circumstances specifically related to the proper sanitation measures required in the home, for the health of either persons residing in the home or benefit from the daytime care of children or adults, although who are not residents. A variance may be limited in amount and in time, and is granted on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 811 § 12, 2017; Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

8.96.030 Establishment of allocations and base level usage.
A. Pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 8.94 PMC, the City Council may, by resolution, establish a water allocation for each property served by the City. The City Council may also establish base level usage for single-family and multifamily residential customers by resolution.

B. If the City establishes water allocation amounts or base level usage amounts, it shall provide notice of the allocation or base level usage by including it in the regular billing statement for the fee or charge or by any other mailing to the address to which the City customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for ongoing water service.

C. Following the effective date of the water allocation or base level amounts any customer using water in excess of the allocation applicable to the property, and which also exceeds the base level applicable to that customer, shall be subject to a penalty for each billing unit of water in excess of the allocation or the base level, whichever is greater.

D. The penalty for excess water usage shall be cumulative to any other remedy or fee that may be imposed for violation of this chapter or Chapter 8.94 PMC. (Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

8.96.040 Establishment of administrative fines and penalties.
A. It is a violation for any City water customer to use, and it is a violation for any responsible party to allow to be used, more than the water allocation and base level usage of water (as may be adjusted by an approved variance) for any billing cycle on any account. Any customer whose use exceeds the water allocation and base level usage of water (as may be adjusted by an approved variance) shall be subject to an administrative fine or administrative penalty that shall be set by a resolution of the City Council from time to time for excess of the water allocation and base level usage that is in effect at the time of the violation.

B. Fines and penalties, if any, shall be in addition to water service fees the City imposes for water delivered to the meter.

C. No administrative fine or administrative penalty shall exceed 100 percent of the amount of the volumetric water charges for the billing cycle on the account for which the customer or the responsible party is determined in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

8.96.050 Charge of administrative fines and penalties.
Upon a determination that an administrative fine or penalty is chargeable by this chapter the enforcement officer shall determine the amount, charge it to the customer’s account as a special charge, and include the fine or penalty on the customer’s bill for the billing cycle in which the fine or penalty was incurred, all in accordance with Chapter 13.11 PMC. Receipt of a water bill with any administrative fine or penalty shall serve as notice of violation of the City’s rules and regulations herein. (Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

8.96.060 Administrative review of administrative fines and penalties.
A. Any customer who wishes to appeal the imposition of an administrative penalty or fine imposed by the City under this chapter shall comply with the following procedures:

1. The customer shall pay all amounts due and owing on his or her water bill, except for any disputed penalty(ies) imposed by the City pursuant to this chapter to avoid interruption in service.

2. The customer shall submit an appeal request form to the Director of Finance no later than 15 calendar days from the date that the customer’s water bill for the billing cycle in which any penalty imposed is due.

B. An appeal may be granted under the following limited circumstances:

1. The amount of water delivered to the customer’s property did not violate the water allocation, as evidenced by a demonstrable malfunction in the meter serving the customer’s property or a billing error by the City.

2. The customer demonstrates the water use is in accordance with a previously granted variance or, if the customer had not previously applied for a variance, that the use is in accordance with a subsequently approved variance applied for within 10 days following the billing date.

3. The customer demonstrates an undetected water leak occurred at his or her property during the billing cycle in which the penalty was imposed, resulting in water loss that did not benefit the customer, and notifies the City of such leak at least five days prior to the bill due date, and demonstrates that the leak has been repaired.

C. The City shall respond to the appeal request within 30 calendar days from receipt of the appeal request form.

D. The decision of the Director of Finance shall be final.

E. If the appeal is not granted, the customer shall pay all the disputed penalties within 10 days of the date that the decision is mailed to the customer.

F. Legal action must be commenced in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4(b) by filing a petition with the Superior Court within 20 days of the date that the final decision of the Director of Finance is served on the customer. (Ord. 811 § 13, 2017; Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

8.96.070 Failure to pay administrative fines or penalties.
Nonpayment of any penalty or fine imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the same remedies available to the City as for nonpayment of basic water rates. Any administrative fines or penalties not paid, or not credited following any administrative review of the charge, shall continue to be charged to the responsible party until paid. No interest on the unpaid fines or penalties shall apply during any period of administrative review by the City. Upon a final determination of the amount of the fines or penalties, payments on any account shall first be applied to the administrative fines or penalties outstanding, in the order by which they were first charged, and the balance of any payment, following the full payment of fines and penalties, shall be applied to the outstanding balance of the customer’s account. (Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

8.96.080 Initiation and termination of water allocation – Administrative fines or penalties.
The City Council may initiate the implementation of water allocations or base level usage regulation from time to time by resolution. After implementation of water allocations or base level usage is initiated pursuant to this section, the City Council can, at any time, by resolution, terminate the implementation and cease imposing administrative fines or penalties for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

8.96.090 Water usage data.
The City Council hereby determines that the public interest in providing water usage data to a customer for their property address clearly outweighs the public interest in not providing the information, when such information is for the purpose of allowing a customer to more accurately evaluate their water allocation, or for the purposes of appealing any administrative fine or penalty. Therefore the City Council hereby approves the release of any water usage data of a former customer at the property address of a current customer, Section 6254.16 of the California Government Code notwithstanding. (Ord. 778 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 8.98
DRONE OPERATIONS DURING PERIODS OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Sections:

8.98.010    Purpose.

8.98.020    Definitions.

8.98.030    Geographical zones of activity.

8.98.040    Prohibited activity.

8.98.050    Civil liability for enforcement services.

8.98.060    Reimbursement for costs of enforcement services.

8.98.070    Violations.

8.98.080    Reservation of legal options.

8.98.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit persons from launching into flight, operating, and landing following flight, drones (as defined herein) during such times that the City of Poway is experiencing an emergency response, as defined herein. (Ord. 780 § 1, 2015)

8.98.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A. “Director” is defined as the Director of Safety Services, or such person designated by the City Manager or Director of Safety Services to act in the capacity of Director.

B. “Drone” is defined as an unmanned aircraft system, or an unmanned aerial vehicle, also known as remotely piloted aerial systems, used for either recreational or commercial purposes; which carries a payload consisting of one or more cameras for still pictures, video recording, or video streaming purposes; which may be a fully-automated flying vehicle or in a communication link and responsive to operator control and direction; and is carrying its own source of power; and is in communication with the operator by way of external control, remote systems. For the purposes of this chapter any drone operated by local, State or Federal law enforcement or emergency response personnel while acting in their official capacities shall not be included in this definition.

C. “Emergency response” means situations where a City, County, State, or Federal governmental agency, or any combination thereof, has initiated fire, paramedic, ambulance, or law enforcement services in response to an existing or threatened incident located within the City or within two miles of the City limits, involving a wildfire, structure fire, flooding, seismic activity, accident, or criminal activity, which could require the use of airplanes, helicopters, or drones to provide assessment of conditions or actual emergency services to aid victims, transport persons or animals, suppress fires, or investigate or intervene in criminal activity.

D. “Enforcement officer” means any officer or employee of the City, and any law enforcement officer employed by the San Diego County Sheriff’s office, with the authority to enforce the Poway Municipal Code, including but not limited to a code compliance officer, inspector, deputy sheriff, and the Fire Marshal.

E. “Exempt drones” are defined as those drones owned or operated by (1) any local, State, or Federal agency while acting in their official capacities; and (2) any public utility as defined in this chapter, but only when used to assess and inspect the public utility’s facilities during a period of emergency response and with the consent of the Director.

F. “Land” or “landing” means the controlled or uncontrolled return of a drone to the ground or to any structure, vehicle, or person located on the earth’s surface. For the purpose of this definition a person is located on the earth’s surface regardless of whether the person is in actual physical contact with the earth at the time of landing.

G. “Launch” means to set forth a drone into flight.

H. “Operation,” for the purposes of this chapter, includes, but is not limited to, controlling a drone before, during, or after its flight into airspace. “Operation” can include active control of a drone in flight, controlling the flight of a drone based on pre-programmed instructions, or altering a pre-programmed flight of a drone, all handled remotely from the ground.

I. “Public utility” is defined as any gas corporation, electrical corporation, telephone corporation, telegraph corporation, water corporation, and sewer system corporation, each as defined in the Public Utilities Act of the State of California (Part 1 of Division 1 of the California Public Utilities Code, Section 201 et seq.).

J. “Quadrant” shall mean one of the four geographical zones in the City of Poway identified in PMC 8.98.030, each based upon public streets. Where a street that identifies a portion of a boundary of a quadrant terminates, its definition shall include all such property that would be included within the quadrant if the streets had extended in prolongations to the City limits.

K. “Restricted” shall mean that certain drone activity is temporarily prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 780 § 1, 2015)

8.98.030 Geographical zones of activity.
For the purposes of this chapter, during those periods of emergency response designated by the Director, the City shall be divided into four quadrants as follows:

A. Quadrant A: the northern portion of the City bounded by Espola Road and Green Valley Truck Trail to the south.

B. Quadrant B: the eastern portion of the City bounded by the east- and west-bound portions of Green Valley Truck Trail to the north, the north- and south-bound portions of Espola Road and Poway Road to the west, and Garden Road and Sycamore Canyon Road to the south.

C. Quadrant C: the southern portion of the City bounded by Poway Road and Garden Road to the north and Sycamore Canyon Road to the east.

D. Quadrant D: the western portion of the City bounded by Poway Road to the south, the north- and south-bound portions of Poway Road and Espola Road to the east, and the east- and west-bound portions of Espola Road to the north. (Ord. 780 § 1, 2015)

8.98.040 Prohibited activity.
No person shall launch, land, or operate a drone while that person is located in any quadrant identified by the Director as a restricted quadrant during any period of emergency response. The Director may identify one or more, including all, quadrants as restricted during any emergency response. This prohibition shall not apply to the operator of any exempt drone. (Ord. 780 § 1, 2015)

8.98.050 Civil liability for enforcement services.
Whenever a person launches, operates, or lands a drone in a restricted quadrant and a peace officer or code enforcement officer is called to the scene, the person or persons having control of the drone shall be liable for the cost of providing enforcement services during the response by enforcement officers, and any follow-up response by enforcement officers. (Ord. 780 § 1, 2015)

8.98.060 Reimbursement for costs of enforcement services.
The actual cost of enforcement services described in PMC 8.98.050 shall be deemed a debt owed to the City, and if not paid, may be recoverable in a civil action, and shall be recoverable in a civil action, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. (Ord. 780 § 1, 2015)

8.98.070 Violations.
A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirement of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Chapter 1.08 PMC and may be enforced through injunctive relief. Penalties for violation of the provisions of this chapter may result in a misdemeanor citation, punishable by a maximum of six months in jail and a $1,000 fine. In addition to any other remedies found in this code any person found to violate this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties in the amount of $1,000 for each and every offense. (Ord. 780 § 1, 2015)

8.98.080 Reservation of legal options.
The City of Poway does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in this chapter is in addition to any other statute, ordinance or law, civil or criminal. This chapter in no way limits the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 780 § 1, 2015)

Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapters:

9.02    Picketing of Private Residence

9.04    Race Discrimination

9.08    Synthetic Stimulants and Synthetic Cannabinoids

9.10    Regulation of the Sale of Products Containing Ephedrine

9.11    Possession of Clonazepam

9.12    Firearms, Fireworks and Explosives

9.16    Public Nudity

9.20    Cardrooms and Gambling

9.24    Curfew

9.26    Daytime Curfew

9.28    Solicitation of Tort Claims

9.30    Hotel, Motel, and Lodging House Registration Regulations

9.32    Mobile Marijuana Dispensaries

9.36    Unauthorized Use of Badges

9.40    Demonstration Equipment Prohibited

9.44    Alarm Systems

9.48    Community Services Facility – Rules and Regulations

9.52    Use of Police Services for Second Response on Private Property

9.54    House Parties – Consumption of Alcohol, Marijuana, and Other Controlled Substances by Minors

9.56    Graffiti

Chapter 9.02
PICKETING OF PRIVATE RESIDENCE
Sections:

9.02.010    Intent and purpose.

9.02.020    Picketing private residence prohibited.

9.02.010 Intent and purpose.
It is the intent of the City Council in enacting PMC 9.02.020 to adopt a limited prohibition against targeted picketing which shall be construed and applied in accordance with the interpretation given to a similar ordinance by the United States Supreme Court in Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474 (1988). PMC 9.02.020 shall only prohibit picketing focused on and taking place in front of a particular residence. The limited purpose of the prohibition is to preclude intrusion upon the constitutionally protected privacy rights of the targeted resident. (Ord. 409 § 1, 1993)

9.02.020 Picketing private residence prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the residence or dwelling of any individual in the City. (Ord. 409 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 9.04
RACE DISCRIMINATION
Sections:

9.04.010    Discrimination signs prohibited.

9.04.010 Discrimination signs prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to display in any restaurant, hotel, eating house, place where ice cream or soft drinks are sold for consumption on the premises, barbershop, bathhouse, theater, skating rink, public conveyance, and all other places of public accommodation or amusement, any sign, written or printed, or notice of any kind whatsoever, which attempts to discourage patronage of members of any certain race or color and/or which tends to discriminate in the public service offered against any person because of race or color. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.401)

Chapter 9.08
SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS AND SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS
Sections:

9.08.010    Purpose and intent.

9.08.020    Definitions.

9.08.030    Public nuisance.

9.08.040    Authority to administer and enforce.

9.08.050    Abatement authority and procedures – Other remedies.

9.08.060    Severability.

9.08.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the public health and safety within the City of Poway from the dangers and ill effects of synthetic stimulants and synthetic cannabinoids by declaring certain activities involving these drugs to be a public nuisance and subject to all available civil remedies. (Ord. 747 § 1, 2013)

9.08.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. Synthetic Stimulants. As used in this chapter, the terms “synthetic stimulant” and “synthetic stimulants” are defined as follows:

1. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation, except bupropion or compounds listed under a different schedule, which contains any quantity of the following substances having a stimulant effect on the central nervous system, including its salts, isomers, esters, or ethers, and salts of isomers, esters, or ethers whenever the existence of such salts, isomers, esters, or ethers, and salts of isomers, esters, or ethers is possible within any of the following specific chemical designations:

a. Naphthylpyrovaleron, whether or not further substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the naphthyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents, or whether or not further substituted in the carbon chain at the 3-, 4-, or 5-position with an alkyl substituent.

b. 2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone (cathinone) or variation in any of the following ways:

i. By substitution in the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents.

ii. By substitution at the 3-position with an alkyl substituent.

iii. By substitution at the 2-amino nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, or benzyl groups, or by inclusion of the 2-amino nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.

2. “Synthetic stimulants” are commonly marketed under the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night and White Lightning but may be marketed under other trade names and contain a common disclaimer that these products are “not safe for human consumption.”

3. “Synthetic stimulants” do not include normal, standard bath salts that do not contain synthetic chemical compounds listed above that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. Standard bath salts primarily contain magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts), sodium chloride (table salt), sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), sodium hexametaphosphate (Calgon, amorphous/glassy sodium metaphosphate), sodium sesquicarbonate and borax.

B. Synthetic Cannabinoids. As used in this chapter, the terms “synthetic cannabinoid” and “synthetic cannabinoids” are defined as follows:

1. Any synthetic cannabinoid agonist, including but not limited to the substances listed below and any substances identified as a “synthetic cannabinoid compound” by Health and Safety Code Section 11357.5:

a. 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-018).

b. 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-073).

c. 1-2-[(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-200).

d. 5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (CP-47,497).

e. 5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (cannabicyclohexanol; CP-47, 497 C8 homologue).

f. Naphthoylindoles: any compound containing a 3-(1-naphthoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

g. Naphthylmethylindoles: any compound containing a 1H-indol-3-yl-(1-naphthyl)methane structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

h. Naphthoylpyrroles: any compound containing a 3-(1-naphthoyl)pyrrole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the pyrrole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-t-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

i. Naphthylmethylindenes: any compound containing a naphthylideneindene structure with substitution at the 3-position of the indene ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent.

j. Phenylacetylindoles: any compound containing a 3-phenylacetylindole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent.

k. Cyclohexylphenols: any compound containing a 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol structure with substitution at the 5-position of the phenolic ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not substituted in the cyclohexyl ring to any extent.

l. Benzoylindoles: any compound containing a 3-(benzoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent.

m. 2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)-pyrrolo-[1,2,3-de]-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-napthalenylmethanone.

n. 9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c] chromen-1-ol.

o. Adamantoylindoles: any compound containing a 3-(1-adamantoyl)indole structure with substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by an alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, 1-(N-methyl-2-piperidinyl)methyl, or 2-(4-morphonyl)ethyl group, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent and whether or not substituted in the adamantyl ring system to any extent.

2. Synthetic cannabinoids products are commonly marketed under the following names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke, Pot-Pourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Serenity, Fake Weed, but may be marketed under other trade names and contain a common disclaimer that these products are “not safe for human consumption.”

3. “Synthetic cannabinoids” does not include normal, standard incense that is sold as incense sticks, oils or cones that is commonly used for its aromatic qualities that do not contain any synthetic chemical compounds listed above that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects.

C. Distribute. As used in this chapter, the term “distribute” has the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11012.

D. Person. As used in this chapter, the term “person” or “persons” has the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11022. (Ord. 747 § 1, 2013)

9.08.030 Public nuisance.
A. It is a public nuisance for any person to distribute, sell or possess with the intent to distribute or sell synthetic stimulants and/or synthetic cannabinoids.

B. Possession that is not described in subsection A of this section is declared to be a public nuisance when such possession injuriously affects any person or persons, other than the person in possession, in such other person’s or persons’ health, safety, welfare, or comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (Ord. 747 § 1, 2013)

9.08.040 Authority to administer and enforce.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Development Services, each agent thereof who is assigned to duties which include the enforcement of this chapter, any peace officer, and any other City official authorized to enforce any provision of the Municipal Code, as noted below. (Ord. 747 § 1, 2013)

9.08.050 Abatement authority and procedures – Other remedies.
A. Public Nuisance. If a public nuisance exists pursuant to this chapter, any of the persons identified in PMC 9.08.040 may proceed under Chapter 8.72 PMC, Nuisance Abatement Procedure.

B. Civil Remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the City of Poway from pursuing any and all other legal remedies that may be available, including but not limited to civil actions filed by the City Attorney seeking any and all appropriate relief such as civil injunctions, penalties and forfeiture.

C. Civil Penalties. Notwithstanding Chapter 1.08 PMC, General Penalty, Chapter 1.10 PMC, Administrative Citations and Penalties, Chapter 8.72 PMC, Nuisance Abatement Procedure, or any other section of this code to the contrary, any person, entity, or organization that maintains a public nuisance as defined in this chapter may be subject to civil penalties up to $1,000 for each day said nuisance is in existence. (Ord. 747 § 1, 2013)

9.08.060 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 747 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 9.10
REGULATION OF THE SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING EPHEDRINE
Sections:

9.10.010    Declaration of purpose.

9.10.020    Definitions.

9.10.030    Limitations on the sale or purchase of ephedrine products.

9.10.040    Separate violation for each incident.

9.10.050    Enforcement authority.

9.10.060    Strict liability offenses.

9.10.010 Declaration of purpose.
The City Council of the City of Poway finds and declares as follows:

A. In addition to its legal uses, ephedrine is used in the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine, and illicit drug manufacturers extract ephedrine from various over-the-counter products containing as an ingredient ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.

B. Southern California generally and San Diego County specifically has become known to narcotics officers and drug enforcement agents for its high incidence of illicit manufacture, sale and use of methamphetamine.

C. There is a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare in that the manufacture, processing, transportation, possession and sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are inherently dangerous, and that the chemicals, compounds, substances, byproducts and wastes associated with the manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs are both dangerous and injurious to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the City of Poway.

D. There has been an increase in the sales, thefts and possession of over-the-counter products that contain as an ingredient ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, or pseudoephedrine sulfate, as well as other products associated with the manufacture of methamphetamine.

E. The reasonable limitations found in this chapter on the quantity of products containing ephedrine that may be sold to or purchased by a customer on a single day will assist the City in its efforts to combat the insidious criminal methods of illegal methamphetamine manufacturers in the City, and will not unduly restrict legitimate businesses or customers from selling or buying these products. (Ord. 502 § 1, 1998)

9.10.020 Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided, for purposes of this chapter:

“Count” means the number of pills, tablets, capsules or individual units of a substance contained within an individual package.

“Customer” means any person who purchases or acquires products from any retail store or establishment.

“Ephedrine” means any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal, that contains ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, or pseudoephedrine sulfate. “Ephedrine” does not mean naturally occurring ephedra alkaloids unless they are spiked with synthetic ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.

“Package” means any bottle, box, blister pack or other container in which products containing ephedrine are sold.

“Retail store or establishment” means any single geographic location of any business, company, corporation, person, employee or associate, that sells products to any customer. It does not include any wholesaler engaged in a wholesale transaction.

“Sell” means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, distribute, or supply, whether or not for monetary gain or other consideration.

“Wholesaler” means one whose business is the selling of goods in gross to retail stores for purposes of resale. (Ord. 502 § 1, 1998)

9.10.030 Limitations on the sale or purchase of ephedrine products.
A. It is unlawful for any person during a single transaction to sell to a customer more than three packages of products containing ephedrine.

B. It is unlawful for any person during a single transaction to sell to a customer products containing ephedrine where the total count exceeds 100.

C. It is unlawful for any customer on any single day to purchase or acquire more than three packages of products containing ephedrine.

D. It is unlawful for any customer on any single day to purchase or acquire products containing ephedrine where the total count exceeds 100. (Ord. 502 § 1, 1998)

9.10.040 Separate violation for each incident.
Each incident in violation of PMC 9.10.030 shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 502 § 1, 1998)

9.10.050 Enforcement authority.
The City Attorney shall be authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 502 § 1, 1998)

9.10.060 Strict liability offenses.
Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. (Ord. 502 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 9.11
POSSESSION OF CLONAZEPAM
Sections:

9.11.010    Declaration of purpose.

9.11.020    Definitions.

9.11.030    Limitations of the sale or purchase of clonazepam.

9.11.040    Separate violation for each incident.

9.11.050    Enforcement authority.

9.11.060    Strict liability offenses.

9.11.010 Declaration of purpose.
The City Council of the City of Poway finds and declares as follows:

A. In addition to its legal uses, adults and juveniles are abusing clonazepam to become intoxicated and/or to facilitate sexual assault.

B. There is a current and immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, in that the use of clonazepam by juveniles and adults is increasing at an alarming rate in the County of San Diego due to its easy access, low price and powerful effect.

C. Currently there is no law that prohibits mere possession of this drug without a valid prescription. (Ord. 529 § 1, 2000)

9.11.020 Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided, for purposes of this chapter:

“Clonazepam” means any drug, substance, or compound, whether legal or illegal, that contains clonazepam as described in California Health and Safety Code Section 11057(d)(6). (Ord. 529 § 1, 2000)

9.11.030 Limitations of the sale or purchase of clonazepam.
Except as authorized by law or Article 7 (commencing with Section 4211) of Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code, it is unlawful for any person to possess clonazepam or any substance that contains clonazepam without a valid prescription. Mere possession of clonazepam or any substance that contains clonazepam without a valid prescription is a violation of this section and shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of the person’s intent regarding such possession. (Ord. 529 § 1, 2000)

9.11.040 Separate violation for each incident.
Each incident in violation of PMC 9.11.030 shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 529 § 1, 2000)

9.11.050 Enforcement authority.
The City Attorney shall be authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 529 § 1, 2000)

9.11.060 Strict liability offenses.
Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. (Ord. 529 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 9.12
FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
Sections:

9.12.010    Definitions.

9.12.020    Prohibition.

9.12.030    Exceptions.

9.12.040    Permits.

9.12.050    City Council may designate special areas.

9.12.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the meanings set out in this section:

A. “Explosive” is defined as any chemical compound or any mechanical mixture which when ignited by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, detonator or any other means causes a sudden or rapid combustion, causing violent expansion of the air or gases and accompanied by a report. The term “explosives” includes fireworks and “safe and sane fireworks,” and includes but is not limited to devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, paper caps, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, fountains, spike fountains, whistles, handle fountains, California candles, ground spinners, or ground spinning devices, wheels – vertical, wheels – horizontal, toy smoke devices, flitter devices, and fireworks kits.

B. “Fire” means to explode, discharge or impel by using compressed air, heat, percussion or electric spark.

C. “Firearm” means any device or weapon from which a missile, such as, but not limited to, a bullet, ball or shell, is hurled by compressed air or explosive. (Ord. 648 § 2, 2007; Ord. 37 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 33.101(a))

9.12.020 Prohibition.
No person shall fire any firearm or explode any explosive within the City. (Ord. 37 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 33.101(b))

9.12.030 Exceptions.
This section does not apply to firearms fired under the authority of the United States, the State, or the City, nor to shooting galleries or target ranges; nor where a permit has been issued or a firing area designated by the City Council pursuant to PMC 9.12.040 and 9.12.050. (Ord. 37 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 33.101(c))

9.12.040 Permits.
The Director of Safety Services may issue written permits to fire firearms or explode explosives upon such terms and under such conditions as he or she deems proper. The terms and conditions imposed by the Director shall be set forth on the face of any permit issued under this section. (Ord. 710 § 2, 2010; Ord. 37 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 33.101(d))

9.12.050 City Council may designate special areas.
The City Council, by resolution, may designate certain areas within the City in which it is lawful to fire firearms upon such terms and under such conditions as the Council deems proper. (Ord. 37 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 33.101(e))

Chapter 9.16
PUBLIC NUDITY
Sections:

9.16.010    Purpose and intent.

9.16.020    Definitions.

9.16.030    Unlawful.

9.16.040    Applicability to persons of certain age.

9.16.050    Applicability to theatrical performances.

9.16.060    Penal Code prohibitions.

9.16.010 Purpose and intent.
The presence of persons who are nude and exposed to public view in or on public rights-of-way, public parks, public beaches or any other public land, or in or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public beach, public park, or other public land, is offensive to members of the general public unwillingly exposed to such persons. Nudity, if it is to be permitted to be exposed to public view, should be confined to a defined area. The provisions of this chapter are enacted for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, morals and general welfare of all persons in the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.1001)

9.16.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set out in this section:

A. “Nudity” means devoid of an opaque covering which covers the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region, or pubic hair region of any person or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person.

B. “Public place” means any public beach, park, street or waters adjacent thereto, or any place open to the public or exposed to public view, including specifically a view from any private residence or any portion of the real property in the immediate vicinity of such private residence, whether such place is publicly or privately owned. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC §§ 32.1002, 32.1003)

9.16.030 Unlawful.
It is declared a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to appear, sunbathe, bathe, walk, disrobe, or otherwise be nude in any public place except in an area expressly set aside for such purpose or in those portions of a comfort location, if expressly set aside for such purpose. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.1004)

9.16.040 Applicability to persons of certain age.
This chapter shall not apply to persons under the age of 10 years of age. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.1005)

9.16.050 Applicability to theatrical performances.
This chapter shall not apply to persons engaged in a live theatrical performance, in a theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is predominantly devoted to theatrical performances. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.1006)

9.16.060 Penal Code prohibitions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any act or acts which are expressly authorized or prohibited by the Penal Code of the State. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.1007)

Chapter 9.20
CARDROOMS AND GAMBLING
Sections:

9.20.010    Gambling implements prohibited.

9.20.020    Letting premises for gambling prohibited.

9.20.030    Conducting houses for gambling prohibited.

9.20.040    Betting on games prohibited.

9.20.010 Gambling implements prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person within the City to exhibit or expose to view in any barred or barricaded house or room or in any place built or protected in a manner to make it difficult of access or ingress to police officers, when three or more persons are present, any cards, dice, dominoes, fan-tan table or layout, or any part of such layout, or any gambling implements whatsoever; or for any person to visit or resort to any such barred or barricaded house or room or other place in the City built or protected in a manner to make it difficult of access or ingress to peace officers, where any cards, dice, dominoes, fan-tan table or layout, or any such layout, or any gambling implements whatsoever are exhibited or exposed to view when three or more persons are present; or for any person in said City to become a visitor at any place for the practice of gambling in the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.101)

9.20.020 Letting premises for gambling prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise knowingly to let or underlet, or transfer the possession of any premises for use by any person, or to permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or under his charge or control in the City to be used, in whole or in part, as a gambling house or place for playing, conducting, dealing, or carrying on any game, not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State, with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or anything of value. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.102)

9.20.030 Conducting houses for gambling prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, to keep, conduct or maintain within the City any house, room, apartment, or place used in whole or in part as a gambling house or a place where any game, not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State, is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or anything of value. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.103)

9.20.040 Betting on games prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person within the City to conduct, carry on, play at or bet upon any game known as peon, chuck-a-luck or for anything of value whatsoever, or to bet with money or anything of value whatsoever at or upon the result of any of said games or either of them. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 37.105)

Chapter 9.24
CURFEW
Sections:

9.24.010    Purpose and intent.

9.24.020    Definitions.

9.24.030    Prohibition – Minor.

9.24.040    Prohibition – Adult.

9.24.050    Exceptions.

9.24.060    Enforcement – Penalty.

9.24.010 Purpose and intent.
By enacting a curfew regulation that applies to minors and their parents, the City Council intends to preserve and promote the safety and welfare of the community and minors during late night hours. In adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City Council considered and relied upon evidence that proves the effectiveness of a juvenile curfew in promoting these purposes. This regulation is intended to reasonably balance the public interest and the protected rights of minors and their parents. This balance is achieved by applying the principle that parental responsibility for a minor’s conduct is paramount to the City’s regulatory authority. Enforcement of this curfew only becomes necessary in the absence of parental authority. (Ord. 477 § 2, 1997)

9.24.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following words or phrases are defined:

A. “Curfew hours” means the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.

B. “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, without limitation, fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

C. “Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with which the court has placed a minor.

D. “Minor” means any person under the age of 18.

E. “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of a minor.

F. “Public place” means any place to which any member of the public has access, including, without limitation, public rights-of-way, public grounds, dedicated open or trail space, or any privately owned unsupervised land that is open and generally available to the public including, without limitation, vacant lots, school parking lots and common areas, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, housing complexes, shopping centers, and malls.

G. “Responsible adult” means the parent, guardian, or adult person at least 21 years old having the responsibility for the care, custody, and control of a minor. (Ord. 477 § 2, 1997)

9.24.030 Prohibition – Minor.
No minor shall be present in any public place during curfew hours. (Ord. 477 § 2, 1997)

9.24.040 Prohibition – Adult.
No responsible adult shall knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow a minor to be present in any public place during curfew hours. (Ord. 477 § 2, 1997)

9.24.050 Exceptions.
The prohibitions described in PMC 9.24.030 and 9.24.040 shall not apply to any minor who, in the alternative, is:

A. Accompanied by his or her responsible adult;

B. Engaged in or directly en route to or from an employment activity;

C. Engaged in any emergency;

D. Present at a public place abutting the minor’s residence;

E. Present in any privately owned building or structure generally committed to a business or trade which is open to and serves the public, or going to or returning from said privately owned building or structure without detour or stop;

F. Attending or directly en route to or from a school sponsored, religious, or recreational activity supervised by at least one responsible adult and sponsored and conducted by the City, a civic organization, public agency, charitable organization, religious entity, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;

G. On an errand at the direction of the minor’s responsible adult without any detour or stop;

H. In any motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

I. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution while being supervised by at least one responsible adult; or

J. Legally emancipated. (Ord. 477 § 2, 1997)

9.24.060 Enforcement – Penalty.
A. Each violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense;

B. A charge under this chapter may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or an infraction. Minors shall be prosecuted in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure.

C. Any person convicted of an infraction for violating this chapter may be punished by a fine not exceeding $250.00 or by a requirement to perform County or City approved work projects or community service or both.

D. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violating this chapter may be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time not exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or both. (Ord. 477 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 9.26
DAYTIME CURFEW
Sections:

9.26.010    Intent.

9.26.020    Infractions, penalties, continuing violations.

9.26.030    Daytime loitering by minors.

9.26.040    Minor curfew, loitering or wilful misconduct – Cost recovery.

9.26.010 Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to encourage juveniles to take advantage of educational opportunities; to reduce the incidence of daytime burglary; to reduce losses due to daytime juvenile crime; and, by reducing juvenile truancy, to develop a program to keep juveniles out of the Juvenile Justice System. (Ord. 455, 1996)

9.26.020 Infractions, penalties, continuing violations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Poway Municipal Code, when a person under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter, and a peace officer issues a notice to that minor to appear in court, the charge may be prosecuted as either a misdemeanor or as an infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. The amount of the fine imposed shall be set by the court. (Ord. 455, 1996)

9.26.030 Daytime loitering by minors.
It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to loiter upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised public place between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. Monday through Friday at times when such person’s school is in session.

This section does not apply:

A. When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; or

B. When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having care or custody of the minor; or

C. When the minor is going or coming directly from or to their place of gainful employment or to or from a medical appointment; or

D. To students who have permission to leave a school campus for lunch or school-related activity and have in their possession a valid, school issued, off-campus permit; or

E. To students currently enrolled in an independent study program. (Ord. 455, 1996)

9.26.040 Minor curfew, loitering or wilful misconduct – Cost recovery.
A. Determination by Court. When a person under 18 years of age is detained for a period of time in excess of one hour, and said detention required the supervision of the juvenile offender by San Diego County Sheriff’s Department employee(s), the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody or control of said minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing such personnel over and above the services normally provided by said department and may be assessed the cost thereof by the court if such detention results in civil finding or criminal conviction of violation of PMC 9.26.030. Said assessment shall be payable to the City of Poway.

B. Appeal. Any person receiving a bill for Sheriff’s Department services pursuant to this chapter may, within 15 days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of said charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal said billing. Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the City Manager, or his or her designee, as the hearing officer. Within 10 days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the Sheriff’s services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the City shall be paid within 30 days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer. (Ord. 455, 1996)

Chapter 9.28
SOLICITATION OF TORT CLAIMS
Sections:

9.28.010    Soliciting employment for settling tort claim prohibited.

9.28.020    Exceptions.

9.28.010 Soliciting employment for settling tort claim prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to solicit employment for himself, or for any other person, either directly or through some other person acting on his behalf, to prosecute, collect, settle, compromise or to negotiate for the settlement, compromise or collection of any tort claims, on behalf of any tort claimant, in which he himself has no pecuniary interest arising from such tort in the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.501)

9.28.020 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent joint tort claimants from negotiating with each other for the purpose of combining respective claims or actions against the tort feasor. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.502)

Chapter 9.30
HOTEL, MOTEL, AND LODGING HOUSE REGISTRATION REGULATIONS
Sections:

9.30.010    Purpose and scope.

9.30.020    Definitions.

9.30.030    Registration identification required.

9.30.040    Multiple renting or letting prohibition.

9.30.050    Signing of true name.

9.30.060    Violation – Penalty.

9.30.010 Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to deter the facilitation of prostitution, illicit drug activity, and other illegal activities within the City by regulating registration practices in hotels, motels, and other lodging houses. (Ord. 744 § 1, 2012)

9.30.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as set forth below:

A. “Hotel” means any structure or portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, including any hotel, inn, tourist home, or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home, motor home, travel trailer, or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

B. “Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

C. “Room” means any area within a hotel intended for use as dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes. “Room” does not mean any area within a hotel not intended for use as sleeping or lodging quarters such as meeting or conference rooms.

D. “Transient” means any person possessing any room or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, sleeping or any other purpose, or possessing the right to do the same for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. (Ord. 744 § 1, 2012)

9.30.030 Registration identification required.
A. Every operator of every hotel in the City shall at all times keep and maintain therein a register, in which the operator shall inscribe with ink the name, address, and date of birth of the adult transient who registers for a room or rooms. Concurrent with the registration process, the adult transient who registers for a room or rooms must provide to the operator a valid picture identification. Valid picture identification includes a valid driver’s license, federal or state government or military identification card, passport, or any form of identification that contains the transient’s picture, current address, and date of birth. The type of picture identification provided to the operator shall be noted in the register and include the document’s identification number and the state or country of issuance. Additionally, the adult transient who registers for a room or rooms will be asked to provide the representatives for the hotels, motels, and lodging houses with the number of adults who will be occupying such room or rooms.

B. At the time of registration, the operator shall inquire of each transient, and include in the register, the make and model of the transient’s vehicle as well as the license plate number. If more convenient to the guest, he or she will be asked to provide the front desk with this information at his or her convenience but prior to the termination of the period for which the room (or rooms) was let.

C. Such register shall be signed by the transient and such operator shall thereupon write opposite such name and address so registered the number of each room assigned thereto together with the time of such inscription. Until all of the aforementioned entries, except vehicle information, have been made in such register, no transient shall be permitted to occupy any room in any hotel in the City. Erasures or alterations on the register shall be prohibited excepting correction of an error, and no person shall erase or obliterate any name or address or permit the same. When the transient quits or surrenders any room in any hotel, the operator of the hotel shall enter the time thereof in the register opposite the name of such transient.

D. Registration records shall be maintained electronically for not less than three years from inscription and shall be available for reasonable inspection by City officials or any peace officer. (Ord. 744 § 1, 2012)

9.30.040 Multiple renting or letting prohibition.
No operator shall rent or let any room in any hotel more than once within an eight-hour time period. (Ord. 744 § 1, 2012)

9.30.050 Signing of true name.
No person shall write or cause to be written, nor shall any operator or person in charge of any hotel knowingly permit to be written, in any register of any hotel any name other than the true name of the person so registering. (Ord. 744 § 1, 2012)

9.30.060 Violation – Penalty.
Any violation of any provision contained in this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense punishable by up to a $1,000 fine and/or 12 months in the county jail. (Ord. 744 § 1, 2012)

Chapter 9.32
MOBILE MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
Sections:

9.32.010    Definitions.

9.32.020    Mobile marijuana dispensaries prohibited.

9.32.030    Marijuana delivery prohibited.

9.32.040    Public nuisance declared.

9.32.050    Violations.

9.32.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:

“Mobile marijuana dispensary” means any clinic, cooperative, club, business or group which transports or delivers, or arranges the transportation or delivery, of marijuana to a person.

“Operation” means any effort to locate, operate, own, lease, supply, allow to be operated, or aid, abet or assist in the operation of a mobile marijuana dispensary.

“Person” means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization. The term “person” shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson. (Ord. 808 § 19, 2017; Ord. 786 § 2, 2016)

9.32.020 Mobile marijuana dispensaries prohibited.
Mobile marijuana dispensaries are prohibited in the City of Poway. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aid, abet or assist in the operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary within the City limits. (Ord. 786 § 2, 2016)

9.32.030 Marijuana delivery prohibited.
A. No person shall deliver marijuana to any location within the City from a mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose.

B. No person shall deliver any marijuana-infused product such as tinctures, baked goods or other consumable products to any location within the City from a mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose. (Ord. 786 § 2, 2016)

9.32.040 Public nuisance declared.
The operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary within the City in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 786 § 2, 2016)

9.32.050 Violations.
Violations of this chapter may be enforced by any applicable law. Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, a violation of this chapter is not subject to criminal penalties. (Ord. 786 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 9.36
UNAUTHORIZED USE OF BADGES
Sections:

9.36.010    Unauthorized use of badges resembling City badges.

9.36.010 Unauthorized use of badges resembling City badges.
Any person, other than an officer or employee of the City who is authorized to use or carry a badge, insignia or emblem, who wilfully carries, wears, publicly exhibits or displays or uses any badge, insignia, or emblem which is identical to, a replica of, or resembles any official or authorized badge, insignia or emblem issued to such officer or employee of the City is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.1101)

Chapter 9.40
DEMONSTRATION EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED
Sections:

9.40.010    Prohibition.

9.40.010 Prohibition.
No person shall carry or possess while participating in any demonstration, rally, picket line or public assembly any length of lumber, wood, metal or lath, unless that object is one-quarter inch or less in thickness, and two inches or less in width. Or, if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed one-half inch in its thickest dimension. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 32.1103(a))

Chapter 9.44
ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sections:

9.44.010    Definitions – Grammatical interpretation.

9.44.020    Registration of alarm agents.

9.44.030    Alarm permits.

9.44.040    Direct dial telephone devices.

9.44.050    Prohibitions.

9.44.060    Inspection of alarm system.

9.44.070    Automatic shut-off requirement.

9.44.080    Delay device requirement.

9.44.090    Power supply.

9.44.100    Testing alarm.

9.44.110    Responsibilities of users of alarm systems.

9.44.120    Duties of alarm business when dispatching emergency personnel.

9.44.130    Finding of a false alarm.

9.44.140    False alarm – Penalties.

9.44.150    Fees.

9.44.160    Suspension of privilege to use alarm system.

9.44.170    Appeals.

9.44.180    Limitation on liability.

9.44.190    Criminal penalties.

 

*    Prior legislation: County Code §§ 310.101 – 310.115, 310.118; Ords. 26, 29, 295 and 334.

9.44.010 Definitions – Grammatical interpretation.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, whenever the singular or masculine is used, the same shall be deemed to include the plural, feminine or body corporate as necessary.

B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as applying within the City as further set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

1. “Alarm agent” means any person in possession of a State-approved alarm company agent identification card containing said agent’s photograph and physical description and employed by maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, responding to or causing others to respond to an alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility. This definition shall not apply to local safety officers as defined in Government Code Section 20019.4.

2. “Alarm business” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity which leases, maintains, services, repairs, or causes to be leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed, any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility, which is licensed by the California Department of Consumer Affairs.

3. “Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for either the detection of fire, medical emergency or intrusion into a building, structure or facility or any of the above, which detection causes a local audible alarm or transmission of a signal or message, or which is used to evoke Sheriff or Fire Department response.

Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, direct-dial telephone devices. Devices which are not designed or used to evoke Sheriff or Fire response and devices which are designed so as not to be audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility are not included within this definition.

Also not included in this definition are auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its system from damage or disruption by use of an alarm system or alarm systems affixed to vehicles. Any alarm system shall be so constructed as to be immune to environmental variations and interference including, but not limited to heat, cold, moisture, electromagnetic and power fluctuations.

4. “Alarm user” means any owner, renter or lessee of a building, whether or not inhabited or occupied, in which an alarm system is installed for the detection of unlawful intrusion or fire in the City.

Any person who rents/leases any property with an alarm system shall be deemed responsible for the use or misuse of the alarm system.

Any person who owns property with an alarm system which is unoccupied shall be deemed responsible for the use or misuse of the alarm system.

5. “Appellant” means a person who submits an appeal pursuant to PMC 9.44.170.

6. “Audible alarm” means a device designed to emit a noise to alert nearby persons of fire or intrusion into a building, structure or facility.

7. “Day” means a calendar day.

8. “False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system responded to by any public agency through mechanical failure or malfunction, or accidental tripping, misoperation or misuse by the lessee or owner of the alarm system or his employee or agent. Mechanical failure or malfunction caused by negligent maintenance of the system is also included in this definition. Upon failure of the Sheriff or Fire Department to find any evidence of intrusion, fire or other need or cause for activating an alarm system, a conclusive presumption of false alarm will be made. False alarm does not include alarms caused by malfunction of telephone line circuits, or external causes beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the alarm system.

9. “Person” means a person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, individual, organization or company.

10. “Smoke detector” means a device which senses visible or invisible particles of combustion and is designed to emit upon activation a sound sufficient only to provide warning to the occupants of the building, structure or facility in which such device is situated. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.020 Registration of alarm agents.
No person shall be employed or operate as an alarm agent in the City without having first obtained an alarm company agent identification card from the State of California, Department of Consumer Affairs which shall have affixed thereto a photograph of the agent, having been taken within 30 days of the issuance of the stated card. The card shall also contain such statistical information in regards to the agent as would currently be required upon a motor vehicle driver’s license issued by the State of California. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.030 Alarm permits.
No person shall install, maintain, lease service, repair, alter, replace, move or use any security or emergency alarm system without first obtaining a City alarm permit. The alarm permit application shall include the alarm location, type of alarm system (silent or audible activation), type of response requested (robbery, burglary, fire or medical emergency), name of business (if applicable), name, home address, phone number of alarm location and additional names, addresses and phone numbers of responsible persons for emergency notification. The alarm permit shall be required for each building, structure or facility that uses an alarm system that could evoke an emergency response. A new permit shall be required upon installation, sale or transfer of ownership of alarm location. Alarm permits shall be required for existing systems within six months from date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. An alarm permit shall be valid for an indefinite period unless there is a change in alarm user or address location of the alarm system. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.040 Direct dial telephone devices.
No person shall lease, maintain, service, repair, alter, replace, move, install, or use any alarm system which directly dials any telephone number of the Department of Safety Services Offices, including the City Fire Department or Sheriff’s Department. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.050 Prohibitions.
A. It is unlawful to install or modify an alarm system which upon activation emits a sound similar to sirens used on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes.

B. It is unlawful to transmit an alarm indicating that an emergency exists without being specific as to the type of emergency, such as robbery, burglary, fire or medical. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.060 Inspection of alarm system.
Fire alarm systems shall be listed by the Office of the State Fire Marshal. The City reserves the right to inspect any systems installed within the City. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.070 Automatic shut-off requirement.
All alarm systems shall include a device which will limit the generation of the audible sound of the system to no longer than 15 minutes after activation, and the Sheriff or his representative or responding Fire Department Supervisor shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect or otherwise render inoperable any activated alarm which fails to reset. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.080 Delay device requirement.
All burglary detection alarm systems, excluding such alarm systems that are for an immediate distress or “panic” situation, shall include a device which will provide a 30-second delay before the original alarm transmission or activation of an external bell or other sound device, and immediately upon being activated shall emit a signal in such a manner as to be perceptible to a person lawfully entering, leaving or occupying the premises. Such a device is intended to provide an opportunity for the person having lawful control of the alarm system to terminate its operation after activation but prior to the transmission of a false alarm. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.090 Power supply.
An alarm system shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal utility electric service will not activate the alarm system. The backup power supply must be capable of at least 12 hours of continuous operation without generating a false alarm. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.100 Testing alarm.
A. Any user of an alarm system shall notify the user’s central receiving station or answering service prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation of the alarm system which might activate a false alarm and result in a Sheriff or Fire Department response. When testing an alarm results in a response by Sheriff or Fire Department, a conclusive presumption of false alarm will be made.

B. After any false alarm caused by any malfunction of an alarm system, the owner or lessee shall cause the alarm system to be repaired so as to eliminate such malfunction before reactivating the alarm system. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.110 Responsibilities of users of alarm systems.
The user of an alarm system or systems shall provide the Director of Development Services with a current mailing address and the names, addresses and phone numbers of at least two persons to call in the event of an emergency. In the event the users mailing address or the names, addresses and phone numbers of such persons change, the user shall supply the changes to the Director of Development Services within five days of the change. The user of any alarm system shall securely lock all doors and windows of an alarmed building prior to activation of a security alarm. All locking devices shall be maintained in good condition. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 457 § 2(A), 1996; Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.120 Duties of alarm business when dispatching emergency personnel.
Any alarm activation important enough to dispatch emergency personnel shall also be responded to by the user or a party who has responsibility for the alarmed premises or a person sent by the alarm company. The alarm company shall notify the user or his/her designated responder. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.130 Finding of a false alarm.
Upon failure of the responding officer of the Sheriff’s or Fire Department to find any evidence of criminal activity or fire, a presumption of false alarm will be made. If the alarm user disputes this finding he/she shall appeal it to the Director of Development Services or his/her authorized representative within 10 days. If the alarm user still disputes the decision of the Director of Development Services or his/her authorized representative, he/she will be directed to file an appeal per PMC 9.44.170. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 457 § 2(A), 1996; Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.140 False alarm – Penalties.
Any person who uses an alarm system for the protection of his/her real or personal property or person which has caused any signal, message or alarm to be transmitted to the Fire Department or Sheriff, either by direct communication from an alarm agent or an alarm business, or by a person responding to an audible alarm, and which is determined to be false, shall pay a false alarm penalty to the City as follows:

A. The first two false alarms in any 12-month period shall be considered accidental. This is so the alarm user can determine and/or repair the cause of such alarm and no penalty fee charged. Subsequent false alarms within any 12-month period shall be subject to a penalty. At the time of a false alarm, the user of the alarm system shall be notified that any further false alarms may result in penalty assessments, by a card that is left on the door of the residence or business. This card will have the penalty assessment fee schedule printed on it.

B. The user of the alarm system shall be assessed the penalty fees for any false alarms above the initial two false alarms in any 12-month period as shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The penalty fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer or his/her designee for deposit in the general fund. (Ord. 457 § 2(A), 1996; Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.150 Fees.
Fees prescribed in this chapter shall be in addition to any other lawful fees imposed by the City for doing business with or in the City. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.160 Suspension of privilege to use alarm system.
A. If at any time it comes to the attention of the Director of Development Services that the user of an alarm system has violated any provisions of this chapter, rules or regulations made pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to, failure to pay false alarm penalties, the Director of Development Services may serve such user with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reason(s) for such suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served, or 72 hours after the same has been deposited by certified mail in any branch of the United States Post Office addressed to the user of such alarm system at his/her address as set forth on the current tax assessor’s roll.

B. Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, such user shall immediately discontinue the use of any alarm system.

C. Upon failure of the user of an alarm system to pay the false alarm penalty provided for in the alarm permit and penalty fee sections, to cause the alarm system or alarm systems to be properly repaired, or to be properly used and operated, or to submit an appeal to the City Manager, as provided for in PMC 9.44.170, such user shall immediately discontinue the use of any systems. The alarm system or systems shall not thereafter be used until such payment has been made, such repairs have been effected, or such owner or lessee satisfies the Director of Development Services that such system or systems shall be properly repaired or used in the future, and the Director of Development Services shall authorize use of such system or systems. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 457 § 2(A), 1996; Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.170 Appeals.
A. If the user of an alarm system disputes any action of the Director of Development Services, such person may appeal to the City Manager by filing with the City Clerk, within 10 days, a statement addressed to the City Manager setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the action of the Director of Development Services. The City Clerk shall notify the appellant in writing of the time and place set for hearing of the appeal. The City Manager or designated representative, shall within 10 days from the date on which such appeal has been filed with the City Clerk, hear the appellant with the Director of Development Services and shall consider all relevant evidence to determine the merits of the appeal. The City Manager may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the Director of Development Services, and that decision shall be final. Any decision by the City Manager to suspend shall be effective immediately.

B. The right to appeal to the City Manager from an action of the Director of Development Services shall terminate 10 days following the deposit of a certified letter in any branch of the United States Post Office addressed to the user of an alarm system at his above mentioned mailing address or personal service of said letter, advising the appellant of the order of suspension.

C. If the user is not satisfied with the decision of the City Manager, the user may appeal to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.20 PMC. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 457 § 2(A), 1996; Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.180 Limitation on liability.
The City is under no obligation or duty to any users of an alarm system or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter or by reason of the exercise of any privilege pursuant to this chapter, nor shall this chapter impose any liability, obligation or duty upon the City in regards to, but not limited to, defects in a security or fire alarm system, any delay in transmission of an alarm message to any emergency unit, or damage caused by nonresponse or in responding to any alarm by any City officer, employee or agent. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

9.44.190 Criminal penalties.
Violations of this chapter may be charged, in accordance with Chapter 1.08 PMC. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 9.48
COMMUNITY SERVICES FACILITY – RULES AND REGULATIONS
Sections:

Article I. City Community Services Facilities

9.48.010    Definitions.

9.48.020    Director to operate Community Services facilities.

9.48.030    Rules and regulations.

Article II. Preservation of City Community Services Facility Features and Public Health and Safety

9.48.040    Hours of operation for City parks.

9.48.050    Camping.

9.48.060    Plants.

9.48.070    Mistreating animals.

9.48.080    Geological features.

9.48.090    Special permits.

9.48.100    Defacement prohibited.

9.48.110    Rubbish.

9.48.120    Weapons and firearms.

9.48.130    Fire hazard.

9.48.140    Barbecues.

9.48.150    Toilet facilities.

9.48.160    Water pollution.

9.48.170    Horses and other animals.

9.48.180    Animals – Presence.

9.48.190    Closing hours.

9.48.200    Washing or repairing cars.

9.48.210    Speed limits.

9.48.220    Parking.

9.48.230    Children.

9.48.240    Soliciting, selling and advertising.

9.48.250    Entertainment.

9.48.260    Peace and quiet.

9.48.270    Alcoholic beverages.

9.48.280    Pedestrian walkways.

9.48.290    Glass prohibited.

9.48.300    Lawful directives of staff.

9.48.310    Directive prohibiting presence in park.

9.48.320    Skate parks.

9.48.330    Unauthorized vehicles.

Article I. City Community Services Facilities

9.48.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Camp” means to reside in or use a park for living accommodation purposes, as exemplified by remaining for prolonged or repetitious periods of time not associated with ordinary recreational use of a park with one’s personal possessions (including but not limited to clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware and similar material), sleeping or making preparations to sleep, storing personal belongings as above defined, regularly cooking or consuming meals, or living in a parked vehicle. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that the participants, in conducting these activities, are in fact using the area as a living accommodation regardless of the intent of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may also be engaged.

B. “Community Services facility” includes parks, recreation facilities, and cultural facilities owned by, leased by or under the control of the City and used as defined herein.

C. “Community Services site employee” means any person employed by the City whose position is assigned to the Community Services Department with duties conducted in or around any indoor or outdoor City park, recreation facility, or cultural facility or area.

D. “Cultural facility” shall include City buildings and outdoor areas that are primarily used for the purpose of arts, education and nature exploration, including all land, water, road improvements, parking, and facilities therein.

E. “Director” means the Director of Community Services or a designated representative.

F. “Other wheeled recreational device” means nonmotorized bicycles, scooters, in-line skates, roller skates, or wheelchairs.

G. “Parks” are designated as City parks, recreation areas, and reserves by the City Council including all land, water, road improvements, parking, and facilities therein.

H. “Recreation facility” is any building that is primarily used for the purpose of recreation and leisure activities including all land, water, road improvements, parking, and facilities therein.

I. “Scooter” means any wheeled device, motorized or not, that has handlebars and is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator.

J. “Skateboard” means a board of any material that lacks a handle mechanism, has wheels attached and such wheels may be used for moving or propulsion.

K. “Skate park” means any facility that is designed and maintained for the purpose of recreational skating. The skate park shall include the fence and the entire area within the fencing surrounding the skate facility, if the immediate skate facility is fenced. (Ord. 782 § 2, 2015)

9.48.020 Director to operate Community Services facilities.
A. The operation of all City Community Services facilities shall be under the control of the Director subject to the supervision of the City Council.

B. Each Community Services site employee is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Director, and shall take appropriate action in the case of any violations thereof.

C. Any peace officer shall have the power to make arrests for violations of the provisions of this chapter and to issue citations for such violations as provided in Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.030 Rules and regulations.
The Director shall promulgate rules and regulations for the operation of City Community Services facilities, and fees and charges for the use of City Community Services facilities, which shall be effective from the time they are approved by the City Council. Such rules and regulations, or excerpts thereof, shall be posted in City Community Services facilities if such posting is feasible in the opinion of the Director; irrespective of posting, copies of such rules and regulations shall be available to persons desiring copies thereof at the office of the Director during business hours. No person shall violate and no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

Article II. Preservation of City Community Services Facility Features and Public Health and Safety

9.48.040 Hours of operation for City parks.
Except as otherwise posted, City parks shall be open to the public between sunrise and sunset. Except by special permit, no person shall be present in any City park at any time that the park is not open to the public. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.050 Camping.
No person shall camp, lodge or sleep overnight, or between sunset and sunrise, except in areas specifically designated for such purpose and as may be permitted by the Director. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.060 Plants.
No person shall pick, dig up, mutilate, destroy, injure, disturb, move, molest, burn or carry away any plant or vegetation, or portion thereof, including aquatic plants. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.070 Mistreating animals.
No person shall trap, kill, wound or maltreat any wild or domesticated bird or animal, and no person shall permit any pet to pursue, trap, kill or wound any wild or domesticated bird or animal. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.080 Geological features.
No person shall destroy, disturb, deface or remove earth, sand, gravel, oil, minerals, rocks or fossils, features of caves, or any parts thereof. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.090 Special permits.
The Director may grant a permit to remove, destroy or otherwise disturb plants or animals or geological, historical or archaeological materials upon finding that such will be in the best interests of the City. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.100 Defacement prohibited.
No person shall in any way deface, mutilate or remove any sign, tree, fence, wall, building, railing, playground equipment, camp or picnic structure, monument or any other object or structure within a City Community Services facility. Removing a “reserved” sign or willfully occupying and holding a camp site, area, building or facility which has been reserved and for which a valid permit has been issued, is prohibited. Users or permittees will be personally responsible for any damage to a building or facility and shall be responsible for reimbursing the City for any loss or damage to City property caused by such use. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.110 Rubbish.
No person shall leave, dispose of or throw away any garbage, refuse, cans, trash, ashes, bottles, broken glass, or like substances, or any animal carcass, in any place except containers provided for that purpose; nor shall any person bring any such substance, except litter accumulated in the course of automobile travel, into a City Community Services facility for the purpose of disposal thereof in City Community Services facilities. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.120 Weapons and firearms.
No person shall use, transport, carry, fire, or discharge any firearms, air gun, archery device, slingshot, or explosive of any kind across, in or into a City Community Services facility; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to activities permitted by the Director of Community Services nor the possession or use of any archery device in or upon a City archery range. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.130 Fire hazard.
No person shall ignite, or permit to be ignited, a fire in any location in a City Community Services facility except in a campfire or cooking area provided by the City. No person shall throw away any lighted tobacco product, or any burning or combustible material or other matter that could set fire to grass, shrubs, buildings or any other combustible substance. Burning tobacco materials may only be disposed of in proper ashtray or receptacle provided for such purpose.

An exception may be approved by the Director for standard cake candles less than four inches that are intended to be easily blown out, and standard “Sterno” cans used only for heating chafing dishes. (Ord. 769 § 2, 2014)

9.48.140 Barbecues.
No person using a barbecue shall permit such barbecue to remain in an untidy or unsanitary condition, nor shall any such person fail to clear away therefrom all cooking and eating utensils and waste matter after use thereof. Any person who uses a barbecue shall, when such use is completed, deposit the coals in the hot ash coal container. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.150 Toilet facilities.
No male person shall resort to nor loiter about any toilet facilities set apart for women and no female person shall resort to nor loiter about any toilet facilities set apart for men; provided, this shall not apply to children accompanied by their father, mother or guardian. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.160 Water pollution.
No person shall place any garbage or other waste, or any soiled eating or cooking utensils or anything similar, in any stream, lake, pond, pool or at any hydrant for the purpose of cleaning the same, nor shall any person use any stream, lake, pond, pool or hydrant for washing or bathing, or for disposal of refuse, or for any activity which would tend to cause the pollution thereof. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.170 Horses and other animals.
A. No horse or other animal shall be hitched to any tree or shrub or structure in a manner that may cause damage to Community Services facility property. No person shall ride, drive, lead or keep a saddled horse or other animal in any City Community Services facility, except on such roads, trails or other areas as the Director may designate and subject to such regulations as the Director may promulgate.

B. No person shall hitch any horse within a Community Services facility except for the duration of the visit to such Community Services facility or pursuant to special permit issued by the Director of Community Services. No person shall leave or hitch any horse on any driveway or at any other place except at such place or places as are designated as places for hitching horses. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.180 Animals – Presence.
A. Subject to the conditions set out in this section, animals are permitted in City parks and outdoor areas during the hours that such areas are open to the public.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, no person shall bring a dog into, permit a dog to enter into or remain in, or possess a dog in any City Community Services facility without first having obtained a valid license for such dog. Evidence of such valid license shall be presented by the person responsible for such dog when required by a Community Services site staff employee.

C. Except in an area specifically set aside and designated by the Director of Community Services as a “dog park,” all animals in City Community Services facilities shall be physically restrained at all times, either by being attached to a substantial leash no more than six feet in length, or by being confined in a tent, trailer, or other appropriate structure.

D. No dogs, horses, or other animals are allowed within 100 feet of Lake Poway.

E. Controlled and supervised animal shows may be allowed with prior written approval of the Director of Community Services and are subject to all conditions and fees stated in the City’s Facility Rules and Regulation Policy.

F. Except as provided in subsections C and E of this section, no person shall bring an animal into or permit an animal to enter and/or remain within, or possess an animal within, any structure in a City Community Services facility other than the Lake Poway Animal Facility.

This subsection shall not apply to an assistance dog accompanying or assisting an unsighted or disabled person there present, or therapy pets when present in facilities occupied by the Poway Senior Center during such times as permitted by an existing facilities use agreement. For purposes of this section, “assistance dog” is one that has been specially trained as a guide dog, signal dog or service dog, and “therapy pet” is one that is trained along with its handler(s) to achieve specific physical, social, cognitive, and emotional goals with patients and individuals.

G. No person shall keep or permit within a City Community Services facility a noisy, vicious or dangerous animal, or an animal which disturbs other persons within the boundaries of a City Community Services facility after having been directed by a Community Services site employee to remove such animal.

H. Any person bringing an animal into a City Community Services facility is solely responsible for the actions of such animal. Any injury inflicted by such animal upon any person or any damage caused by such animal to any real or personal property shall be reported to a Community Services site employee.

I. The Director may further regulate animals in, or may exclude animals from, any City Community Services facility or section of a City Community Services facility where the Director finds that the presence of animals substantially conflicts with the general use and enjoyment of such Community Services facilities. (Ord. 703 § 2, 2010)

9.48.190 Closing hours.
No person shall remain upon the grounds of a City Community Services facility or occupy the grounds of such Community Services facilities, or any part thereof, or use any of the facilities or equipment therein, or permit any vehicle to remain therein after closing time, as posted, unless authorized by the Director. The Director may designate and enforce an earlier closing time, which shall be posted, for such grounds or facilities and for the use of such equipment. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.200 Washing or repairing cars.
No person shall engage in the washing, cleaning, polishing, repairing, renovating or painting of any vehicle within a City Community Services facility, except that emergency repairs immediately necessary to render such vehicle safe may be made. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.210 Speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle within a City Community Services facility other than in a reasonable and prudent manner and with due regard for traffic and road conditions. In no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed, which endangers the safety of persons, property or wildlife. No vehicle shall be driven at a speed greater than 10 miles per hour in camp, parking lots, picnic, utility or headquarters area and areas of general public assemblage, and no vehicle shall be driven at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour in other areas. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.220 Parking.
No person shall park any vehicle at any City Community Services facility except for the duration of the visit to such facility or pursuant to special permit issued by the Director of Community Services. No person shall leave or park any motor vehicle on any driveway or at any other place except at such place or places as are designated as places for vehicle parking. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.230 Children.
No person shall permit any child under the age of seven years to play in any playground area, or fish, swim or play in or near any lake or pool, unless such child is attended by an adult. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.240 Soliciting, selling and advertising.
A. Except and only as expressly permitted in Chapter 5.22 PMC, no person shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, articles or merchandise; or practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession within a City Community Services facility without the authorization of the Director. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit sales of articles or solicitations by nonprofit organizations that are otherwise allowed by law.

B. No person shall distribute, circulate, give away, or throw or deposit any commercial handbill, circular, pamphlet, tract or advertisement in any Community Services facility within the City. It is not unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. No person shall post or affix to any pole, tree, car, fence or structure situated therein any kind of handbill, circular, pamphlet, tract or advertisement. Nothing herein shall prohibit the posting of an advertisement on any community bulletin board maintained by the City for that purpose. Nothing herein shall prohibit the placement and maintenance of signs and/or banners by the City in connection with community activities or by facility use permittees in connection with permitted activities. (Ord. 826 § 2, 2019; Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.250 Entertainment.
No person shall set up or maintain any exhibition, entertainment device, animal ride, show, performance, lecture, oration or concert without written permission to do so from the Director. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.260 Peace and quiet.
No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of a City Community Services facility by any loud or unusual noise, or by the sounding of automobile horns or noise-making devices, or by the use of profane, obscene or abusive language or gesture. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.270 Alcoholic beverages.
A. No person shall transport into a City Community Services facility, or consume upon the premises of a City Community Services facility, any intoxicating liquors having an alcoholic content in excess of 20 percent by volume.

B. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage at any time at the archery range, in facility parking lots, or a playground area of a City park.

C. Except as expressly provided below, no person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any other indoor or outdoor area of a City Community Services facility between 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.:

1. On Lake Poway or within the high water line or concession balcony of Lake Poway during the established operating hours; or

2. At the Poway Center for the Performing Arts; or

3. Pursuant to permit issued by the City for a special public event.

D. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage at any City Community Services facility during times that it has been rented, with or without remuneration to the City, to house a youth event. Youth events include rite of passage celebrations such as bar mitzvahs, bat mitzvahs, quinceaneras, “sweet 16” and other birthday parties, in addition to youth sports team games and parties, and all events involving social groups whose participants and/or members are primarily under the age of 21 years. (Ord. 769 § 3, 2014)

9.48.280 Pedestrian walkways.
No person shall ride, operate or use any vehicle, skateboard, bicycle, scooter, roller skates or roller blades in any area of a City Community Services facility designated and posted as a pedestrian walkway. This prohibition shall not apply to Community Services site employees or City authorized personnel in the course of their duties. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.290 Glass prohibited.
No person shall possess any glass container in any indoor or outdoor area of a City Community Services facility except pursuant to a permit issued by the City. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.300 Lawful directives of staff.
No person shall fail to obey any lawful directive of a Community Services site employee. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

9.48.310 Directive prohibiting presence in park.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter which protects the health or safety of any other person, and, after being directed by Community Services site personnel to cease and desist from such conduct, refuses or fails to do so, shall remove himself from the Community Services facility if so directed by a Community Services site employee. No person who is ordered excluded from a Community Services facility shall remain upon or return to the Community Services facility property during the period covered by the order.

B. The directive excluding a person from a Community Services facility for a period no longer than 72 hours may be in verbal form and reported to the Director. Directives exceeding 72 hours shall be in writing, signed by the Director of Community Services or designee, and shall not exceed 180 days. Directives may be appealed to the City Manager or designee. Appeal may only be commenced by a written request for a hearing filed in the office of the City Manager during the period that the person is excluded from the Community Services facility. The appeal shall be conducted promptly. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing officer shall issue the decision in writing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 769 § 4, 2014)

9.48.320 Skate parks.
It is unlawful and punishable as set forth in PMC 1.08.010 for any person:

A. To ride a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device within the fenced area surrounding the skate facility in a skate park owned or operated by the City, whether supervised or not, unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads which are in serviceable condition and properly fastened in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations for such equipment;

B. To operate motorized equipment in the facility;

C. To perform stunt, trick or luge maneuvers in or around the skate park, or in the skate park parking lot;

D. To consume any food, beverage, alcoholic beverage or drugs in or upon the skate park;

E. To use tobacco products within the skate park;

F. To possess glass within the skate park;

G. To use the skate park under wet conditions;

H. To possess or use unauthorized ramps, jumps or obstacles in the skate park;

I. To fail to wear the protective equipment required by this section and to remain at the skate park after having been directed to leave by City of Poway staff or any peace officer for that reason;

J. To enter or to return to the skate park for the purpose of using the skate park unless said person is wearing the protective equipment required by this section;

K. To use the skate park when under the age of 12 unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;

L. For a parent, guardian or other adult person having custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to allow such minor to use the skate park unless said minor is wearing the protective equipment required by this section.

City of Poway staff, Sheriff’s Department personnel and similarly authorized individuals are exempted from the provisions of this section when their presence is in conjunction with the performance of their duties.

The City shall erect and maintain regulatory signs at all skate parks owned and/or operated by the City. Such signs shall give notice that any person riding a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device in the facility must wear a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads, and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation under this section. In addition, said sign will give notice that a violator’s skateboard or other wheeled recreational device may be impounded subject to an impound fee in an amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time.

Any peace officer, public safety volunteer, or park ranger shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device which is located in the skate park and which is used in violation of this section. The property may be impounded and seized as evidence of the violation. If property is impounded, an impound fee in an amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time will be charged. (Ord. 782 § 3, 2015)

9.48.330 Unauthorized vehicles.
Operation of an unauthorized automobile, truck, trailer, or vehicle of any description other than upon designated open and paved roads or in other than designated parking areas is prohibited. (Ord. 630 § 2, 2005)

Chapter 9.52
USE OF POLICE SERVICES FOR SECOND RESPONSE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Sections:

9.52.010    Purpose and intent.

9.52.020    Definitions.

9.52.030    First response.

9.52.040    Subsequent responses.

9.52.050    Billing.

9.52.060    Confidentiality.

9.52.070    Severability.

9.52.010 Purpose and intent.
The City finds and determines that the control of parties, gatherings or events on private property is necessary when such continued activity is determined to be a threat to the peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public. Police officers have been required to make several return trips to a location of a party, gathering or event in order to disperse uncooperative participants, and the return of police officers to a location constitutes a drain of manpower and resources, often leaving other areas of the City without minimal levels of police protection; all of which creates a significant hazard to the safety of the police officers and to the public in general. (Ord. 328, 1990)

9.52.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the meanings set out in this section:

A. “Cost of second and subsequent responses” includes the salaries of the police officers, at the salary then in effect for each classification of each individual officer, for the amount of time actually spent responding to or remaining at the party, gathering or event; appropriate overhead; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers, and, the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property.

B. “Party” includes a gathering or event where a group of persons have assembled or are assembling on private property for a social occasion or social activity which may constitute a disturbance of the peace in violation of California Penal Code Section 415.

C. “Responsible person” is the person who owns the property where the party, gathering or event takes place and/or the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the party, gathering or event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will jointly and severally be liable for the costs incurred for second and subsequent City responses.

D. “Special security assignment” is the assignment of police officers and services during a second call to a location after the distribution of a written warning that the party, gathering or event violates the law. (Ord. 328, 1990)

9.52.030 First response.
A. During a first response to a disturbance of the peace occurring on private property, the responding officer(s) may among other things, deliver to the responsible person or persons a “notice of violation: first response” which shall contain a message substantially as follows:

This notice of violation is given to you as a result of a first response of the City of Poway to a disturbance of the peace occurring in violation of Penal Code Section 415. You will be charged all city personnel and equipment expenses incurred as a result of any second or subsequent responses to this location.

B. The “notice of violation: first response” may contain other information as deemed necessary by the City Manager to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 328, 1990)

9.52.040 Subsequent responses.
A. If the City is required to respond a second time to a disturbance of the peace and a “notice of violation: first response” has been delivered to the responsible person or persons, then the City shall commence computing the response costs.

B. A statement of the charges incurred by the City in its second and subsequent responses shall be prepared and delivered to the responsible person or persons.

C. The amount of the charge shall be deemed a debt to the City of the responsible person or persons who shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney’s fees. (Ord. 328, 1990)

9.52.050 Billing.
The Director of Safety Services shall notify the Director of Finance in writing. Following the rendering of police services, the name and address of the person responsible for the cost thereof, and such other information as may be required. The Director of Finance shall thereafter cause the appropriate billings to be made. (Ord. 811 § 14, 2017; Ord. 328, 1990)

9.52.060 Confidentiality.
Information furnished and served pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter or pursuant to a court order. (Ord. 328, 1990)

9.52.070 Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, part or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. It is declared that this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part or portion thereof, would have been adopted or passed irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 328, 1990)

Chapter 9.54
HOUSE PARTIES – CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL, MARIJUANA, AND OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES BY MINORS
Sections:

9.54.010    Purpose and intent.

9.54.020    Definitions.

9.54.030    Property owner’s duties and prohibitions.

9.54.040    Consumption of alcohol, marijuana, and other controlled substances by minor prohibited.

9.54.050    Prima facie evidence.

9.54.060    Protected activities.

9.54.070    Civil liability for enforcement services.

9.54.080    Reimbursement for cost of enforcement services.

9.54.090    Reservation of legal options.

9.54.010 Purpose and intent.
The City Council finds and determines that youth often obtain alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and other controlled substances at parties or other gatherings held at private residences or at rented residential and commercial premises, which are under the control of a person or persons who know or should know of the illegal conduct and fail to stop it. The City Council further finds and determines that persons who will be held responsible for abetting or tolerating such conduct will be more likely to properly supervise or stop such parties or gatherings on property under their control. It is the purpose of this chapter to impose criminal liability on persons who are aware, or should be aware, of the illegal conduct yet fail to prevent it. It is the further purpose of this chapter to impose civil liability for the recovery of the costs of enforcement services and to provide for the recovery of reasonable attorneys’ fees in the event of litigation. Most importantly, it is the purpose of this chapter to curtail the consumption of alcohol, marijuana, and other controlled substances by minors, in order to prevent the many adverse side effects of alcoholic beverage, marijuana, and other controlled substance consumption by minors, including juvenile delinquency and victimization as well as adverse health effects. (Ord. 828 § 4, 2019; Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

9.54.020 Definitions.
Terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning given to them by State law except as expressly provided herein.

A. “Adult” means a person who is 21 years of age or older.

B. “Alcoholic beverage” means any liquid, gas, or solid material intended to be ingested by a person, which contains ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol, drinking alcohol, or alcohol, including but not limited to alcoholic beverages as defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code, and which contains one percent or more of alcohol by volume; any intoxicating liquor; any malt beverage, beer, wine, spirits, liqueur, whiskey, rum, vodka, cordials, gin, and brandy; and any mixture containing one or more alcoholic beverages. “Alcoholic beverage” includes a mixture of one or more alcoholic beverages, whether found or ingested separately or as a mixture.

C. “Control” means any form of dominion including ownership, tenancy, or other possessory right.

D. “Controlled substance” means a drug or substance whose possession and use are regulated under the Controlled Substances Act. Such term does not include any drug or substance for which the individual found to have consumed such substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical practitioner authorized to issue such a prescription.

E. “Enforcement services” means the salaries and benefits of police officers or other code enforcement personnel for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at, the gathering; the administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured police officers or other code enforcement personnel; the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property; and the cost arising from the use of any damaged City equipment in responding to or remaining at the gathering.

F. “Gathering” means a party, gathering, or event, where a group of three or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity at a residence or premises.

G. “Marijuana” shall have the same meaning as the term “cannabis” set forth in Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code and shall also include the definition of “cannabis products” set forth in Section 11018.1 of the California Health and Safety Code.

H. “Minor” means a person under the age of 21 years.

I. “Residence” or “premises” means a hotel or motel room, home, yard, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

J. “Social host” means a person who permits or allows a gathering where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or other controlled substances on property owned or controlled by the person. (Ord. 828 § 4, 2019; Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

9.54.030 Property owner’s duties and prohibitions.
A. It shall be the duty of any person having control of any residence, real property, or premises, who hosts, permits, or allows a gathering to take place at said residence or premises, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and other controlled substances by any minor at the gathering. Whenever the person having control of the residence or premises either knows or should know a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or other controlled substance at the residence or premises in violation of this chapter, it is presumed that the person had the ability to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage, marijuana, and other controlled substances by a minor as set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section; it is further presumed that the person has the ability to terminate the illegal conduct once it is, or should reasonably have been, discovered.

B. No person who owns or has control of any residence or premises shall allow a gathering to take place or continue at the residence or premises if:

1. At the gathering any minor consumes any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, and other controlled substance; and

2. The person knows or reasonably should know by taking all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic beverage, marijuana, and other controlled substance consumption by any minor that a minor possesses or is consuming any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, and other controlled substance at the gathering. Reasonable steps are (a) controlling access to alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and other controlled substances at the gathering; (b) controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and other controlled substances present at the gathering; (c) verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers’ licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that persons under the age of 21 years do not consume alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and other controlled substances while at the gathering; and (d) supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.

C. This section does not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

D. This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and other controlled substances that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by Article I, Section 4, of the California Constitution. (Ord. 828 § 4, 2019; Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

9.54.040 Consumption of alcohol, marijuana, and other controlled substances by minor prohibited.
Except as permitted by State law, it is unlawful for any minor to:

A. Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or other controlled substance; or

B. Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or other controlled substance, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or other controlled substance that minor is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 828 § 4, 2019; Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

9.54.050 Prima facie evidence.
Whenever a person having control of a residence or premises is present at that residence or premises at the time that a minor possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or other controlled substance thereon, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge specified in PMC 9.54.030(A) or (B)(2). This section affects the burden of producing evidence. (Ord. 828 § 4, 2019; Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

9.54.060 Protected activities.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to legally protected religious activities or gatherings of family members with not more than two non-family members. (Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

9.54.070 Civil liability for enforcement services.
When a gathering prohibited by PMC 9.54.030 occurs and a police officer or code enforcement officer is called to the scene, the person or persons having control of the residence or premises shall be liable for the cost of providing enforcement services during the second or a follow-up response by the police, after a first warning to the person or persons having such control. (Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

9.54.080 Reimbursement for cost of enforcement services.
The actual cost of enforcement services described in PMC 9.54.070 shall be deemed a debt owed to the city recoverable in a civil action, and shall be recoverable in a civil action, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. (Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

9.54.090 Reservation of legal options.
The City of Poway does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in this chapter is in addition to any other statute, ordinance or law, civil or criminal. This chapter in no way limits the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 720 § 2, 2011)

Chapter 9.56
GRAFFITI
Sections:

9.56.010    Definitions.

9.56.020    Prohibitions.

9.56.030    Graffiti removal.

9.56.040    Expenditures of public funds.

9.56.050    Provisions nonexclusive.

9.56.060    Severability.

9.56.070    Penalty for violation.

9.56.080    Liability of parent or guardian.

9.56.090    Penalty for etching.

9.56.010 Definitions.
A. “Graffiti” means any paint, chalk, drawing, inscription, scratching, scrawling, etching or other marking by any person on any wall, fence, stucco, plaster or other surface not his or her own, or, done without the permission of the property owner, whether public or private, and written or drawn so as to be capable of being viewed by any person utilizing any public right-of-way in the City, such as a road, parkway, or alley.

B. “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property.

C. “Felt tip marker” means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth inch, containing an ink that is not water-soluble.

D. “Graffiti stick” means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width, visible from a distance of 20 feet, and not water-soluble.

E. “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, a graffiti stick or a glass-etching tool, including glass-etching creams. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 434 § 1, 1994; Ord. 353 § 1, 1992)

9.56.020 Prohibitions.
A. Graffiti Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to paint, inscribe, mark or otherwise apply graffiti on any public or private property in the City.

B. Removal Required. It is unlawful for the owner of any private commercial, manufacturing or multifamily residential property to permit graffiti to remain in a manner visible to persons using any public rights-of-way in the City, provided the City has given the owner a written notice to remove the graffiti within 10 days and said period has elapsed. Further, such graffiti is declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement in accordance with Chapter 8.72 PMC. The written notice required by this section shall be served personally or by certified mail return receipt requested upon the owner of record of the property or upon the agent for service of process of the owner of the property.

C. Possession by Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implements while upon public property, or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such private property given in advance, and such consent as to the person’s presence shall have been given while such person was in the possession of a graffiti implement. The foregoing provision shall not apply while the person is attending, or traveling to or from a school at which the person is enrolled, if the person is participating in a class at said school which has, as a written requirement of said class, the requirement to use felt tip markers.

D. Possession in Designated Public Places. No person shall have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility (other than a highway, street, alley or way), except as may be authorized by the City.

E. Wrongful Display or Storage. No person, firm or entity engaged in a commercial enterprise shall store or display for sale, trade or exchange any graffiti implement except in an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which the public is precluded from entry, or in a completely enclosed and locked storage device. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 434 § 2, 1994; Ord. 353 § 1, 1992)

9.56.030 Graffiti removal.
Whenever the City Manager determines that graffiti is located on public or private property within the City in a manner visible to persons using any public rights-of-way, the City Manager is authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti or, at the Manager’s discretion, furnish or otherwise provide the owner with materials necessary to accomplish such removal as hereinafter set forth.

A. Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than the City, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent, release, and waiver of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure, in the form of a fully executed Graffiti Removal Authorization Form, or otherwise.

B. Where a structure is privately owned, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent, release, and waiver of the owners, in the form of a fully executed Graffiti Removal Authorization Form, or otherwise.

C. Whenever the City determines that graffiti exists and the owner of such property has returned the executed consent form to the City, the City shall be authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti. The City shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 353 § 1, 1992)

9.56.040 Expenditures of public funds.
The City is authorized to expend City funds to remove graffiti from public or privately owned structures located on public or privately owned real property within the City. Such expenditures shall be limited to the removal of graffiti and not the painting or repair of a more extensive area. Expenditure of City funds to remove graffiti from private property shall be conditioned on the consent of the private property owner to pay the actual, reasonable cost of removal. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 353 § 1, 1992)

9.56.050 Provisions nonexclusive.
Any provision of this chapter notwithstanding, any act deemed unlawful hereunder may also be punishable under any other appropriate law of the State of California or ordinance of the City. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 353 § 1, 1992)

9.56.060 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 353 § 1, 1992)

9.56.070 Penalty for violation.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 and 1.12 PMC.

B. In lieu of, or as a part of, requesting prosecution of a petition to declare a minor to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602, or in lieu of prosecuting a violation of this chapter as a crime against an adult, the City Attorney, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, shall be authorized to offer the minor or adult an option to perform such community service as the City Attorney deems appropriate, but which community service shall, if offered at all, contain the following minimum elements:

1. The minor or adult shall perform community service of a number of hours approximately equal to the cost of repair of damage caused divided by the minimum wage, but in no event less than 30 hours.

2. At least one of the custodial parents, or if none, guardians, shall be in attendance at least 50 percent of the period of assigned community service.

3. The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the City Manager.

4. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult. To the extent that the offense giving rise to the offer of community service constitutes a violation of this chapter, reasonable effort shall be made by the City Manager to assign the minor to community service which constitutes in significant part the removal of graffiti. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 417 § 1, 1993; Ord. 353 § 1, 1993)

9.56.080 Liability of parent or guardian.
Any violation by a minor of PMC 9.56.020(A) which results in damage to property, not in excess of $25,000, shall cause the parent or guardian, having custody and control of the minor, to be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any damages resulting from the wilful misconduct. The City Manager shall have the authority to seek reimbursement for victims of unauthorized graffiti placement pursuant to Civil Code Section 1714.1. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 442, 1995; Ord. 417 § 2, 1993)

9.56.090 Penalty for etching.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, the violation of PMC 9.56.020(A) by etching shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of at least $500.00 and imprisonment in County jail, or detention at Juvenile Hall, of at least two days. (Ord. 590 § 1, 2003; Ord. 434 § 3, 1994)

Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:

10.04    General Provisions and Definitions

10.08    Obedience to Traffic Regulations

10.12    Traffic-Control Devices

10.16    Turning Movements

10.20    One-Way Streets

10.24    Through Highways and Intersections

10.28    Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.32    Speed Limits

10.36    Repealed

10.40    Miscellaneous Driving Rules

10.42    Truck Routes and Maximum Gross Weight Limits

10.43    Interstate Trucks

10.44    Parades

10.48    Vehicles on Private Property

10.52    Vehicles on Highway and Nuisance Vehicles

10.56    Bicycles

10.60    Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices

10.64    Spectators Prohibited at Illegal Motor Vehicle Speed Contests or Illegal Exhibitions of Speed

Chapter 10.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Sections:

10.04.010    Title.

10.04.020    Vehicle Code definitions.

10.04.030    Definitions.

10.04.040    State highways.

10.04.010 Title.
This title shall be known as the City traffic code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.1)

10.04.020 Vehicle Code definitions.
Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this chapter, but are now defined in the Vehicle Code of the State, such definitions as now exist are incorporated in this chapter and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases as are used in this title as though set forth in this chapter in full. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.3)

10.04.030 Definitions.
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Alley” means any highway, as defined in this section, having a width of 25 feet or less and not provided with a sidewalk or sidewalks.

B. “Bus loading zone” means that space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of buses during loading and unloading of passengers.

C. “Crosswalk” is either:

1. That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the boundary lines of sidewalks at intersections where the intersecting roadways meet at approximately right angles, except the prolongation of any such lines from an alley across a street.

2. Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.

D. “Council” means the City Council of the City.

E. “Director of Public Services” means the Director of Public Services of the City.

F. “Highway” means the entire width between boundary lines of every way set apart for public travel when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

G. “Holidays” are the first day of January, the twelfth day of February, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September, the ninth day of September, the second Monday in October, the eleventh day of November, the 25th day of December and Thanksgiving Day.

H. “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

I. “Official traffic-control devices” means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.

J. “Official traffic signals” means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed, and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction.

K. “Park” means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

L. “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

M. “Pedestrian” is any person who is afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle.

N. “Roadway” means that portion of the highway between the regularly established curblines, or when no curbs exist, that portion improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

O. “Safety zone” means that portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians, marked and designated as provided in this chapter.

P. “Sidewalk” means that portion of the highway between the curblines or traversable roadway and the adjacent property lines.

Q. “State Department of Transportation” means the Department of Transportation of the State.

R. Stop or Stand.

1. “Stop” means the complete cessation of movement.

2. “Stop and stand” means any stopping, or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except where necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

S. “Street” has the same meaning as the word “highway.”

T. “This code” means the entire Poway Municipal Code unless some other code is specified.

U. Time. Whenever certain hours are named in this title they shall mean standard time or daylight-savings time as may be in current use in the City.

V. “Vehicle” means every device or animal by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a street or highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon rails.

W. “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the State. (Ord. 106 § 7, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.2, 72.4 – 72.26)

10.04.040 State highways.
No amendment of this title with respect to a State highway and no resolution establishing any regulation with respect to a State highway shall take effect until such amendment or resolution is approved by the State Department of Transportation. The Director of Public Services shall not erect any signs or place any markings upon a State highway unless the regulation imposed by such signs or markings has been approved by the State Department of Transportation. Within six months after receipt of written notice that the State Department of Transportation has withdrawn its approval of any regulation affecting a State highway, the Director of Public Services shall remove from such State highway any signs or markings giving notice of such regulation. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.240)

Chapter 10.08
OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sections:

10.08.010    Required obedience to traffic title.

10.08.020    Public employees to obey traffic regulations.

10.08.030    Exemption of certain vehicles.

10.08.010 Required obedience to traffic title.
It is an infraction for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this title. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.50)

10.08.020 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, any County or City and it is unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by State statute. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.51)

10.08.030 Exemption of certain vehicles.
A. The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle that has qualified under the Vehicle Code as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any such vehicle is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

B. The foregoing exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others.

C. The provisions of this title regulating parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the Department of Public Services or of the State Department of Transportation while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on any highway or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.52)

Chapter 10.12
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Sections:

10.12.010    Authorization of signs.

10.12.020    Failure to post signs.

10.12.030    Authorization of signals.

10.12.040    Placing of signals.

10.12.050    Traffic-control devices – Hours of operation.

10.12.060    Director of Public Services may install traffic-control devices.

10.12.070    Obedience to traffic signs and signals.

10.12.080    Crosswalks.

10.12.090    Traffic markings.

10.12.100    Distinctive roadway markings.

10.12.110    Equestrian crossings.

10.12.120    Temporary removal of signals and other facilities – Suspension of regulations.

10.12.130    Damaging signs prohibited.

10.12.140    Permit for school district to maintain portable sign within right-of-way.

10.12.150    Temporary closing of portions of streets or highways crossing or dividing school grounds.

10.12.160    Restricting use of or closing City highway.

10.12.010 Authorization of signs.
The Council shall by resolution determine and designate the size, shape and character of all official warning, regulatory, and direction signs, other than signs the size, shape and character of which have been established by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to the Vehicle Code. The Director of Public Services may place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, all official warning and direction signs necessary to the proper control of traffic and all regulatory signs required or authorized by this title or the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.60)

10.12.020 Failure to post signs.
No provisions of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator thereof unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provision. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.61)

10.12.030 Authorization of signals.
The Council shall by resolution designate what intersections shall be controlled by official traffic-control signals. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.62)

10.12.040 Placing of signals.
The Director of Public Services shall place, maintain and operate, or cause to be placed, maintained and operated all official traffic-control signals authorized by the Council as provided in this title. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.63)

10.12.050 Traffic-control devices – Hours of operation.
The Director of Public Services shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title or established by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.64)

10.12.060 Director of Public Services may install traffic-control devices.
The Director of Public Services may place and maintain such traffic-control devices in addition to those authorized by other provisions of this title as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be established by division or resolution of the Council. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.65)

10.12.070 Obedience to traffic signs and signals.
It is unlawful for any operator or pedestrian to at any time violate any instruction appearing on any traffic sign or signal or marking placed upon any highway in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.66)

10.12.080 Crosswalks.
The Director of Public Services shall provide and maintain painted markings or other appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at all crosswalks which have been designated as such by the Council. He may do so at such other crosswalks where, in his opinion, such symbols or warning signs are necessary. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.67)

10.12.090 Traffic markings.
The Director of Public Services may place appropriate traffic guidelines dividing highways into the number of traffic lanes that is proper and necessary, and may place such other pavement markings as are necessary to direct vehicular movements in accordance with requirements of this title and the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.68)

10.12.100 Distinctive roadway markings.
Whenever the State Department of Transportation determines and designates a distinctive roadway marking which shall indicate no driving over such marking, the Director of Public Services is authorized to designate by such marking those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.69)

10.12.110 Equestrian crossings.
The Director of Public Services shall indicate by appropriate signs of a type approved by the Department of Transportation of the State those intersections of bridle paths and highways which the Council, pursuant to Section 21805 of the Vehicle Code, by resolution has designated as equestrian crossings. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.70)

10.12.120 Temporary removal of signals and other facilities – Suspension of regulations.
Whenever, because of the construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any highway, or because of other emergency, compliance with any prohibition of this title, including a prohibition pursuant to any action of the Council taken in accordance with this title, will create a traffic hazard and the Director of Public Services so finds, he shall either remove or cover up any sign or other traffic marking which informs persons of such prohibition. While such sign or other marking is removed or covered the effect of such prohibition is suspended. At the end of such emergency, unless otherwise determined by the Council, the Director of Public Services shall replace or uncover such sign or other marking. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.71)

10.12.130 Damaging signs prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to maliciously tear down, damage, mutilate, deface or destroy any sign, notice or traffic-control device placed upon or along or affixed to or along any City highway or any property, which sign, notice or traffic-control device is intended to indicate or designate any highway or is intended to direct, control or warn operators or travelers. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.72)

10.12.140 Permit for school district to maintain portable sign within right-of-way.
Upon approval of the Council, the Director of Public Services may issue a permit to a school district authorizing such district to maintain within a City right-of-way a portable school crossing sign and/or flasher. Such permit may be issued on the terms and conditions deemed necessary or appropriate by the Director of Public Services for the protection of the public. Any such permit issued by the Director of Public Services shall contain a provision that it may be revoked by the Director of Public Services for violation of any of the terms and conditions of such permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.73)

10.12.150 Temporary closing of portions of streets or highways crossing or dividing school grounds.
A. The Council, by resolution, may close to vehicular traffic that portion of any street or highway crossing or dividing any school ground or grounds when in the opinion of the Council such closing is necessary for the protection of persons attending such school or school grounds. Such closing to vehicular traffic may be limited to such hours and days as the Council may specify.

B. Upon and for the duration of closure of a portion of any street or highway as provided in subsection A of this section, the school district within whose district said closed portions lies shall post and maintain at each end of said closed portion and at other appropriate locations barricades and signs giving notice of such closure to the public. The type, posting and maintenance of such barricades and signs shall be under such terms and conditions as is deemed necessary or appropriate by the Director of Public Services for the protection of the public. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.74)

10.12.160 Restricting use of or closing City highway.
A. The Director of Public Services is authorized to restrict the use of, or close, any City highway whenever he considers such closing or restriction of use necessary:

1. For the protection of the public;

2. For the protection of such City highway from damage during storms;

3. During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon.

B. No liability shall attach to the City, the Director of Public Services or to the City Council, for the restriction of use, or closing, of any City for the above public purposes. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.75)

Chapter 10.16
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Sections:

10.16.010    Authority to place and obedience to turning markers – Intersections – Multiple lanes.

10.16.020    Authority to place restricted turn signs.

10.16.030    Obedience to no-turn signs.

10.16.040    Authority to prohibit right turns against traffic stop signal.

10.16.010 Authority to place and obedience to turning markers – Intersections – Multiple lanes.
The Director of Public Services is authorized to place pavement markings, markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the Director of Public Services is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.80)

10.16.020 Authority to place restricted turn signs.
The Director of Public Services is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.81)

10.16.030 Obedience to no-turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.82)

10.16.040 Authority to prohibit right turns against traffic stop signal.
The Director of Public Services is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.83)

Chapter 10.20
ONE-WAY STREETS
Sections:

10.20.010    Council to designate one-way streets.

10.20.020    Director of Public Services to post one-way streets.

10.20.030    Violation of one-way street signs.

10.20.010 Council to designate one-way streets.
The Council may by resolution describe and designate highways or portions of highways as one-way streets. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.90)

10.20.020 Director of Public Services to post one-way streets.
The Director of Public Services shall place or cause to be placed in a conspicuous place on such one-way streets at the intersection of each highway intersecting such one-way street, adequate signs bearing the words “One-Way Street” and indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.91)

10.20.030 Violation of one-way street signs.
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle traversing any portion of any one-way street as designated or established by resolution of the Council, to operate such vehicle thereon in violation of the one-way street signs placed by the Director of Public Services pursuant to this title. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.92)

Chapter 10.24
THROUGH HIGHWAYS AND INTERSECTIONS
Sections:

10.24.010    Director of Public Services to erect stop signs on through highways.

10.24.020    Establishment of stop signs at stop intersections.

10.24.030    Emergency stop signs.

10.24.040    All vehicles to stop at stop signs.

10.24.050    Emergency removal of stop signs.

10.24.060    Emerging from alley or private driveway.

10.24.070    Director of Public Services to erect signs at yield right-of-way intersections.

10.24.010 Director of Public Services to erect stop signs on through highways.
The Director of Public Services shall erect and maintain stop signs complying with the provisions of the Vehicle Code at all entrances to highways or portions of highways designated by the Council by resolution as “through highways.” (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.100)

10.24.020 Establishment of stop signs at stop intersections.
The Director of Public Services shall erect and maintain stop signs in compliance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code at the entrance of every intersection which the Council has determined is an intersection at which there is special hazard to life or property by reason of the volume of traffic at such intersection, or because of the lack of visibility to the drivers of vehicles approaching such intersection, or because of the number of reported accidents or the apparent probability thereof, or by reasons of physical conditions which render any such intersection exceptionally dangerous or hazardous to life or property, and where the factors creating this special hazard are such that according to the principles and experience of traffic engineering, the installation of stop signs is reasonably calculated to reduce the expectancy of accidents and that the use of warning signs would be inadequate. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.101)

10.24.030 Emergency stop signs.
Where because of any emergency the conditions described in PMC 10.24.020 exist, the Director of Public Services may erect or cause to be erected stop signs complying with the Vehicle Code, as provided in PMC 10.24.020, and maintain such signs while such conditions continue to exist. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.102)

10.24.040 All vehicles to stop at stop signs.
Where stop signs are erected as provided in this title at or near the entrance to any intersection, every operator of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection; provided, however, that no stop need be made at any such entrance or intersection where:

A. An officer is on duty and directs traffic to proceed;

B. A traffic signal is in operation and indicates that traffic may proceed;

C. A stop sign has been removed or covered pursuant to this title. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.103)

10.24.050 Emergency removal of stop signs.
A. Where, because of temporary detours, or other emergency it would be impracticable and a hazard to require a vehicle to stop at an intersection where a stop sign has been erected pursuant to this title and the Director of Public Services so finds, he shall either remove such sign or so cover it that no portion of the word “STOP” remains visible.

B. At the termination of such emergency, unless the Council otherwise determines, the Director of Public Services shall restore such signs or uncover such signs. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.104)

10.24.060 Emerging from alley or private driveway.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building, shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into a sidewalk area extending across any alleyway. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.105)

10.24.070 Director of Public Services to erect signs at yield right-of-way intersections.
The Director of Public Services shall erect and maintain “Yield Right-of-Way” signs complying with the provisions of the Vehicle Code to all approaches to highways and intersections of highways designated by the Council by resolution. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.107)

Chapter 10.28
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Sections:

Article I. Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.28.010    Application of regulations.

10.28.020    Standing prohibited.

10.28.030    Parking parallel with curb and on one-way streets and roadways – Angle parking zones.

10.28.040    Parking prohibited on narrow streets.

10.28.050    Parking adjacent to schools.

10.28.060    Stopping or standing prohibited in specified places.

10.28.070    Stopping or parking prohibited in specified places.

10.28.080    Council may prohibit or restrict parking.

10.28.090    Blocking highway.

10.28.100    Temporary no parking.

10.28.110    Moving of vehicles by Chief of Police.

10.28.120    Removal of ignition key when parking.

10.28.130    Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.

10.28.140    Parking for certain purposes prohibited.

10.28.150    Council may restrict parking to emergency vehicles.

10.28.160    Council may establish no parking-towaway zones.

10.28.170    Parking or standing of commercial vehicles.

10.28.180    Stopping or standing of a school bus by a driveway.

Article II. Zones for Loading or Unloading Only

10.28.190    Council to establish zones.

10.28.200    Loading zones.

10.28.210    Passenger loading zones.

10.28.220    Bus loading zones.

10.28.230    Only bus to use bus loading zones.

10.28.240    Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.

10.28.250    Effect of permission to load or unload.

10.28.260    Standing for loading or unloading only.

10.28.270    Standing in any alley.

10.28.280    Parking for the disabled – Blue curb.

Article I. Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.28.010 Application of regulations.
A. The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this title, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

B. The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code, this code or City ordinances, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.110)

10.28.020 Standing prohibited.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any median strip between roadways or within any traffic island or other area designed to separate or guide the movement of traffic. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.111)

10.28.030 Parking parallel with curb and on one-way streets and roadways – Angle parking zones.
A. Parking Parallel with Curb and Parking on One-Way Streets and Roadways.

1. Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

2. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon or adjacent to the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

3. The Director of Public Services is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

4. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon either side of a one-way street so that such vehicle is facing opposite to the direction of traffic movement upon such one-way street.

B. Angle Parking Zones. On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the City Council as angle parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such angle parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except at the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space.

Stopping, standing, and parking will not be permitted along certain segments of the curb line at the ends of the angle parking zones as deemed necessary for sight distance by the City’s Traffic Engineer. (Ord. 614 § 1, 2004; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.112)

10.28.040 Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
A. The Director of Public Services is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any highway when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a highway as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway does not exceed 30 feet.

B. When signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this title, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any sign or marking. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.113)

10.28.050 Parking adjacent to schools.
A. The Director of Public Services is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.114)

10.28.060 Stopping or standing prohibited in specified places.
When the Director of Public Services determines that it is necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking at any of the following places in order to eliminate a dangerous traffic hazard, the Director of Public Services shall appropriately sign or mark such places and when so signed or marked, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of said places, except that this section does not prohibit buses from stopping to receive or discharge passengers at such places when appropriately signed or marked as bus loading zones:

A. At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb or edge of the roadway immediately opposite and midblock end of a safety zone;

B. At any place within 25 feet of an intersection;

C. Within 25 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, stop sign, or official electric flashing device;

D. Adjacent to either side of a crosswalk or driveway entrance for a distance not to exceed 20 feet from either side of such crosswalk or driveway;

E. At any other place where the Director of Public Services determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate a dangerous traffic hazard. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.115)

10.28.070 Stopping or parking prohibited in specified places.
The Director of Public Services may appropriately sign or mark the following places and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of said places:

A. For a distance of 50 feet along the curb or edge of the roadway at the entrance to any hospital;

B. For a distance of 50 feet along the curb or edge of the roadway immediately in front of the main entrance to any substation office of the Chief of Police;

C. For a distance of 50 feet along the curb or edge of the roadway immediately in front of the main entrance to any fire station housing motor vehicle firefighting equipment;

D. Adjacent to any fire hydrant when it has been determined by the Director of Public Services that stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, would present some special hazard or would prevent ready access to the fire hydrant. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.116)

10.28.080 Council may prohibit or restrict parking.
When the Council determines by resolution that it is necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking on certain highways, or portions thereof, at all or certain hours of the day, in order to facilitate the movement of traffic or to eliminate a hazardous condition, the Director of Public Services shall appropriately sign or mark such highways, or portions thereof, and when so signed or marked, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any such highway or portion thereof in violation of the restrictions stated on or indicated by such signs or markings, except that this section does not prohibit buses from stopping to receive and discharge passengers at places appropriately signed or marked as bus loading zones. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.117)

10.28.090 Blocking highway.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any highway within any business or residence district unless not less than eight feet of the width of the paved or improved or main traveled portion of the highway opposite such stopped, parked, or standing vehicle is left clear and unobstructed for the free passage of other vehicles. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.118)

10.28.100 Temporary no parking.
A. Whenever the Director of Public Services determines that traffic congestion or traffic hazard of an emergency nature is likely to result from the operation, stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles during the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or during the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any highway, or for any other reason, he may place or cause to be placed, temporary signs prohibiting the operation, stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles during the existence of such emergency.

B. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, stop, stand or park any vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.119)

10.28.110 Moving of vehicles by Chief of Police.
A. If a person parks any vehicle contrary to the provisions of PMC 10.28.100 and the presence of such vehicle prevents or interferes with the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of the highway, the Chief of Police shall move such vehicle to the nearest place on the highway where:

1. The presence of such vehicle will not prevent or interfere with the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of the highway; and

2. The presence of such vehicle is not in violation of any provisions of any statute or ordinance except PMC 10.28.100.

B. The Chief of Police shall not move, in any event, any vehicle more than 500 feet. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.120)

10.28.120 Removal of ignition key when parking.
Every person who parks a motor vehicle upon any highway shall first lock the ignition, remove the key therefrom and take such key with him, unless a licensed operator remains in such motor vehicle, in which case such licensed operator before leaving such vehicle first locks the ignition, removes the key therefrom and takes such key with him. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.121)

10.28.130 Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.
A. No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours.

B. In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of 72 hours, the Chief of Police or any member of the Highway Patrol of the State may remove said vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of Sections 22651 and 22652 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.122)

10.28.140 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any highway for the principal purpose of:

A. Displaying such vehicle for sale;

B. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.123)

10.28.150 Council may restrict parking to emergency vehicles.
When the Council determines by resolution that it is necessary to restrict parking on certain highways or portions thereof to emergency vehicles as defined in Vehicle Code Section 165, or to one or more of the types of emergency vehicles as defined in this title, the City Engineer shall appropriately sign or mark such highways or portions thereof, and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any such highway or portion thereof in violation of the restriction stated on or indicated by such signs or markings. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.124)

10.28.160 Council may establish no parking-towaway zones.
A. When the Council determines by resolution that it is necessary to establish no parking-towaway zones on certain highways or portions thereof as defined in subsections (k), (l), (m) or (n) of Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code, the City Engineer shall appropriately sign or mark such highways or portions thereof, and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any such highway or portion thereof in violation of the restriction stated on or indicated by such signs or markings.

B. Any vehicles left parked or standing on any such highway or portion thereof in violation of subsection A of this section may be removed by the Chief of Police or any member of the California Highway Patrol. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.125)

10.28.170 Parking or standing of commercial vehicles.
A. At all areas within the City the parking or standing of commercial vehicles is prohibited if said vehicle is one or more of the following:

1. A vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more;

2. A “truck tractor” as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 655;

3. A “semitrailer” as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 550;

4. A “trailer” as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 630.

B. This chapter shall not apply under the following conditions:

1. When such vehicle is loading or unloading property;

2. When such vehicle is parked in connection with and in aid of the performance of a service to or on a property;

3. When such vehicle is engaged in the construction, installation, repair or maintenance of a publicly or privately owned improvement located on the property;

4. When the registered owner of said vehicle is the owner in fee of the property on which said vehicle is parking or standing and said parking or standing does not violate any other zoning or regulatory ordinance of the City;

5. When the City Council has determined by resolution that the parking of such vehicles on certain streets or properties shall be permitted. (Ord. 75 § 1, 1982; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.126)

10.28.180 Stopping or standing of a school bus by a driveway.
The stopping of a school bus in front of a public or private driveway for the sole purpose of loading or unloading school pupils is authorized. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.127)

Article II. Zones for Loading or Unloading Only

10.28.190 Council to establish zones.
The City Council may by resolution determine the location of and establish loading zones, passenger loading zones and bus loading zones. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.130)

10.28.200 Loading zones.
Loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs indicating such zone or by a yellow line stenciled with black letters “LOADING ONLY,” upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.131)

10.28.210 Passenger loading zones.
Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs or by a white line stenciled with black letters “PASSENGER LOADING ONLY,” upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.132)

10.28.220 Bus loading zones.
Bus loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs or by a red line stenciled with white letters “NO STANDING” together with the words “BUS ZONE” on the top or side of all curbs within such zones. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.133)

10.28.230 Only bus to use bus loading zones.
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus loading zone. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.134)

10.28.240 Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.
A. The Director of Public Services is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required in this title shall place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meaning set forth in this section:

1. Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signposted as a bus zone.

2. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20 minutes.

3. White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:

a. When such zone is in front of a hotel the restrictions shall apply at all times;

b. When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed;

or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox.

4. Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than 20 minutes at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays.

5. Blue shall mean parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons.

B. When there are no curbs, the Director of Public Services shall indicate the parking or standing regulations by installing in lieu of curb markings appropriate signs giving notice of such regulations.

C. When the Director of Public Services, pursuant to this title, has caused curb markings or appropriate signs to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or adjacent to the side of any roadway so appropriately signed, in violation of any of the provisions of this section or of such curb markings or signs. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.135)

10.28.250 Effect of permission to load or unload.
A. Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes.

B. The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

C. Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.

D. Within the total limit above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted by this section. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.136)

10.28.260 Standing for loading or unloading only.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in PMC 10.28.250. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.137)

10.28.270 Standing in any alley.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.138)

10.28.280 Parking for the disabled – Blue curb.
A. Purpose and Intent. The City Council finds and declares that public street parking should be preserved for the use of the general public whenever possible. Because approval of blue curb parking spaces for the disabled on the public streets limits the use of those spaces by the general public, they shall be approved only upon a strong showing of necessity by the applicant, based on the factors set forth in subsection B of this section.

B. Approval Process. The Director of Development Services may determine that it is necessary to designate parking spaces on certain public streets for the exclusive use of any vehicle which displays either a disabled person’s identification license plate issued pursuant to Section 5007 of the CVC, or a distinguishing placard issued pursuant to Sections 22511.55 or 22511.59 of the CVC. A blue curb shall not be designated for a specific resident and will be available to any qualified disabled person. In evaluating the request, the Director of Development Services may approve a blue curb only after consideration of the following factors:

1. Inadequate on-site parking at the applicant’s residence (for example, a steep driveway or inadequate garage/driveway parking) so that the on-street parking space will provide better access to the applicant’s residence;

2. Lack of reasonable parking alternatives;

3. Current parking conditions within the neighborhood;

4. Other conditions deemed necessary by the Director of Development Services;

C. The Traffic Safety Committee shall make a recommendation on any proposed blue curb prior to the Director of Development Services making a determination. Upon the determination of the necessity of blue curb, the Director of Development Services shall request the posting of signs and marking of the curb or edge of pavement with blue paint immediately adjacent to and visible from the space.

D. The applicant must demonstrate a continued need for the blue curb on an annual basis by providing the Director of Development Services with a copy of a current DMV placard. In the event the applicant is no longer eligible for the DMV placard, or has moved from the subject residence, the Director of Development Services shall request the removal of the blue curb. (Ord. 715 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 10.32
SPEED LIMITS
Sections:

10.32.010    Designation of speed limits.

10.32.010 Designation of speed limits.
The City is authorized by State law to establish prima facie speed limits other than those set forth by the California Vehicle Code, if the speed limits are based upon an engineering and traffic survey demonstrating that they are reasonable and safe, and would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic. The speed limits established by the City Council shall be set forth in an ordinance kept in the office of the City Clerk. A speed limit established by the City Council shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice of the speed limit are erected upon the street. (Ord. 678 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 10.36
CROSSWALKS
(Repealed by Ord. 734)

Chapter 10.40
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Sections:

10.40.010    Riding bicycles on sidewalks prohibited.

10.40.020    Driving through funeral processions.

10.40.030    New pavement.

10.40.040    Restricted access.

10.40.050    Restrictions on use of freeways.

10.40.060    Molesting of traffic counting devices prohibited.

10.40.070    Livestock prohibited.

10.40.080    Vehicles injurious to highways prohibited.

10.40.090    Loitering and fishing on bridges prohibited.

10.40.100    Motorcycles prohibited on trails.

10.40.110    Trespass on airport runways prohibited.

10.40.120    Flashing lights.

10.40.130    Removal of flashing lights.

10.40.010 Riding bicycles on sidewalks prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in a business district. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.230)

10.40.020 Driving through funeral processions.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.234)

10.40.030 New pavement.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.235)

10.40.040 Restricted access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.236)

10.40.050 Restrictions on use of freeways.
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle, or drive or ride any horses or livestock, upon any highway established as a freeway, as defined in Section 604.5 of the Vehicle Code, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.237)

10.40.060 Molesting of traffic counting devices prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, except persons authorized by the Director of Public Services, to move, molest, tamper with or damage any traffic counting device within a City highway. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.241)

10.40.070 Livestock prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to drive or ride or permit to be driven or ridden any livestock upon or along any public highway for a period of 90 days subsequent to the oiling of such highway by the City; provided, that conspicuous signs shall have been erected prohibiting the driving of livestock thereon during such period; and, provided, that there exist practical and feasible means to move such livestock without driving or riding the same upon the oiled portion of the highway. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the straying of livestock in open range territory as defined in Sections 465.5 and 465.6 of the Vehicle Code and posted as provided therein. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.242)

10.40.080 Vehicles injurious to highways prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive, draw, or propel or permit to be ridden, driven, drawn or propelled along, upon or over any improved highway in the City any vehicle, traction engine, harrow or disc harrow, disc plow or other implement that will tear up or in any manner disturb or damage the surface on the highway. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.243)

10.40.090 Loitering and fishing on bridges prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter upon, stand or sit on or fish from any public highway bridge spanning any stream or body or water within the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.244)

10.40.100 Motorcycles prohibited on trails.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle or power cycle on any riders’ and hikers’ trail within the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.245)

10.40.110 Trespass on airport runways prohibited.
A. “Airport runway” means any airport taxiway or runway, and includes all public or private airplane landing strips or airstrips designed and constructed for the landing or taking off of aircraft.

B. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon any airport runway, whether or not occupied or attended, without first having obtained written permission from the owner thereof or the person lawfully entitled to the possession thereof. (Ord. 106 § 8, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.246)

10.40.120 Flashing lights.
No person not authorized by the City Council shall erect or maintain any device which directs a beam of light in a flashing sequence toward any highway, nor shall any person erect or maintain any electric advertising sign or similar device that interferes with the visibility of any official traffic-control device or warning signal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.247)

10.40.130 Removal of flashing lights.
The Director of Public Services shall and is authorized by this chapter to remove or cause to be removed every unofficial sign, signal or device placed, maintained or displayed upon any City highway contrary to the provisions of Section 473 of the Vehicle Code and this title. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.248)

Chapter 10.42
TRUCK ROUTES AND MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT LIMITS
Sections:

10.42.010    Prohibited acts – Excepted routes.

10.42.020    Vehicles subject to Public Utilities Code.

10.42.030    Pickups and deliveries.

10.42.040    Vehicles owned by a public utility or licensed contractor.

10.42.050    Effective subject to proper sign erection on streets affected.

10.42.010 Prohibited acts – Excepted routes.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35701 of the Vehicle Code, no person, corporation, or any other organization shall use or operate any commercial vehicle or any vehicle exceeding 20,000 pounds rated gross vehicle weight on or over any street, road or public right-of-way within the City except the following streets which are designated truck routes:

A. Pomerado Road between Creek Road and north City limits.

B. Community Road between Twin Peaks Road and Poway Road;

C. Twin Peaks Road between Pomerado Road and Espola Road;

D. Camino Del Norte westerly City limit and Pomerado Road.

E. Ted Williams Parkway from the west City limit to Twin Peaks Road;

F. Stowe Drive from Pomerado Road to Scripps Poway Parkway;

G. Danielson Street from Community Road to Kirkham Way;

H. Kirkham Way from Kirkham Court to Danielson Street;

I. Espola Road from Poway Road to Twin Peaks Road;

J. Community Road from Kirkham Way to Poway Road;

K. Scripps Poway Parkway from the east City limit to the west City limit. (Ord. 562 § 1, 2002; Ord. 325 § 1, 1990; Ord. 319 § 1, 1990; Ord. 122 § 1, 1984)

10.42.020 Vehicles subject to Public Utilities Code.
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable with respect to any vehicle which is subject to the provisions of Sections 1031 through 1036, inclusive of the Public Utilities Code. (Ord. 122 § 2, 1984)

10.42.030 Pickups and deliveries.
This chapter shall not prohibit any commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has been previously obtained. (Ord. 122 § 4, 1984)

10.42.040 Vehicles owned by a public utility or licensed contractor.
This chapter shall not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in connection, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 122 § 5, 1984)

10.42.050 Effective subject to proper sign erection on streets affected.
This chapter shall not be effective until the appropriate signs are erected indicating those streets which are affected by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 122 § 3, 1984)

Chapter 10.43
INTERSTATE TRUCKS
Sections:

10.43.010    Definitions.

10.43.020    Purpose.

10.43.030    Application.

10.43.040    Fees and costs.

10.43.050    Retrofitting.

10.43.060    Revocation of route.

10.43.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth, and if any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it shall have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the Vehicle Code, it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

A. “CalTrans” means the State of California Department of Transportation or its successor agency.

B. “Director of Development Services” means the Director of Development Services of the City or an authorized representative.

C. “Interstate truck” means a truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the Vehicle Code.

D. “Terminal” means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be loaded and off loaded or at which the vehicles are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 147 § 1, 1984)

10.43.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks operating on a Federally designated highway system and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 147 § 1, 1984)

10.43.030 Application.
A. Any interested person requiring terminal access for interstate trucks from the Federally designated highway system shall submit an application, on a form as provided by the City, together with such information as may be required by the Director of Development Services and appropriate fees to the City.

B. Upon receipt of the application, the Director of Development Services will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal. Upon the Director of Development Services’ approval of that designation, the Director of Development Services will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections and highways and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes. No access off a Federally designated highway system will be approved without the approval of CalTrans.

C. Should the requested route pass through the City to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with that jurisdiction’s application process.

Coordination of the approval of the route through the City will be the responsibility of the entity which controls the terminal’s land use. Costs of trailblazer signs shall be as provided in PMC 10.43.040. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 147 § 1, 1984)

10.43.040 Fees and costs.
A. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by the City by resolution, sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route.

B. Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the City and by CalTrans, the applicant shall deposit with the City sufficient funds as estimated by the Director of Development Services to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal access signs and trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the City on route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 147 § 1, 1984)

10.43.050 Retrofitting.
A. If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory by the Director of Development Services, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction, and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when the retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of CalTrans, the actual construction will be done by the City or by a contractor acceptable to it.

B. When the work is to be done by the City, the applicant shall deposit with the City the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant as the case may be. When the work is done by the applicant, the applicant may file with the Director of Development Services, on a form satisfactory to the Director of Development Services a statement detailing the actual costs of the retrofitting.

C. If at any time within five years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any new applicant seek approval of a terminal which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, the new applicant may be required to pay a fee to the City equal to the proportionate share of the cost of the previously completed retrofitting, as determined by the Director of Development Services, which fee shall be disbursed by the City to the applicant who paid for the retrofitting as well as to any applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting under this subsection. Nothing in this chapter shall require the payment of a proportionate fee if the applicant doing the work failed to file the report with the Director of Development Services required by subsection B of this section. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 147 § 1, 1984)

10.43.060 Revocation of route.
The Director of Development Services may revoke any approved terminal or route if the terminal or route becomes a safety hazard for vehicular traffic. A safety hazard includes the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate the route or said vehicles causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 147 § 1, 1984)

Chapter 10.44
PARADES
Sections:

10.44.010    Temporary closing of streets.

10.44.010 Temporary closing of streets.
The Director of Public Services may temporarily close a portion of a street for a parade or special event for which a permit has been issued when in his opinion such closing is necessary for the safety and protection of persons using that portion of the street during the temporary closing. No such closing shall be for more than 24 hours without the approval of the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.249.6)

Chapter 10.48
VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Sections:

Article I. Vehicle Use on Private Property

10.48.010    Prohibited – Written permission required.

Article II. Parking Vehicles on Private Property

10.48.020    Prohibition of parking on private property.

10.48.030    Removal of vehicle parked on private property.

10.48.040    Size of sign.

10.48.050    Notice to owner of vehicle.

Article I. Vehicle Use on Private Property

10.48.010 Prohibited – Written permission required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive or leave any vehicle in, over or upon any private property without having in his possession the written permission of the owner thereof, or the person entitled to the immediate possession thereof, or the authorized agent of either.

B. Whenever any person is stopped by a peace officer pursuant to this section, he shall, upon the request of such peace officer, display said written permission. (Ord. 33 § 2, 1981; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 76.101)

Article II. Parking Vehicles on Private Property

10.48.020 Prohibition of parking on private property.
No person shall park a vehicle on private property without the consent or permission of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property. (Ord. 120 § 1, 1984)

10.48.030 Removal of vehicle parked on private property.
The owner or person in lawful possession of any private property may, subsequent to notifying, by telephone or, if impractical, by the most expeditious means available, the County Sheriff, cause the removal of a vehicle parked on such property to the nearest public garage, if there is displayed, in plain view at all City approved entrances to the property, or if none exists at least one sign per street frontage, a sign prohibiting public parking and indicating that vehicles will be removed at the owner’s expense, and containing the telephone number of the local office of the Sheriff of the County. (Ord. 120 § 2, 1984)

10.48.040 Size of sign.
The sign prohibiting public parking shall be 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall clearly state the following:

Public Parking is Prohibited

Unauthorized Vehicles Will be Towed Away at Owner’s Expense

Poway Sheriff’s Department – 858-513-2800

CVC22658

(Ord. 120 § 3, 1984)

10.48.050 Notice to owner of vehicle.
A. The person causing removal of such vehicle shall, if the person knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records of the Department of Motor Vehicles, the name and address of the registered legal owner thereof, immediately give, or cause to be given, notice in writing to the registered and legal owner of the fact of such removal, the grounds for the removal, and indicate the place to which the vehicle has been removed.

B. In the event the vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage.

C. The notice provided for in this chapter shall include the amount of mileage at the time of removal if applicable.

D. If the person does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in this chapter, the person causing removal of a vehicle shall comply with the requirements of Section 22853 of the California Vehicle Code relating to notice in the same manner as applicable to an officer removing a vehicle from private property. (Ord. 120 § 4, 1984)

Chapter 10.52
VEHICLES ON HIGHWAY AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
Sections:

Article I. Removal of Vehicles from Highway

10.52.010    Circumstances.

10.52.020    Procedures.

10.52.030    Supplemental to statutory authority.

Article II. Removal and Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles Not on Highways

10.52.040    Purpose and intent.

10.52.050    Removal and disposal procedures.

Article I. Removal of Vehicles from Highway

10.52.010 Circumstances.
Any individual authorized pursuant to Section 22651 of the California Vehicle Code, including but not limited to, any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of the City is authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City under the circumstances enumerated in this chapter and otherwise set forth with the California Vehicle Code:

A. When any vehicle has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours;

B. When any vehicle has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway when the parking or standing of vehicles thereon has been prohibited by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, and where signs are posted giving notice of such removal;

C. When any vehicle has been parked or left standing on a street or highway in violation of temporary “No Parking” signs which have been posted on said street or highway pursuant to Section 22651(l), (m) or (n) of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 25 § 1(a), 1981)

10.52.020 Procedures.
Any officers removing a vehicle as provided in this chapter shall comply with the procedures set forth in Section 22850, et seq. of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 25 § 1(b), 1981)

10.52.030 Supplemental to statutory authority.
This chapter is not intended to limit that authority of the City as set forth in Chapter 10 of the California Vehicle Code, commencing with Section 22650 thereof, but is intended to supplement that authority. (Ord. 25 § 1(c), 1981)

Article II. Removal and Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles Not on Highways

10.52.040 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the Council in adopting this article is to establish procedures pursuant to Sections 22660 to 22664 of the California Vehicle Code for the abatement, removal and disposal as public nuisances, of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or vehicle parts from private or public property, not including highways. (Ord. 25 § 2(a), 1981)

10.52.050 Removal and disposal procedures.
Any vehicle located on property other than a highway may be removed as a public nuisance and disposed of in accordance with the following procedures:

A. Not less than 10 days prior to any removal or disposal of a vehicle, a notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle as a public nuisance shall be issued unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle. The notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the vehicle and of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

B. Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located, a public hearing shall be held before the City Manager or any other regularly salaried full-time employee of the City whom the City Manager may designate. This request shall be made to the Manager or his designee within 10 days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle.

C. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing. Instead of making an appearance, he may present a sworn written statement, in time for consideration at the hearing, denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for his denial. This statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting the request. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not acquiesced in its presence, then the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle shall not be assessed against the property upon which the vehicle is located, pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, or collected from the landowner.

D. No person shall reconstruct or make operable any vehicle removed under the provisions of this article, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license, pursuant to Section 5004 of the California Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.

E. This article shall not apply to:

1. A vehicle which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

2. A vehicle which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard.

This exception shall not, however, authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this section.

F. Vehicle may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, automobile dismantler’s yard, or any suitable site for processing as scrap, or other final disposition consistent with subsection D of this section.

G. Notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles within five days after the date of removal, identifying the vehicle and any evidence of registration available including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificate of ownership or license plates.

H. The cost of removal and disposal of any vehicle, and the administrative fee as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, may be charged against the person who is determined to be responsible for the maintenance of the vehicle as a public nuisance.

I. Provisions of this section shall be administered by regularly salaried full-time employees of the City, except that the removal of vehicles from the property may be by any other duly authorized person. Any such authorized person may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this section to examine a vehicle, and remove or cause to be removed the vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this section.

J. Any licensed dismantler or commercial enterprise acquiring vehicles removed pursuant to this section shall be excused from the reporting requirements of Section 11520 of the California Vehicle Code; and any fees and penalties which would otherwise be due the Department of Motor Vehicles are waived; provided, that a copy of the resolution or order authorizing disposition of the vehicle is retained in the dismantler’s or commercial enterprise’s business records. (Ord. 683 § 42, 2008; Ord. 25 § 2(b), 1981)

Chapter 10.56
BICYCLES
Sections:

10.56.010    Definitions.

10.56.020    License – Required.

10.56.030    License – Fees.

10.56.040    License – Issuance.

10.56.050    Record of licenses.

10.56.060    Authority to stamp frame.

10.56.070    Transfer of ownership – Reports.

10.56.080    Change of address.

10.56.090    Destroying/altering license plates and registration cards.

10.56.100    Destroying/altering numbers of frames.

10.56.110    Violation – Penalty.

10.56.010 Definitions.
“Bicycle” means a device upon which any person may ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain, or gears, and having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement. (Ord. 551 § 3, 2002; Ord. 60 § 1, 1982)

10.56.020 License – Required.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, highway, or other public property within the jurisdiction of the City without first obtaining a license issued by the City. The Department of Safety Services, or any other department designated by the City Manager, is authorized and directed to issue, upon written application therefor, a bicycle license, to any person residing within the City. License applicants who reside outside the City shall be referred to their respective city or jurisdiction of residency. (Ord. 60 § 2, 1982)

10.56.030 License – Fees.
License fees will be in accordance with those stated in Section 39004 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 60 § 3, 1982)

10.56.040 License – Issuance.
A. Licenses issued by the City shall be of a type designated by the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State, and distributed by the Department pursuant to Division 16.7 of the California Vehicle Code. The City shall designate a bicycle licensing agency to issue bicycle licenses upon request by the bicycle owner.

B. The licensing clerk may authorize regularly licensed bicycle dealers to purchase blocks of licenses and upon the sale of a bicycle, issue a license and forward within 10 days of the issuance thereof the required copies of the registration to the licensing clerk. (Ord. 60 § 4, 1982)

10.56.050 Record of licenses.
The designated licensing agency shall keep a record of each bicycle license number issued pursuant to this chapter, the date of issuance of each bicycle license, the City identification number and manufacturer’s serial number of the bicycle, the make, type and model of the bicycle and the name and address of the licensee. Records shall be maintained by the designated licensing agency during the period of validity of the license or upon notification that the bicycle is no longer operated. (Ord. 60 § 5, 1982)

10.56.060 Authority to stamp frame.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the bicycle licensing agency or retailer, from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles for identification purposes. (Ord. 60 § 6, 1982)

10.56.070 Transfer of ownership – Reports.
A. Owner’s Report. Pursuant to this chapter, whenever the owner of a licensed bicycle sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, the owner shall notify the licensing clerk within 10 days. This notice shall be in the form as required by California Vehicle Code Section 39008(a).

B. Purchaser’s Report. Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle shall, within 10 days of taking possession thereof, apply for a transfer of license and report the purchase of said bicycle to the licensing clerk. (Ord. 60 § 7, 1982)

10.56.080 Change of address.
Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter changes his/her address, he/she shall, within 10 days, notify in writing the designated licensing agency of the old and new address. (Ord. 60 § 8, 1982)

10.56.090 Destroying/altering license plates and registration cards.
No person shall remove, mutilate or alter any license plate or registration card during the time such license plate or registration card is in effect. (Ord. 60 § 9, 1982)

10.56.100 Destroying/altering numbers of frames.
No person shall wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 60 § 10, 1982)

10.56.110 Violation – Penalty.
Under Section 39011 of the California Vehicle Code, violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an infraction, and no fine imposed for any such violation shall exceed the sum set forth in that section. (Ord. 60 § 11, 1982)

Chapter 10.60
COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES
Sections:

10.60.010    Certain uses of coasters, roller skates and similar devices.

10.60.010 Certain uses of coasters, roller skates and similar devices.
The City Council of the City of Poway finds and declares as follows:

A. For the purposes of applying this section, the term “roller device” means roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, coasters, scooters, toy vehicles or any similar device upon which a person may be propelled.

B. No person shall use a roller device upon any public or private street, parking lot, parking structure, sidewalk or walkway in any district in the City of Poway in such a manner as to interfere with the lawful use thereof by motor vehicles or pedestrians.

C. No person shall use a roller device upon any public or private street, parking lot, parking structure, sidewalk, or walkway which is open to the public for public or commercial purposes, provided that such street, parking lot, parking structure, sidewalk, or walkway shall be posted by the owner thereof indicating that such use is prohibited pursuant to this section.

D. No person shall use a roller device upon or within any drainage channel, ditch, culvert or other improved stormwater control system which is either:

1. Situated within a public right-of-way or is owned and controlled by a public entity; or

2. Situated upon private property which is posted by the owner thereof indicating that such use is prohibited pursuant to this section.

E. Except for school-sanctioned events authorized by a school site administrator, no person shall ride any skateboard, roller blade, roller skate, or similar type device on any property owned by any school district which has a policy prohibiting such use, and displays a sign at the main entrance to the property informing visitors of the policy. (Ord. 530 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 10.64
SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTESTS OR ILLEGAL EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED
Sections:

10.64.010    Definitions.

10.64.020    Spectator at illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed violation.

10.64.030    Relevant circumstances to prove a violation.

10.64.040    Admissibility of prior acts.

10.64.010 Definitions.
A. “Illegal motor vehicle speed contest” or “illegal exhibition of speed” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

B. “Event” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

C. “Preparations for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed” include, but are not limited to, situations in which: (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals have arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) one or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting the event; (4) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed; (5) one or more drivers is revving his or her engine or spinning his or her tires in preparation for the event; or (6) an individual is stationed at one or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter.

D. “Spectator” means any individual who is within 200 feet of an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed, or at a location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. “Spectator” includes any individual within 200 feet of the event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means. (Ord. 586 § 1, 2003)

10.64.020 Spectator at illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed violation.
A. Any individual who is present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed, with the intent to be present at such illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed, is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of six months in jail and a fine of $1,000.

B. Any individual who is present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, where preparations for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed are being made, with the intent to be present at such illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed, is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of six months in jail and a fine of $1,000.

C. Exemption. Nothing in this section prohibits law enforcement officers or their agents from being spectators at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed in the course of their duties. (Ord. 586 § 1, 2003)

10.64.030 Relevant circumstances to prove a violation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of PMC 10.64.020, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:

A. The time of day;

B. The nature and description of the scene;

C. The number of people at the scene;

D. The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or group present at the scene;

E. The number and description of the motor vehicles at the scene;

F. That the individual charged drove or was transported to the scene;

G. That the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed;

H. That the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed;

I. That the individual charged has previously attended an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed;

J. That the individual charged previously was present at a location where preparations for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed were being made or where an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed was in progress. (Ord. 586 § 1, 2003)

10.64.040 Admissibility of prior acts.
The list of circumstances set forth in PMC 10.64.030 is not exclusive. Evidence of prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed was taking place at the time of the presently charged offense. Prior acts are not limited to those that occurred within the City of Poway. (Ord. 586 § 1, 2003)

Title 11
(Reserved)
Title 12
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapters:

12.04    Public Right-of-Way Permit

12.08    Moving Buildings and Structures

12.12    Excavations, Fills and Obstructions

12.14    Prohibition of Excavations

12.16    Street and Sidewalk Construction

12.20    Construction Standards for Streets

12.24    Encroachments

12.26    Automobile Deliveries

12.28    Highway Related Nuisances

12.32    Urban Forestry

12.36    Vending Racing Forms on Streets

12.38    Newsracks Affecting Public Property

12.40    Refuse Containers on Public Property

12.44    Centerlines

12.48    Underground Utility Districts

12.52    Bridge Crossings and Major Thoroughfares – Construction Fees

Chapter 12.04
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT
Sections:

12.04.010    Scope of regulation.

12.04.020    Permit required.

12.04.030    Permit application.

12.04.040    Exceptions for emergency work.

12.04.050    Traffic control plan.

12.04.060    Issuance of permit.

12.04.070    Denial of permit.

12.04.080    Permittee liable for damages.

12.04.090    Inspection deposit.

12.04.100    Permit fee.

12.04.110    Permit deposit.

12.04.120    Revocation of permit.

12.04.130    Extension of permit.

12.04.140    Suspension of permit.

12.04.150    Presentation of permit.

12.04.160    Permit violations.

12.04.170    Hours of operation.

12.04.180    Remedies.

12.04.190    Appeal.

12.04.200    Designated agents for the City.

12.04.010 Scope of regulation.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to anyone performing work in the public right-of-way, including but not limited to the following:

A. A developer of private property, his agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors;

B. Contractors, their agents, employees, and subcontractors under contract with the City to perform work in the public right-of-way;

C. All utilities and franchisees. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.020 Permit required.
No work shall be performed or caused to be performed, in the public right-of-way without first obtaining from the Director of Public Services or his designee a written public right-of-way permit in accordance with this chapter.

A. Private. In the event that the work is being performed by a developer of private or public property, his agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors, then the permit shall be obtained by the developer and signed by the contractor.

B. City Contracts. The contractor shall be required to obtain a permit for any work being done in the public right-of-way under contract with the City.

C. Utilities and Franchisees. Work in the public right-of-way by a utility or franchisee requires the permit to be acquired by a designated representative of the utility and/or franchisee. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.030 Permit application.
Application for a permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the Director of Public Services. The application shall include:

A. The location description and justification for the work and the extent to which it may interfere with the public use of roadway;

B. The duration for which the permit is sought and the date it is requested to be effective;

C. The application must include a schedule specifying the days of the week and the hours of the day for which the permit is sought, and the work to be performed;

D. A copy of a current certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000, worker’s compensation insurance, and appropriate contractor’s license;

E. List of all subcontractors who will be performing work under the permit, and a copy of their contractor’s license;

F. Such other information that the Director of Public Services may require, including but not limited to, construction drawings prepared and signed by a registered Civil Engineer, traffic detour plan, soils report, and any other information deemed necessary to ensure that the proposed work within the public right-of-way is performed per City standards. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.040 Exceptions for emergency work.
In an emergency, work may be performed until a permit can be acquired on the following working day. In such cases the permittee will be required to notify the City’s law enforcement officials immediately of the location and approximate length of time for the emergency work to be performed. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.050 Traffic control plan.
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall submit to and have a traffic control plan approved as to form and content by the Director of Public Services or his designee. The traffic control plan shall comply with the State of California Manual of Traffic Control for Construction and Maintenance Zones. The traffic control plan shall be subject to review and modification by the Director of Public Services at any time as the public health, safety or convenience may require. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.060 Issuance of permit.
The Director of Public Services shall approve or conditionally approve or deny applications for a public improvement permit subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.070 Denial of permit.
The Director of Public Services shall not issue a public right-of-way permit where he finds that the work as proposed will:

A. Irreparably damage private or public property;

B. Unreasonably expose any property or persons to injury;

C. Unreasonably interfere with the orderly movement of traffic;

D. Impair use of the right-of-way for an unreasonable period of time. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.080 Permittee liable for damages.
Every permit shall contain an agreement signed by the applicant that the City and all officers, agents and employees thereof shall be held harmless by the applicant from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss to persons or property, occurring in whole or in part as the result of any act or omission of the permittee or his contractors or employees. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.090 Inspection deposit.
The amount of the inspection deposit will be established by a resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.100 Permit fee.
The permit fee will be established by a resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.110 Permit deposit.
Prior to receiving a public right-of-way permit, the applicant shall be required to deposit cash for the purpose of securing timely completion and/or correction of the work. The amount of the deposit shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The deposit shall be maintained in its full amount at all times during the term of the permit. Failure to maintain the deposit in its full amount following five working days’ written notice for the City to replace funds withdrawn from the deposit shall result in revocation of the permit. The cost of any work performed by the City or its agents, which is necessitated by the applicant’s failure to comply with the conditions of the permit, will be deducted from the applicant’s deposit. The Director of Public Services shall have the right to waive or reduce the permit deposit for City contractors, utilities or franchises. Within 40 days after the acceptance by the City of the work which is the subject of the permit, the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee, less any amount deducted by the City in the form of forfeitures of costs for work performed. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.120 Revocation of permit.
The Director of Public Services shall revoke a public right-of-way permit by a letter sent either certified mail or hand-delivered to the developer and/or contractor, if any of the following exist:

A. The term of the permit has expired;

B. Work performed in violation of any term or condition of the permit;

C. Work performed creating or resulting in a condition on or near the right-of-way which presents a hazard or danger to the public, or is otherwise not authorized by the permit. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.130 Extension of permit.
No work in the public right-of-way is to be performed after the completion date specified on the permit, unless an extension of the permit is obtained as provided in this section. At least two working days prior to the expiration of the permit, the developer and his contractor shall submit to the City a written request for a time extension. The request shall specify the reasons for not completing the work by the date specified on the permit, and state the revised completion date. The Director of Public Services is authorize to deny, approve, or revise the conditions of a permit that has been requested for extension. The Director of Public Services may also require the developer’s deposit to be increased as a condition of approval for the time extension, and may specify conditions for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.140 Suspension of permit.
The Director of Public Services may suspend a permit if the condition in or around the public right-of-way is determined to be a potential danger to the public health, safety or welfare. The suspension notice shall be in the form of a letter sent registered mail or hand-delivered to the developer and/or contractor. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.150 Presentation of permit.
The public right-of-way permit shall be presented upon demand of any City employee or agent at the site of the work being performed. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and may result in the immediate suspension of the permit. The contractor, the contractor’s representative, or superintendent, must be on-site at all times work is being performed. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.160 Permit violations.
A. Violation of any condition or term of the permit resulting in a hazard or danger to the public shall result in the revocation of the permit.

B. Any person required by this chapter to obtain a public right-of-way permit who works in the public right-of-way without a valid permit or in violation of a permit issued by the City, that is in full force and effect, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

C. Any employee of a person required by this chapter to obtain a public right-of-way permit who works in the public right-of-way without a valid permit or in violation of a permit issued by the City, that is in full force and effect, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

D. Violation of any condition or term of the permit may, upon revocation of the permit result in forfeiture of the remaining balance of the developer’s permit deposit. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.170 Hours of operation.
Work in the public right-of-way shall be allowed only on those days of the week and between the hours of the day provided in the permit or as authorized in writing by the Director of Public Services or his/her designee. Work performed before or after these times shall constitute a violation of the permit. No work shall be performed on Saturday or Sunday unless expressly authorized by the terms of the permit as approved. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.180 Remedies.
Any work performed in the public right-of-way by the permittee or by an employee of the developer, contractor, or subcontractor which is not authorized by the permit or which presents a hazard or danger to the public, shall (1) constitute a misdemeanor on the part of the permittee; (2) constitute a misdemeanor on the individual or individuals performing the work; (3) constitute grounds for any agent of the City to order all work stopped; (4) constitute grounds for the Director of Public Services to direct the permittee or City-retained forces to perform the work necessary to alleviate any and all conditions causing a hazard or danger to the public. In the event that City forces perform such work, the cost thereof plus administrative costs, shall be reimbursed to the City from the developer’s deposit. In the event the deposit has been forfeited or is insufficient to cover the costs of the necessary work, the permit may be revoked. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.190 Appeal.
Permittee shall have the right to appeal any stop work order, order to perform work, permit suspension, permit revocation, or deposit forfeiture to the City Manager, by providing to the City Manager within three working days of the action taken, permittee’s written notice of appeal. The filing of an appeal shall not affect any stop work order, permit suspension, permit revocation, or deposit forfeiture during the appeal period unless so ordered by the City Manager. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

12.04.200 Designated agents for the City.
Designated agents and employees of the City for purposes of enforcement of this chapter shall include:

A. Law enforcement personnel or law enforcement personnel under contract.

B. Employees or contract employees of the City employed to provide engineering and inspection services.

C. City Manager or Assistant City Manager.

D. City Attorney. (Ord. 250 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 12.08
MOVING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Sections:

12.08.010    Scope of regulations.

12.08.020    Permit required.

12.08.030    Application for permit.

12.08.040    Application changes by Director of Public Services.

12.08.050    Permit fee.

12.08.060    Permit affixed to structure.

12.08.070    Copies of permit on sections of structure.

12.08.080    Extension of permit.

12.08.090    Classification of buildings.

12.08.100    Deposits according to classification.

12.08.110    Tree trimming deposit.

12.08.120    Estimate of tree trimming costs.

12.08.130    General deposit in lieu of special deposits.

12.08.140    Additional deposit.

12.08.150    Increase in deposit to cover higher class.

12.08.160    Deductions from deposit.

12.08.170    Refund or deficiency payment.

12.08.180    Billing in lieu of deductions.

12.08.190    Supervision by inspector.

12.08.200    Planks required under dollies on wheels.

12.08.210    Charge for damage to highway.

12.08.220    Warning lights.

12.08.230    Defacing trees not permitted.

12.08.240    Trimming of trees.

12.08.250    Permit for structures exceeding permissible weights.

12.08.260    Permit for specific equipment – Fee – Bond.

12.08.270    Insurance in lieu of bond.

12.08.010 Scope of regulations.
The provisions of this chapter apply only to the moving of buildings and structures. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.201)

12.08.020 Permit required.
No person shall move or cause to be moved along any highway any building or structure without first obtaining from the Director of Public Services a permit to do so. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.202)

12.08.030 Application for permit.
Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made in duplicate and in accordance with Chapter 12.04 PMC. The application shall specify the kind of building or structure to be moved, the approximate weight thereof, as nearly as may be ascertained, the location of the same, the location to which and the route over or along which such building or structure and each section or portion of such building or structure is to be moved, the number of sections in which the building or structure will be moved, the type and number of conveyances upon which the same is to be moved, the total number of tire inches thereof for each separate section to be moved, and the time when such building, structure, or portion thereof, is proposed to be moved and within which such removal will be completed. The applicant shall attach to the application a copy of a valid building permit for the building or structure at its destination point, or in the case of intended storage, a copy of an appropriate special use permit or other evidence that storage at the destination point is not in violation of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.203)

12.08.040 Application changes by Director of Public Services.
The Director of Public Services may make such changes in any application for a permit as in his opinion are necessary for the protection of the highways along or over which it is proposed to move the building or structure or to prevent undue interference with traffic or to avoid jeopardizing the safety of any persons using such highways. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.204)

12.08.050 Permit fee.
Every person applying for a permit required by this chapter shall at the time of making application for the permit pay an issuance fee. The issuance fee amount shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 43, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.204.1)

12.08.060 Permit affixed to structure.
The moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times while it is on the highway, in a conspicuous place on the building or structure to be moved, the permit for such moving. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.205)

12.08.070 Copies of permit on sections of structure.
If a building or structure is moved in more than one section, and more than one of such sections are moved at the same time, the moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times while they are on the highway in a conspicuous place on each section on which the original permit is not affixed, true copies of such permit. Such true copies shall be issued by the Director of Public Works upon payment to him by the applicant of an issuance fee for each additional copy. The fee for additional copies shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 44, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.206)

12.08.080 Extension of permit.
Each permit issued shall become null and void upon the expiration of the time specified in the application unless the Director of Public Services extends the time, which he may do if in his opinion the moving of the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is impracticable because of inclement weather, act of God, strikes, or other causes not within the control of the permittee. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.207)

12.08.090 Classification of buildings.
All buildings and structures are classified as follows:

A. Class A is any building or structure or any portion thereof which is moved on a motor truck or other vehicle propelled by its own power;

B. Class B is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class A which is not more than 16 feet in width;

C. Class C is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class A which is more than 16 feet and not more than 22 feet in width;

D. Class D is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class A which is more than 22 feet and not more than 28 feet in width;

E. Class E is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class A which is more than 28 feet and not more than 40 feet in width;

F. Class F is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class A which is more than 40 feet in width. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.208)

12.08.100 Deposits according to classification.
Every applicant for a permit from whom an issuance fee is required, who does not maintain a sufficient general deposit, shall deposit an amount as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. The deposit amount will vary, depending on the permit classification. (Ord. 683 § 45, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.209)

12.08.110 Tree trimming deposit.
Before any permit is issued, in addition to any deposit made as required by PMC 12.08.100, the moving contractor shall also deposit with the Director of Public Services an amount equal to that estimated by him pursuant to PMC 12.08.120 to cover the cost of necessary tree trimming. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.210)

12.08.120 Estimate of tree trimming costs.
If examination of the application and/or route to be traversed discloses that the moving will require trimming the trees, the City shall estimate the cost of such trimming of trees growing upon any grounds or property belonging to the City or upon the highway, as is necessary:

A. At the time the structure is moved to facilitate the moving thereof;

B. Subsequent to the moving of the structure to correct previous trimming done when the structure was moved. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.211)

12.08.130 General deposit in lieu of special deposits.
In lieu of making the special deposits required by PMC 12.08.100 and 12.08.110, the moving contractor may make and maintain with the Director of Public Services a general deposit in a sum equal to the amount of the special deposit for the highest class of building or structure which he desires, expects or intends to move. This general deposit shall be held and used for the same purpose as said special deposits. While such general deposit is maintained in an amount sufficient to cover the amount of the deposit required for the removal of any building or structure sought to be moved, the moving contractor need not make any special deposit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.212)

12.08.140 Additional deposit.
If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Services, any special or general deposit is not sufficient for the proper protection of the public interest in the highways, including any trees thereon, over which it is sought to move a building or structure, the Director of Public Services may require an additional deposit in such amount as he determines will be sufficient to protect such public interest. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.213)

12.08.150 Increase in deposit to cover higher class.
Before any permittee moves any building, structure, or portion thereof, of a class higher than the class for which he has made any general or special deposit, he shall increase such deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the class sought to be moved. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.214)

12.08.160 Deductions from deposit.
The City shall deduct from the deposit made or maintained by each permittee:

A. The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid;

B. The cost of the services and transportation of any inspector appointed pursuant to PMC 12.08.190;

C. The cost of any repairs made necessary because of the moving of the building or structure;

D. The total cost of all tree trimming done by the Director of Public Services made necessary in order to move the building or structure as specified in the permit, including all such trimming after the moving of the building or structure to correct trimming done when the structure was moved. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.215)

12.08.170 Refund or deficiency payment.
The remainder of any such special deposit, if there is any remainder, shall be refunded to the person making such deposit, or to his assigns. In case the deposit made pursuant to this title shall not be sufficient to pay all fees and deductions provided for in this title, the person to whom such permit is issued, shall, upon demand, pay to the Director of Public Services a sufficient sum to fully cover the same. Upon failure to pay such sum, the same may be recovered by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction, and until paid, no further such permit shall be issued to such moving contractor. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.216)

12.08.180 Billing in lieu of deductions.
If a moving contractor makes and maintains a general deposit with the Director of Public Services, the deductions provided for in PMC 12.08.160 need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the Director of Public Services may bill the moving contractor for the amount due from him to the City under the provisions of this title. If, 15 days after such bill has been sent, the moving contractor does not pay the same in full, then such amount may be deducted from his general deposit and PMC 12.08.160 and 12.08.170 shall apply. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.217)

12.08.190 Supervision by inspector.
The Director of Public Services may require that the moving of any building or structure be under the supervision of an inspector to be appointed by the Director of Public Services. The permittee shall pay to the Director of Public Services an amount equal to the compensation and cost of transportation of such inspector during the time he is assigned to such inspection. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.218)

12.08.200 Planks required under dollies on wheels.
When so required by the Director of Public Services, a moving contractor shall place under each dolly or wheel used in moving the building or structure, boards or planks of adequate width and strength to carry the load without being broken, to serve as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along any portion of any highway which has a surface other than natural soil. The moving contractor shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on or resting on such surface except upon such board, plank or runway. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.219)

12.08.210 Charge for damage to highway.
The Director of Public Services may restore, or cause to be restored, every highway damaged by the moving of any building or structure thereon, to a condition equivalent to that prior to such damage. The moving contractor who caused such damage shall pay the cost of the repair thereof to the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.220)

12.08.220 Warning lights.
When a building or structure, while being moved, is located on any highway, at all times between sunset and sunrise the moving contractor shall keep burning a red warning light not over six feet above the surface of such highway at each corner of such building or structure, and unless the Director of Public Services otherwise directs, on all sides and projections thereof at intervals of not more than five feet. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.221)

12.08.230 Defacing trees not permitted.
A permit granted under this title does not permit, license, or allow any person, except the Director of Public Services, to trim, prune, cut or deface in any manner any tree upon any grounds or property belonging to the City or upon any road, street or highway. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.222)

12.08.240 Trimming of trees.
At the request of a moving contractor holding an unrevoked permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Director of Public Services within a reasonable time after such request, shall trim such trees under his supervision as it is necessary to trim, and where it will not harm the trees, to the extent required to move the structure to the location specified in the permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.223)

12.08.250 Permit for structures exceeding permissible weights.
The Director of Public Services shall not issue a permit to move any building or structure when the weight of such building or structure, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment, exceeds the weight permitted by the Vehicle Code, except that if it appears to the Director of Public Services that the size, shape or physical characteristics of the building or structure or portion thereof to be moved, or of the highway over which such building or structure is to be moved, makes it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the Director of Public Services may issue a permit:

A. To move a building or structure on a vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with rubber tires where the total weight of both building or structure and vehicle does not exceed 60,000 pounds;

B. To move a building or structure on a vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.224)

12.08.260 Permit for specific equipment – Fee – Bond.
A. The Director of Public Works may in his discretion, if good cause appears, issue a permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move over and along highways specific pieces of mobile mechanical equipment, on specific vehicles or specific pieces of mechanical equipment or specific vehicles, or emergency public utility equipment on specific vehicles. Any such permit shall be subject to the following conditions:

1. The permit shall be limited to specified highways or a specified area of the City and shall specifically describe the highways or the area of the City to which it is limited. This limitation shall be fixed by the Director of Public Works so as to afford protection to highways and the traveling public;

2. The granting of the permit shall in no way relieve the permittee from liability for damage to the highways or to person or property;

3. The permit shall be issued for a specific period of time designated by the Director of Public Works and set forth in the permit, which period shall not exceed one year;

4. The permit may be issued subject to such other conditions as the Director of Public Works deems necessary for the protection of the highways and the traveling public.

B. The application for a permit pursuant to this section shall be made on a form furnished by the Director of Public Works and shall contain the information required by Section 35781 of the Vehicle Code and such other information as may be required by the Director of Public Works, including the power unit to be used to tow any oversize or overweight trailer coaches. The application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in an amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, and which shall be in lieu of any other fee prescribed by this title. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall file with the Director of Public Works a surety bond satisfactory to the Director of Public Works in the amount of $5,000 for the protection of highways from injury and to provide indemnity for any damage resulting from the operation or movement under the permit. The filing of such bond shall satisfy the provisions of this chapter requiring the deposit of money with the Director of Public Works, insofar as any permit issued pursuant to this section is concerned, and a single $5,000 bond may in the discretion of the Director of Public Works be deemed sufficient security for the issuance of one or more permits to the same applicant pursuant to this section. (Ord. 683 § 46, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.225)

12.08.270 Insurance in lieu of bond.
In lieu of the surety bond specified in PMC 12.08.260 the Director of Public Services may accept a certificate of insurance certifying that the applicant for the permit has an insurance policy in the amount specified by the Director of Public Services, but not less than $5,000 property damage, to which there has been attached and executed an oversize-overweight vehicle permit endorsement on a form approved by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.226)

Chapter 12.12
EXCAVATIONS, FILLS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
Sections:

12.12.010    Scope of regulations.

12.12.020    Permit – Required.

12.12.030    Permit – Application.

12.12.040    Applicant responsible for removing obstructions.

12.12.050    Proof of right to use highways.

12.12.060    Location changes required by Director of Public Services.

12.12.070    Permit fee.

12.12.080    Permits subject to use of highways by others.

12.12.090    Permits nontransferable.

12.12.100    Commencement of work – Cancellation of permits.

12.12.110    Advance permit not required of certain parties.

12.12.120    Poles and overhead lines – Exemptions from permit requirements.

12.12.130    Emergency excavations.

12.12.140    Special deposit – Exemptions.

12.12.150    General deposit in lieu of special deposit.

12.12.160    Additional deposit.

12.12.170    Deductions from deposit.

12.12.180    Refund or deficiency payment.

12.12.190    Billing in lieu of deductions.

12.12.200    Work must conform to permit.

12.12.210    Protective measures required.

12.12.220    Warning lights.

12.12.230    Refilling excavations required.

12.12.240    Restoration of highway.

12.12.250    Restoration by Director of Public Services.

12.12.260    Notification of completed refilling.

12.12.270    Resurfacing highway.

12.12.280    Charge for resurfacing.

12.12.290    Charge for subsequent repairs.

12.12.010 Scope of regulations.
The provisions of this chapter apply only to permits for the making of encroachments, including excavations, fills or obstructions, for the purpose of installing utilities including, but not limited to: sanitary sewer, storm drainage, domestic and irrigation water, oil and natural gas, electrical power, telephone, and television signals: both main and lateral lines. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.301)

12.12.020 Permit – Required.
No person or the contractor of any person excepting the contractor of this City for highway construction, improvement or repair, shall make or cause to be made any encroachment including an excavation, fill or obstruction in, over, along, or across or through any highway without first obtaining from the Director of Public Services a permit to do so. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.302)

12.12.030 Permit – Application.
Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made in accordance with Chapter 12.04 PMC. The application shall specify in detail:

A. The location, dimensions, purpose, extent and nature of the excavation, fill or obstruction;

B. The time during which it is estimated that such excavation or obstruction will exist. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.303)

12.12.040 Applicant responsible for removing obstructions.
Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant, that as to any encroachment not placed in a right-of-way belonging to the applicant which is prior in time and/or right-of-way to the City’s right-of-way, if any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, pole, anchor, or overhead line placed in the excavation or obstruction for which a permit is issued interferes with the subsequent improvement, grading or realignment of the highway by the City then the applicant and his successors or assigns will at his own expense remove such tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, pole, anchor, or overhead line, or relocate at a location designated by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.304)

12.12.050 Proof of right to use highways.
The Director of Public Services may require each applicant for a permit to file with him proof of the applicant’s right to use a highway for the purposes set forth in the application. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.305)

12.12.060 Location changes required by Director of Public Services.
The Director of Public Services may require such changes in the location of the proposed excavations, fills or obstructions as may be necessary to prevent undue interference with the use of the highway for other lawful purposes provided the changes required will not unreasonably interfere with the applicant’s rights of such use. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.306)

12.12.070 Permit fee.
Every person, unless exempted by law, applying for a permit required by this chapter shall at the time of making application for the permit pay an issuance fee in an amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 47, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.307)

12.12.080 Permits subject to use of highways by others.
Every permit for an excavation in or under the surface of any highway shall be granted subject to the right of the City or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of such highway for any purpose for which such highway may lawfully be used. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.308)

12.12.090 Permits nontransferable.
Permits issued under this chapter are nontransferable. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.309)

12.12.100 Commencement of work – Cancellation of permits.
The Director of Public Services may cancel a permit unless the work therein permitted is commenced within 60 days of the issuance thereof and thereafter, in the opinion of the Director of Public Services, is diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.310)

12.12.110 Advance permit not required of certain parties.
No permit shall be required in advance of performing work of the persons, firms or agencies listed in PMC 12.04.160 or of any public utility company subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State or of any distributor of public water supply for excavations required for service connections to existing pipelines or conduits maintained in highways or for excavations reasonably necessary for the location of trouble in such pipelines or conduits or the making of necessary repairs but not replacements thereto. In such event, however, a report of the excavation in such form as may be required by the Director of Public Services shall be filed with the Director of Public Services within five days after the excavation is made and all provisions of this title for the protection of the public and governing repairs to the highway shall apply to the same extent as where applications and permits are required. There shall be paid with each such report the same fees and deposits as would otherwise be required for a permit. In all other cases each applicant for an excavation permit shall file with the Director of Public Services as a condition to the granting of the permit, such plats, maps and descriptions of the work to be done as may be reasonably required by the Director of Public Services for the purpose of maintaining full and complete records of the structures within the highways, and for establishing responsibility for the protection of the public and repairing the property damaged. The advance exemption from obtaining a permit granted by this section shall not apply to the contractor of the persons, firms or agencies so exempted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.311)

12.12.120 Poles and overhead lines – Exemptions from permit requirements.
Any person who is subject to the rules and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission of the State shall not be required to obtain a permit to install, maintain, replace, repair or relocate any telephone or electric pole, anchor, or overhead lines; provided, however, that any person exempted by this section from obtaining a permit shall be deemed to be a “permittee” under a blanket permit while performing any work referred to in this section and shall comply with all regulations and requirements of this title imposed on a permittee or otherwise imposed on such person; and, provided further, that no such person shall be deemed exempted by this section unless such person has on file with the Director of Public Services a signed and unrevoked statement of the sort required by PMC 12.04.040 and of the sort required by PMC 12.12.040. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.312)

12.12.130 Emergency excavations.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person from maintaining by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, any pipe or conduit in any highway, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the City are closed, if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor within one day after the offices of the Director of Public Services are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.313)

12.12.140 Special deposit – Exemptions.
A. Except as provided in this section, each applicant for a permit in addition to payment of the issuance fee shall deposit with the Director of Public Services a sum of money in no event less than $10.00, which is twice the estimated cost to the nearest $5.00 of repairing the surface of the highway which may be damaged or destroyed by the proposed excavation or obstruction. The cost shall be estimated by multiplying the number of square feet of surface which may be damaged as shown by the application and plat, and the number of inches of thickness, plus one inch, by such sum as the City Council by order determines to most adequately represent the actual cost. Such order shall in no event specify the sum greater than $0.25. The City Council may change and revise such order from time to time. In the absence of any such order the amount shall be $0.10. In all cases the cost shall be presumed to be not less than $1.00.

B. An exemption from the provisions of this section shall be granted to an applicant for a permit in the case of a contract secured by a faithful performance bond, which contract is awarded by this City; provided, however, the applicant shall furnish a written certification by the Director of Public Services of the satisfactory restoration of the highway as a condition precedent to the acceptance of the work under such contract by this City or such a sanitation district.

C. Where the deposit as calculated above in this section will exceed $3,000, an exemption from the provisions of this section shall be granted for the excess above $3,000 to an applicant for a permit in the case of a contract secured by a public agency which is exempt from payment of fees or deposits as provided by PMC 12.04.060 or by a public utility company authorized to occupy a City roadway under terms of a franchise granted by the City or under the terms of a franchise issued by the State; provided, however, that the public agency or public utility company for whom the work is to be performed shall submit to the Director of Public Services a written guarantee of restoration of the highway to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Services and a guarantee of payment of all costs for which the agency or the company or their contractor may become liable to the City; and, provided further, that the public agency or public utility company for whom the work is to be performed shall submit to the Director of Public Services evidence satisfactory to the Director of Public Services that the applicant shall be required to furnish a written certification by the Director of Public Services of the satisfactory restoration of the highway as a condition precedent to the acceptance of the work by the public agency or public utility company. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.314)

12.12.150 General deposit in lieu of special deposit.
In lieu of making the special deposit required by PMC 12.12.140, the applicant may make and maintain with the Director of Public Works a general deposit in an amount estimated by the Director of Public Works to be sufficient to pay for the cost of permit issuance fees and expected repairs occasioned by future excavations or obstructions. The general deposit shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time and shall be held and used for the same purposes as said special deposit. While a general deposit is maintained in an amount sufficient to cover the amount of deposit required for the making of any excavation or obstruction sought to be made, the applicant need not make any special deposit. (Ord. 683 § 48, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.315)

12.12.160 Additional deposit.
If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Services, any special or general deposit is not sufficient for the proper protection of the public interest in the highways in which it is proposed to excavate or on which it is proposed to place obstructions, the Director of Public Services may require an additional deposit in such amount as he determines will be sufficient to protect such public interest. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.316)

12.12.170 Deductions from deposit.
The City shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee:

A. The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid;

B. The cost to the City of refilling any excavation or removing any obstruction;

C. The cost to the City, calculated pursuant to PMC 12.12.140, of resurfacing the highway;

D. The cost of any inspection by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.317)

12.12.180 Refund or deficiency payment.
After making the required deductions, the City shall refund to the applicant any amount still remaining in the special deposit in the manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. If any deposit made is less than sufficient to pay all fees and costs to be deducted, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Director of Public Services an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon demand, the City may recover the same by action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full a permit shall not be issued to such permittee. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.318)

12.12.190 Billing in lieu of deductions.
If a person makes and maintains with the Director of Public Services a general deposit the deductions provided for in this chapter need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the Director of Public Services may bill such person for the amount owed by him to the City under the provisions of this chapter. If such amount is not paid within 15 days of the transmission of such bill, the Director of Public Services may deduct such amount from the general deposit, and PMC 12.12.170 and 12.12.180 shall apply. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.319)

12.12.200 Work must conform to permit.
Every permittee who makes or causes to be made any excavation, or constructs, puts upon, maintains, or leaves any obstruction or impediment to travel, or piles or places any material in or upon any highway, or installs or maintains or causes to be installed or maintained any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, or tunnel in or upon, or under the surface of any highway, at any location other than that described in the application, as amended, if amended, by the Director of Public Services, and shown in the plat filed with such application, or in any way contrary to the terms of the permit, is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.320)

12.12.210 Protective measures required.
In any permit issued by him the Director of Public Services may specify what lights, barriers, warning signs or other measures designed to protect the traveling public must be erected by the permittee. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.321)

12.12.220 Warning lights.
A. If the permit does not specify what lights, barriers, warning signs or other measures must be erected by the permittee, the permittee shall place and maintain warning lights at each end of such excavation or obstruction and at distances of not more than 50 feet along such excavation or obstruction from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled and resurfaced or such obstruction is removed and every said person shall place and maintain barriers not less than three feet high at each end of any such excavation or obstruction at all times until such excavation is entirely refilled or such obstruction is removed.

B. The upper portion of each of these barriers shall consist of a substantial sign approximately one foot high and four feet wide and on each side thereof bearing a sign complying with one of the following requirements:

1. In letters not less than three inches and neither yellow nor black, bearing the name of the permittee, on a background of alternate three-inch black and yellow stripes; the stripes shall be at an angle between 45 and 60 degrees from the horizontal;

2. In letters not less than six inches high, bearing the word “excavation”;

3. In conformity with the regulations adopted by the State Division of Highways pursuant to Section 465.7 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.322)

12.12.230 Refilling excavations required.
Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or obstruction permitted by any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or remove the obstruction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.323)

12.12.240 Restoration of highway.
A permittee shall refill any excavation in the manner which the Director of Public Services determines is most effective to accomplish thorough consolidation and enable the highway to be restored to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the excavation. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.324)

12.12.250 Restoration by Director of Public Services.
If any permittee fails or refuses to refill any excavation which he has made, or remove any obstruction which he has placed in any highway, the Director of Public Services may so do and charge the cost thereof to the permittee. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.325)

12.12.260 Notification of completed refilling.
Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation the permittee shall so notify the Director of Public Services, in writing, on a form prescribed by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.326)

12.12.270 Resurfacing highway.
Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation, the Director of Public Services, at his option, may require the permittee to resurface that portion of the highway surface damaged by the permittee’s excavation or obstruction, or the Director of Public Services may elect to do such resurfacing himself. Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and, in no event, to a thickness less than two inches. Where a treated or modified subgrade or surface has been removed or destroyed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness of not less than that of the surrounding or adjacent subgrade or surface, unless the Director of Public Services orders that the repair of such treated or modified subgrade or surface shall be made by an oil and rock mixture, in which case the thickness shall not be less than one-half the thickness of the treated or modified surface or subgrade. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.327)

12.12.280 Charge for resurfacing.
If, after the refilling of an excavation the permittee fails or refuses to resurface that portion of the surface of the highway damaged by him, or if the Director of Public Services elects to do such resurfacing, the Director of Public Services may do such resurfacing. The cost of such resurfacing shall be charged against the permittee, except in those instances where the permittee’s excavation is within an area of pavement to be immediately reconstructed by the City, and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general City improvement. The cost shall be computed as provided in PMC 12.12.140. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.328)

12.12.290 Charge for subsequent repairs.
If at any time subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by any excavation or obstruction in such highway, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation or obstruction, the permittee shall pay to the Director of Public Services the cost of such additional repairs. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such additional costs upon demand, the City may recover such additional costs by an action against such permittee in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such costs are paid the Director of Public Services shall not issue any permits to such permittee. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.329)

Chapter 12.14
PROHIBITION OF EXCAVATIONS
Sections:

12.14.010    Permit prohibited.

12.14.020    Emergency excavation.

12.14.030    Violation of chapter.

12.14.040    Administrative penalties.

12.14.050    Civil penalties and fees.

12.14.060    Criminal penalties and fees.

12.14.010 Permit prohibited.
No permit to excavate in newly renovated, overlaid, rehabilitated or reconstructed streets shall be granted for three years after completion of street renovation as shown on the current street moratorium list maintained by Development Services. Additionally, no permit shall be granted to excavate in slurry sealed, cape sealed, or other seal-coated streets for a period of one year following completion of stated renovation. Utilities shall determine alternate methods of making necessary repairs to avoid excavating in newly renovated streets. Exceptions to the above are as follows:

A. Emergency which endangers life or property;

B. Interruption of essential utility service;

C. Work that is mandated by City, State or Federal legislation;

D. Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of providing service exists;

E. Other situations upon a finding by the Director of Development Services that the public benefit outweighs the damage done to the street by excavation.

All permits which are issued under subsections A through E of this section shall be in accordance with the standards, details and specifications established by and on file at Development Services. Permission to excavate under these terms shall only be allowed upon receipt of written permission by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 512 § 1, 1999)

12.14.020 Emergency excavation.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person from excavating a street to the limited extent necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during days or times when the Development Services Department is closed. In the event that any person takes any action to excavate or cause to be excavated the public right-of-way pursuant to this section, such person shall apply for an emergency permit within four hours after Development Services is first reopened. The applicant for an emergency permit shall submit a written statement of the basis of the emergency action and describe the work performed. An emergency permit shall not be issued if the Director finds that an emergency did not exist or that the excavation exceeded that necessitated by the emergency. (Ord. 512 § 1, 1999)

12.14.030 Violation of chapter.
The Director of Development Services (“Director”), shall have authority to enforce this chapter. Upon a determination by the Director that a person has violated any provision of this chapter, the standard plans and specifications, the design manual, notices, orders, regulations, or rules of the City, any term, condition, or limitation of any permit or is subject to any outstanding fees, deposits, or other charges, the Director shall serve notice on said person to abate the violation. Any person whom the Director determines to be responsible for violating this chapter may be subject to any or all of the penalties specified in this chapter. (Ord. 512 § 1, 1999)

12.14.040 Administrative penalties.
A. The Director shall notify the person responsible for a continuing violation that they have 72 hours to correct or otherwise remedy the violation or be subject to the imposition of administrative penalties. For violations subject to the incomplete work provisions of this chapter, the person responsible shall be notified they have 24 hours to remedy the violation or be subject to the imposition of administrative penalties. For those violations that create an immediate danger to health or safety or are otherwise subject to emergency remediation, the person responsible shall be notified they must immediately remedy the violation or be subject to the imposition of administrative penalties.

B. Administrative penalties may be assessed pursuant to subsection A of this section up to $1,000 per day, per violation.

C. In addition to the administrative penalty assessed pursuant to subsection A of this section, the Director shall assess fees to cover the reasonable costs incurred in enforcing the administrative penalty, including, but not limited to, inspection costs and administrative overhead.

D. Penalties and fees assessed under this section shall continue to accrue against the person responsible for the violation until the violation is corrected or otherwise remedied in the judgment of the Director.

E. The Director, or his or her designated representative, is responsible for charging and collecting any penalty or fee assessed pursuant to this section. The Director shall notify in writing the person responsible for the violation of the cost of the penalty and fee and declare that such costs are due and payable to the City. If the penalty and fee are not paid within 30 days of this notice, the Director shall pursue collection of the penalty and fee.

F. Any person who has been assessed administrative penalties or fees may seek administrative review of such penalties and fees by filing an appeal with the Director that specifies in detail the basis for appeal. Within 20 days of the receipt of the appeal, unless extended by mutual agreement of the affected parties, the Director shall cause a hearing to be held before the City Manager. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. (Ord. 512 § 1, 1999)

12.14.050 Civil penalties and fees.
A. The City Attorney may commence an action for injunction, summary abatement, or abatement of any violation of this chapter, and for assessment and recovery of a civil penalty and attorney fees for such violation and litigation.

B. Any person who violates this chapter may be liable for a civil penalty, not to exceed $1,000 for each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue. Such penalty shall be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought by the City Attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction. In assessing the amount of the civil penalty, the court may consider any one or more of the relevant circumstances presented by any of the parties to the case, including, but not limited to, the following: the nature and seriousness of the misconduct, the number of violations, the persistence of the misconduct, the length of time over which the misconduct occurred, the wilfulness of the defendant’s misconduct, and the defendant’s assets, liabilities, and net worth. The City shall also be entitled to seek recovery of reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred in bringing a civil action pursuant to this section.

C. In undertaking enforcement of this chapter, the City is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers and employees, any obligation for which the City is liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of duty related to or arising from this chapter proximately caused their injury. (Ord. 512 § 1, 1999)

12.14.060 Criminal penalties and fees.
The City may institute criminal proceedings in the enforcement of this chapter as set forth in the Poway Municipal Code. (Ord. 512 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 12.16
STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
Sections:

12.16.010    Scope of regulations.

12.16.020    Permit required.

12.16.030    Residential driveway permit.

12.16.040    Application for permit.

12.16.050    Plans required with application.

12.16.060    Applicant for concrete box.

12.16.070    Work to be full length of street.

12.16.080    Permit fee.

12.16.090    Engineering and/or inspection fee.

12.16.100    Refund or deficiency payment.

12.16.110    Relocation costs.

12.16.120    Deposit for resetting stakes.

12.16.130    Refund upon revocation.

12.16.140    Work to commence in 60 days.

12.16.150    Revocation for delay.

12.16.160    Work must conform to permit.

12.16.170    Lines and grades obtained from Director of Public Services.

12.16.180    Performance according to plans and specifications – Inspections.

12.16.190    Subsequent change in plans and specifications.

12.16.200    Request for Director of Public Services before works begins.

12.16.210    Approval of concrete forms.

12.16.220    Warning lights.

12.16.230    Removal of debris.

12.16.240    Notification of completion of work.

12.16.250    Certificate of acceptance.

12.16.260    Permittee’s responsibility.

12.16.270    Defective work and materials.

12.16.280    Default of permittee.

12.16.290    Public nuisance.

12.16.010 Scope of regulations.
The provisions of this chapter apply only to permits for the laying, constructing, reconstructing, or repairing of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, highway surfaces, retaining walls, storm drains, culverts, or other appurtenant highway structures. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.401)

12.16.020 Permit required.
No person shall construct or repair any curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, roadway surface, retaining wall, storm drain or culvert or other work of any nature in, over, along, across or through any highway, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining from the Director of Public Services a permit to do so. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.402)

12.16.030 Residential driveway permit.
No person shall construct, improve or repair any residential driveway in, over, along, across or through any highway, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit to do so pursuant to Chapter 15.04 PMC. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.402.5)

12.16.040 Application for permit.
Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made in accordance with Chapter 12.04 PMC. The application shall specify:

A. The location, nature, and extent of the work to be performed;

B. The materials to be used;

C. Such other information as the Director of Public Services may require. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.403)

12.16.050 Plans required with application.
If in the opinion of the Director of Public Services the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the Director of Public Services may require the application to be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent engineer. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.404)

12.16.060 Applicant for concrete box.
Where the structure, driveway, curb, sidewalk or gutter is to be constructed of concrete, the applicant shall be a person licensed by the State to perform the work described in the application, and he must perform the work or the work must be performed under his immediate supervision. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.405)

12.16.070 Work to be full length of street.
If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Services, the construction of any length of curb or sidewalk less than the full length of a street between street intersections would create a condition hazardous to the traveling public using the street upon which it is proposed to install the curb or sidewalk, he may refuse to issue a permit for the construction of curb or sidewalk for any length less than the full length of said street between intersecting streets. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.406)

12.16.080 Permit fee.
Every person applying for a permit required by this chapter shall at the time of making application for the permit pay an issuance fee in an amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 49, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.407)

12.16.090 Engineering and/or inspection fee.
A. An applicant for a permit to construct any work, except curbs, walks, gutters or highway surfaces, shall, in addition to the issuance fee, pay or make a deposit for an engineering or inspection fee or engineering and inspection fee as follows:

1. An amount estimated by the Director of Public Works to be equal to twice the actual cost of all necessary engineering and inspection;

2. An applicant for a permit to construct a driveway with surfacing other than dirt, gravel or decomposed rock, shall, in addition to the issuance fee, pay an engineering and/or inspection fee in an amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time.

B. The Director of Public Works shall not charge any engineering or inspection fee for a permit to construct curbs, walks, gutters, or highway surfaces. (Ord. 683 § 50, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.408)

12.16.100 Refund or deficiency payment.
A. The engineering and inspection costs provided for in PMC 12.16.090(A)(2) shall be presumed to be the actual cost. A refund shall not be made to any applicant unless the inspection and/or engineering fee was erroneously collected, in which case the entire amount may be returned, or if the driveway or driveways were not constructed by the permittee, the applicant may apply for a refund of the unused fees less a charge in an amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time on the permit for final inspection charges. Where the deposit has been made under PMC 12.16.090(A)(1), the Director of Public Works shall deduct from the deposit the amount of the issuance fee and the actual cost to the City of the required engineering and inspection. If such cost and fee is less than the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the person making the deposit in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys.

B. If the cost, plus the issuance fee, exceeds the deposit, the permittee shall pay the excess to the City. If he does not so pay within 15 days, the City may recover such sum in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such amount is paid, further permits shall not be issued to such permittee. (Ord. 683 § 51, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.409)

12.16.110 Relocation costs.
If so required by the Director of Public Services, the permittee shall make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of relocating any structure, public utility, tree or shrub, where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The Director of Public Services may elect to do the necessary relocation. In such case the permittee shall deposit with the Director of Public Services a sum of money estimated by him to be sufficient to pay the cost thereof. After such relocation, a refund shall be paid to, or a deficiency shall be paid by, the permittee as provided in PMC 12.16.100. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.410)

12.16.120 Deposit for resetting stakes.
If any stakes set for any work covered by this chapter are disturbed or destroyed and it becomes necessary to set additional stakes, the permittee shall deposit a sum estimated by the Director of Public Services to be sufficient to pay the cost of setting such additional stakes. The Director of Public Services shall set the additional stakes. After such setting, a refund shall be paid to, or a deficiency shall be paid by, the permittee as provided in PMC 12.16.100. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.411)

12.16.130 Refund upon revocation.
When a permit has been revoked by the Director of Public Services, the permittee may obtain a refund of any unused fee paid or unused deposit made. No part of any issuance fee may be refunded. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.412)

12.16.140 Work to commence in 60 days.
Every permittee shall commence the proposed work within 60 days after the granting of the permit and thereafter prosecute the work in a continuous, diligent, and workmanlike manner to completion. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.414)

12.16.150 Revocation for delay.
Unless in his opinion a good and sufficient reason exists for the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of PMC 12.16.140, the Director of Public Services may revoke the permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.415)

12.16.160 Work must conform to permit.
Every person who performs any work covered by this chapter in an amount greater than, or in any way different from or contrary to the terms of any permit issued therefor, is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.416)

12.16.170 Lines and grades obtained from Director of Public Services.
Before a permittee performs any work regulated by this chapter he shall obtain from the Director of Public Services the lines and grades therefor. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.417)

12.16.180 Performance according to plans and specifications – Inspections.
A. The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the plans, if plans are made, and the specifications entitled “The Standard Specifications, Road Department of the County of San Diego,” on file with the Director of Public Services, and, further, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Services.

B. The Director of Public Services may waive inspection, if he believes such inspection is not necessary for the best interests of the City; provided, however, any such waiver shall be in writing. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.418)

12.16.190 Subsequent change in plans and specifications.
No change in any plans, if plans are made, or specifications shall be made unless approved in writing by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.419)

12.16.200 Request for Director of Public Services before works begins.
Not less than 18 hours before the commencement of any work regulated by this chapter, the permittee shall apply in writing to the Director of Public Services for an inspector therefor. In such application he shall specify the day and hour when, and the location at which, the work will be commenced. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.420)

12.16.210 Approval of concrete forms.
No concrete shall be poured or placed until the Director of Public Services has approved in writing the forms into which the concrete is to be poured or placed. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.421)

12.16.220 Warning lights.
A permittee shall place and maintain at each end of the work and not more than 50 feet apart along the side thereof, unless otherwise directed by the Director of Public Services, from sunset of each day until sunrise of the following day, until the work is entirely completed, flares or red warning lights. He shall also place and maintain barriers not less than three feet high at each end of the work until the work is completed to the entire satisfaction of the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.422)

12.16.230 Removal of debris.
A permittee shall remove all material and debris:

A. Where new work is covered with earth, in accordance with the terms of the specifications attached to the permit;

B. In all other cases within three days. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.423)

12.16.240 Notification of completion of work.
Whenever any permittee has completed any work for which a permit has been granted, he shall so notify the Director of Public Services in writing. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.424)

12.16.250 Certificate of acceptance.
If the Director of Public Services by survey or by inspection or by both ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit, issued therefor and all of the provisions of this title, he shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.425)

12.16.260 Permittee’s responsibility.
The inspection, or approval, or acceptance of work or materials shall not relieve the permittee of any of his obligations to perform and complete the work according to the permit, the plans, if plans are made, and the specifications referred to in PMC 12.16.180 and 12.16.190. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.426)

12.16.270 Defective work and materials.
Upon order of the Director of Public Services, any work or material which does not conform to the permit, the plans, if plans are made, and the specifications referred to in PMC 12.16.180 and 12.16.190 shall be removed and replaced so as to conform to said plans and specifications, notwithstanding that such work or material has been previously inspected, or approved, or accepted by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.427)

12.16.280 Default of permittee.
By applying for and obtaining a permit pursuant to this title, the permittee agrees with the City that in the event the permittee fails to comply promptly with the terms of the permit and perform and complete the work according to the plans, if any, and the specifications referred to in PMC 12.16.180 and 12.16.190, or fails to comply with any other provisions of this title, the City may elect to perform and complete the work, in which event the permittee shall pay to the City upon demand of the Director of Public Services and prior to actual performance and completion of the work by the City or its contractor, the cost of performing and completing the work according to such permit, the plans, if any, and the specifications either by the use of the City’s forces or by an independent contractor, whichever method the Director of Public Services deems appropriate, and in the event the permittee fails to pay such cost to the City upon demand, the City may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover such cost together with reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.428)

12.16.290 Public nuisance.
Any work performed contrary to the permit, the plans, if plans are made, and the specifications referred to in PMC 12.16.180 and 12.16.190 is declared to be a public nuisance, and upon order of the City Council, the City Attorney shall immediately initiate proceedings necessary for the abatement, enjoinment, and removal thereof in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.429)

Chapter 12.20
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR STREETS
Sections:

12.20.010    Dedicated and nondedicated semirural and urban standards and parking lot specifications.

12.20.020    Dedicated rural street standards.

12.20.030    Dedicated rural street specifications.

12.20.040    Nondedicated rural street standards.

12.20.050    Nondedicated rural street specifications.

12.20.060    Nondedicated streets – Maintenance.

12.20.070    Criteria for semirural and urban standards, including parking lots – Designation.

12.20.080    Specifications for semirural and urban street standards including parking lots – Designation.

12.20.090    Specifications for dedicated rural street standards – Designation.

12.20.100    Criteria for dedicated rural street standards – Designation.

12.20.110    Criteria for nondedicated rural street standards – Designation.

12.20.120    Specifications for nondedicated rural street standards – Designation.

12.20.010 Dedicated and nondedicated semirural and urban standards and parking lot specifications.
All dedicated and nondedicated semirural and urban streets and parking lots within the City shall be developed to the criteria set forth in PMC 12.20.070 and 12.20.080, provided that this provision may be waived under appropriate circumstances. (Ord. 74 § 1, 1982)

12.20.020 Dedicated rural street standards.
All dedicated rural streets within the City limit lines, as noted on the adopted general plan for the City, shall be developed to the criteria set forth in PMC 12.20.090, provided that this provision may be waived under appropriate circumstances. (Ord. 74 § 2, 1982)

12.20.030 Dedicated rural street specifications.
All dedicated rural streets within the City limit lines, as noted on the adopted general plan for the City, shall be constructed in accordance with specifications set forth in PMC 12.20.100; provided, however, that this provision may be waived under appropriate circumstances. (Ord. 74 § 3, 1982)

12.20.040 Nondedicated rural street standards.
All nondedicated rural streets within the City limit lines, as noted on the adopted general plan for the City, shall be developed to the criteria set forth in PMC 12.20.110; provided, however, that this provision may be waived under appropriate circumstances. (Ord. 74 § 4, 1982)

12.20.050 Nondedicated rural street specifications.
All nondedicated rural streets within the City limit lines, as noted on the adopted general plan for the City, shall be constructed in accordance with specifications set forth in PMC 12.20.120; provided, however, that this provision may be waived under appropriate circumstances. (Ord. 280 § 2, 1988; Ord. 74 § 5, 1982)

12.20.060 Nondedicated streets – Maintenance.
A road construction and maintenance agreement, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, shall be executed by the developer and/or owner of any parcel serviced by a nondedicated road as a condition of approval of any land division, building permit, or other permit or grant of development approval for such parcel. (Ord. 280 § 2, 1988; Ord. 74 § 6, 1982)

12.20.070 Criteria for semirural and urban standards, including parking lots – Designation.
The criteria for semirural and urban street standards, including parking lots are as follows:

A. An urban street shall serve residential areas with lot sizes less than one-half acre or densities more than two units per acre.

B. A semirural street shall serve residential areas with lot sizes from one-half acre to one acre or densities of one unit or two units per acre.

C. All streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the City and the San Diego County Regional Standard Plans, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Development Services.

D. Design speed shall be 25 miles per hour and the maximum street grade shall be 16 percent, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Development Services. Street alignment and profile shall comply with the criteria for safe stopping sight distance in conformance with the California State Highway Design Manual unless special situations allow for modifications and such modifications are approved by the Director of Development Services.

E. Nondedicated streets should not be aligned between two dedicated streets so that the nondedicated street would act as a “shortcut” between the streets.

F. Structural sections shall be determined by the State of California Gravel Equivalent Hveem Stabilometer Method, using the R-value of the native soil and traffic indices established by the City. The minimum section shall be three inches A.C. over either four inches class II A.B. or five inches class III base. If the R-value of the existing native soil is 50 or greater, a minimum section of four inches A.C. over compacted subbase may be substituted.

G. Nondedicated streets shall provide a paved travel way incorporating a pedestrian circulation system approved by the Director of Development Services.

H. Entry gates into nondedicated tracts shall be set back from the near curb line of any public street to provide a minimum storage of 75 feet for entering vehicles to stack without interfering with through traffic.

I. Streets shall intersect at right angles wherever possible and shall not be greater than 15 degrees skew to a right angle.

J. Four-legged intersections should be avoided except at (future) signalized or controlled locations or where median islands are on the through street. The minimum distance between intersections shall be 150 feet.

K. Street widths, geometric criteria, and structural section shall conform to PMC 12.20.080.

L. Local roads serve as primary access roadways to residential units and do not exceed the daily traffic shown in PMC 12.20.080. Local collector roads service local road traffic by providing routes to the circulation system roads. Daily traffic should not exceed the amount indicated in PMC 12.20.080.

M. Streets with grades over 10 percent may be required to be constructed of Portland cement concrete to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services (minimum thickness shall be six inches) when necessitated by specific field conditions.

N. The dedication requirements of Resolution No. 184 of the City (on file in the City Clerk’s office) shall apply to these provisions. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 74 Exh. A, 1982)

12.20.080 Specifications for semirural and urban street standards including parking lots – Designation.
Specifications for semirural and urban street standards including parking lots shall be as follows:

 

 

R/W

or I.O.D.*3

(in feet)

Sidewalk

(in feet)

Street Width*4

Paving

(in feet)

Minimum Structural

Section

    Paved Area Shoulder

    (in inches)

 

 

 

PCC

C & G

(in inches)

Maximum Grade

(in percent)

 

Urban Roads

(dedicated and nondedicated)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Local Collector (1200 vpd to 2400 vpd)

60

4 1/2*1

40

3 AC/4 AB*6

—

6 C.F.*2

10

 

Local

(up to 1200 vpd)

54

4 1/2*1

36

3 AC/4 AB*6

—

6 C.F.*2

16*5

 

Semirural Roads

(dedicated and nondedicated)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Local Collector

(1200 vpd

to 2400 vpd)

56

4 1/2*1

(one side only)

40

3 AC/4 AB*6

—

6 C.F.*2

10

 

Local

(up to 1200 vpd)

50

None

36

3 AC/4 AB*6

—

6 C.F.*2

16*5

 

Planned Development Roads

(nondedicated)

None

As approved

24 to 28 Minimum*4

3 AC/4 AB*6

—

6 C.F.

16*5

 

Parking Lots

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Commercial

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

3 AC/4 AB*6

3 AC/6 AB

(drives)

 

 

 

 

Industrial

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

3 AC/6 AB

3 AC/8 AB

(drives)

 

 

 

*Notes:

l.    Sidewalks may be eliminated on nondedicated streets, if an approved pedestrian circulation system is incorporated.

2.    Curb height may be increased if needed to control drainage. Rolled curb may be installed on semirural local streets or other streets when approved by the Director of Development Services.

3.    On nondedicated streets, Irrevocable Offers of Dedications (IOD) may be required along the nondedicated street alignment in conformance with the above right-of-way requirements for public streets.

4.    Variations in geometric design may be considered in special situations because of physical conditions (such as hillsides and streams).

5.    Streets with grades over 10 percent may be required to be constructed of P.C.C. concrete (six inches minimum thickness). In special situations, local streets maximum grade may be increased to 20 percent as approved by the Director of Development Services.

6.    Five inches of class III base may be substituted for four inches of class II A.B. If the R-value of the existing native soil is 50 or greater, the minimum of four inches of A.C. over compacted sub-base may be substituted.

 

    vpd = vehicles per day.

(Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 74 Exh. B, 1982)

12.20.090 Specifications for dedicated rural street standards – Designation.
Specifications for dedicated rural street standards shall be as follows:

 

 

R/W

(in feet)

Sidewalk

 

Street Width*2

    Shoulders Paving

    (in feet) (in feet)

Minimum Structural

Section

    Paved Area Shoulder

    (in inches) (in inches)

 

 

 

 

C&G

 

Maximum Grade*3

(in percent)

 

Dedicated Rural

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Local Collector (800 vpd to

2400 vpd)

52

0*4

6*7

28

3 AC/4 AB*6

6 D.G.*5

None*1

12

 

Local

(up to

800 vpd)

44

0*4

6*7

24

3 AC/4 AB*6

6 D.G.*5

None*1

20

*Notes:

l.    Asphalt berms, P.C.C. curbs, or shoulder paving may be required if needed to control drainage or erosion.

2.    Variations in geometric design may be considered in special situations because of physical conditions such as hillsides, streams, rock formations and others.

3.    Streets with grades over 10 percent may be required to be constructed of P.C.C. concrete (six inches minimum thickness).

4.    Paved all-weather walkways may be required for routes to school or bus stops.

5.    If the R-value of the native soil in the shoulder area is 50 or greater, and the sand equivalent exceeds 20, no D.G. will be required.

6.    Five inches of class III base may be substituted for four inches of class II A.B. If the R-value of the existing native soil is 50 or greater, the minimum of four inches of A.C. over compacted sub-base (95 percent relative compaction) may be substituted.

7.    Shoulders may be eliminated in special hillside areas because of excessive slope conditions, as approved by the City Engineer. Protective barricades may be needed for safety as required by the City Engineer.

 

    vpd = vehicles per day.

(Ord. 74 Exh. C, 1982)

12.20.100 Criteria for dedicated rural street standards – Designation.
Criteria for dedicated rural street standards shall be as follows:

A. A dedicated rural street shall serve residential areas with lot sizes greater than one acre or densities less than one unit per acre.

B. All streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City and San Diego Regional Standard Plans, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Development Services.

C. Design speed shall be 25 miles per hour and the maximum street grade shall be 20 percent, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Street alignment and profile shall comply with the criteria for safe stopping sight distance in conformance with the California State Highway Design Manual unless special situations or physical field conditions suggest the need for modifications, and such modifications are approved by the City Engineer.

D. Structural sections for dedicated rural streets shall be determined by the State of California Gravel Equivalent Hveen Stabilization Method, using the R-value of the native soil and traffic indices established by the City. The minimum structural section shall be three inches A.C. over four inches class II A.B. (five inches of class III base may be substituted for four inches A.B.). If the native soil R-value is 50 or greater, a minimum section of four inches A.C. over compacted sub-base may be substituted.

E. Streets shall intersect at right angles wherever possible and shall not be greater than 15 degrees skew to a right angle.

F. Four-legged intersections should be avoided except at (future) signalized or controlled locations or where median islands are on the through street. The minimum distance between intersections shall be 150 feet.

G. Street widths, geometric criteria, and structural section shall conform to PMC 12.20.080.

H. Local roads serve as primary access roadways to residential units and do not exceed the daily traffic shown in PMC 12.20.080. Local collector roads service local road traffic by providing routes to the circulation system roads. Daily traffic should not exceed the amount indicated in PMC 12.20.080.

I. Streets with grades over 10 percent may be required to be constructed of Portland cement concrete to the satisfaction of the City Engineer (minimum thickness shall be six inches) when necessitated by specific field conditions.

J. The dedication requirements of Resolution No. 184 of the City shall apply to these provisions. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 74 Exh. D, 1983)

12.20.110 Criteria for nondedicated rural street standards – Designation.
Criteria for nondedicated rural street standards shall be as follows:

A. A nondedicated rural street shall serve residential areas with lot sizes greater than one acre or densities less than one unit per acre and are confined within road easements not dedicated as a public road right-of-way.

B. All streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the City and the San Diego County Regional Standard Plans, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.

C. Design speed shall be 25 miles per hour and the maximum street grade shall be 20 percent, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer because physical conditions make it impractical or unsafe to achieve these standards. Street alignment and profile shall comply with the criteria for safe stopping sight distance in conformance with the California State Highway Design Manual.

D. Private streets should not be aligned between two public streets so that the private street would act as a “shortcut” between the streets.

E. 1. Paved Roads. Structural sections for private streets shall be determined by the State of California Gravel Equivalent Hveem Stabilometer Method, using the R-value of the native soil and traffic indices established by the City. The minimum A.C. section shall be two inches. Base material will not be required if the native soil has an R-value of 40 or greater. If the R-value of the native soil is less than 40, the minimum base section shall be four inches class II base.

2. Gravel Roads. In areas where a nondedicated rural road serves 10 or fewer parcels, where the native soils have a minimum R-value of 60, minimum sand equivalent of 30, minimum grade of one percent and a maximum grade of 10 percent, gravel roads meeting the specifications outlined in PMC 12.20.120 may be used.

F. Entry gates into private tracts shall be set back from the right-of-way line of any public street to provide a minimum storage of 75 feet for entering vehicles to stack without interfering with through traffic.

G. Streets shall intersect at right angles wherever possible and shall not be greater than 15 degrees skew to a right angle.

H. Four-legged intersections should be avoided at (future) signalized or controlled locations or where median islands are on the through street. The minimum distance between intersections shall be 150 feet.

I. Street widths, geometric criteria, and structural section shall conform to PMC 12.20.080.

J. Local roads serve as primary access roadways to residential units and do not exceed the daily traffic shown in PMC 12.20.080. Collector roads service local road traffic by providing routes to the circulation system roads. Daily traffic should not exceed the amount indicated in 12.20.080.

K. Streets with grades over 15 percent may be required to be constructed of Portland cement concrete to the satisfaction of the City Engineer (minimum thickness shall be six inches) when necessitated by specific field conditions.

L. Irrevocable Offers of Dedication (I.O.D.) may be required along the nondedicated street easement. (Ord. 280 § 2, 1988; Ord. 74 Exh. E, 1982)

12.20.120 Specifications for nondedicated rural street standards – Designation.
Specifications for nondedicated rural street standards shall be as follows:

 

 

 

Street Width*5

Min. Structural
Section

 

 

 

Easement*4 (in feet)

Sidewalk

Shoulders (in feet)

Width (in feet)

Paved Area (in inches)

Shoulder (in inches)

C&G

Maximum Grade*6
(in percent)

 

Nondedicated Rural (PAVED)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Local Collector (800 vpd to 2400 vpd)

52

0

6

26

2 AC*2

Native*3

None*1

12

 

Local (up to 800 vpd)

40

0

6

20

2 AC*2

Native

None*1

20

 

Local (serving 10 parcels or fewer)*8

28

0

4

20

Class II*7 Base

Native

None

10

*Notes:

1.    Asphalt berms, P.C.C. curbs, or shoulder paving may be required if needed to control drainage.

2.    If the R-value of the native soil is less than 40, the minimum structural section shall be two inches A.C. over four inches class III base.

3.    If the R-value of the native soil is less than 40, the shoulder shall consist of six inches of D.G. (class III base).

4.    On nondedicated streets, Irrevocable Offers of Dedication (IOD) may be required along the nondedicated street easement.

5.    Variations in geometric design will be considered in special situations or where physical conditions make it impractical to comply to these standards. All variations shall be approved by the Director of Development Services.

6.    Streets with grades over 15 percent may be required to be constructed of P.C.C. concrete (six-inch minimum thickness).

7.    Scarify and compact top 12 inches of subgrade to a minimum of 95 relative compaction. Over subgrade, compact the specified amount of Class II base to 95 percent based on the following table:

R-Value

Inches of Base

60

6

68

5

75

4

80 or above

3

8.    Drainage improvements and culverts must be installed to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services.

 

    vpd = vehicles per day.

(Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 280 § 2, 1988; Ord. 74 Exh. F, 1982)

Chapter 12.24
ENCROACHMENTS
Sections:

12.24.010    Scope of regulations.

12.24.020    Permit – Required.

12.24.030    Permit – Application.

12.24.040    Permittee liable for damages.

12.24.050    Protective measures required.

12.24.060    Permits – Term of duration – Revocation.

12.24.070    Restoration of highway.

12.24.080    Permit fee.

12.24.090    Special deposit.

12.24.100    General deposit.

12.24.110    Deductions from deposit.

12.24.120    Refund or deficiency payment.

12.24.130    Billing in lieu of deductions.

12.24.010 Scope of regulations.
The provisions of this chapter apply only to the placing, changing or renewing of an encroachment not subject to the provisions of Chapters 12.08 through 12.16 and 12.32 PMC. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.601)

12.24.020 Permit – Required.
No person shall place, change or renew an encroachment in, under or over any portion of a highway, without first obtaining from the Director of Public Services a written permit in accordance with this chapter and with Chapter 12.04 PMC. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.602)

12.24.030 Permit – Application.
Application for a permit shall be made in writing on a form supplied by the Director of Public Services. The application shall specify in detail:

A. The location, description and justification for the encroachment and the extent to which it will interfere with the public use and maintenance of the highway;

B. The duration for which a permit is sought and the date it is requested to be effective;

C. Such other information that the Director of Public Services may require. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.603)

12.24.040 Permittee liable for damages.
Every permit shall contain an agreement, signed by the applicant that the City and any officer or employee thereof shall be saved harmless by the applicant from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property, happening or occurring as the proximate result of any placement, change or renewal of an encroachment under the terms of this application and the permit or permits which may be granted in response thereto, and that all of said liabilities are assumed by the applicant. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.604)

12.24.050 Protective measures required.
In any permit issued by him the Director of Public Services may specify what lights, barriers, warning signs or other measures designed to protect the traveling public must be erected by the permittee. If the permit does not specify what protective measures are required, every encroachment which in any way interferes with the public use of any traveled way, shoulder, parking lane, side path, or sidewalk shall be lighted, barricaded and signed as provided in PMC 12.12.220. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.605)

12.24.060 Permits – Term of duration – Revocation.
Permits issued under the authority of this chapter may specify a duration of 10 days or less from their effective date, in which case they shall be revocable with notice as provided in PMC 12.04.150. Other permits issued under the authority of this chapter shall be classified as of indefinite duration and shall be revocable as provided in PMC 12.04.160. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.606)

12.24.070 Restoration of highway.
Every permit shall contain an agreement, signed by the applicant, that if the permit expires, is revoked by the Director of Public Services, or is vacated or abandoned, the permittee will, within a reasonable time and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Services, restore the highway to the equivalent or better condition than it was prior to the date that permit became effective or prior to the date the encroachment was first placed, whichever is earlier. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.607)

12.24.080 Permit fee.
Every person applying for a permit required by this chapter shall, at the time of making application for the permit, pay an issuance fee in an amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 52, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.608)

12.24.090 Special deposit.
Each applicant for a permit, in addition to payment of the issuance fee, shall deposit a sum with the Director of Public Services to guarantee the placement of protective measures, if required, and the removal of the encroachment and restoration of the highway. The amount of the deposit shall be twice the estimated cost of removing the encroachment but in no case less than $50.00. Such a deposit may be waived by the Director of Public Services if the encroachment existed prior to the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.609)

12.24.100 General deposit.
In lieu of making the special deposits required by PMC 12.24.090, an applicant for temporary permits having a duration of 10 days or less, may make and maintain with the Director of Public Services, a general deposit in an amount estimated by the Director of Public Services to be sufficient to pay the cost of permit fees and to guarantee performance as required in PMC 12.24.090 for future encroachments. Such a deposit shall not exceed $1,000. While a general deposit is maintained in an amount sufficient to cover the fees and deposits required for the placing, changing or renewing of all encroachments sought to be made, the applicant need not make any special deposit. If, in the opinion of the Director of Public Services, a general deposit is not sufficient for the proper protection of the public interest in the highways on which encroachment permits are sought, he may require a special deposit under the provisions of PMC 12.04.090. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.610)

12.24.110 Deductions from deposit.
The City shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee:

A. The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid;

B. The cost of any inspection by the Director of Public Services;

C. The cost of the City of the placement of protective measures if required and the removal of the encroachment and restoration of the highway if the permittee fails or refuses to do so. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.611)

12.24.120 Refund or deficiency payment.
After making the required deductions, the City shall refund to the applicant any amount still remaining in the special deposit in the manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. If any deposit made is less than sufficient to pay all fees and costs to be deducted, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Director of Public Services an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon demand, the City may recover the same by action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full a permit shall not be issued to such permittee. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.612)

12.24.130 Billing in lieu of deductions.
If a person makes and maintains with the Director of Public Services a general deposit the deductions provided for in this chapter need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the Director of Public Services may bill such person for the amount owed by him to the City under the provisions of this chapter. If such amount is not paid within 15 days of the transmission of such bill, the Director of Public Services may deduct such amount from the general deposit, and PMC 12.24.110 and 12.24.120. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.613)

Chapter 12.26
AUTOMOBILE DELIVERIES
Sections:

12.26.010    Definitions.

12.26.020    Prohibition.

12.26.030    Exceptions.

12.26.040    Designation of general manager.

12.26.050    Violations.

12.26.010 Definitions.
A. For purposes of this chapter, “automobile” means any vehicle commonly known as an automobile, car, or pickup truck.

B. For purposes of this chapter, “general manager” means a person, regardless of the job title or description, who has discretionary powers to organize, direct, carry on, or control the operations of the automobile dealership, including, but not limited to, the loading and unloading of automobiles of the dealership. (Ord. 624 § 2, 2005)

12.26.020 Prohibition.
A. No general manager of an automobile dealership shall allow, permit, or authorize the receipt onto the automobile dealership’s premises of an automobile which has been unloaded in the right-of-way of a public or private street from a truck which has the capacity to transport more than one such automobile.

B. No general manager of an automobile dealership shall allow or authorize the shipment from the automobile dealership’s premises of an automobile that will be loaded in the right-of-way of a public or private street onto a truck which has the capacity to transport more than one such automobile. (Ord. 624 § 2, 2005)

12.26.030 Exceptions.
Nothing in PMC 12.26.020 shall prohibit the loading or unloading of automobiles wholly within the boundaries of the privately owned premises of an automobile dealership or wholly within the boundaries of an automobile storage lot approved by the City for such purpose. (Ord. 624 § 2, 2005)

12.26.040 Designation of general manager.
Within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the owner of each automobile dealership located within the City limits of the City of Poway shall file with the Code Compliance Officer of the City the name of the general manager of the dealership, and shall, within 30 days of the employment of a different general manager thereafter, file with the Code Compliance Officer of the City the name of that general manager. (Ord. 624 § 2, 2005)

12.26.050 Violations.
A violation of PMC 12.26.020 shall not require that the general manager have actual knowledge of the circumstances of the loading or unloading of any particular automobile. A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirement of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC and may be enforced through injunctive relief against the owner or general manager of the dealership. (Ord. 624 § 2, 2005)

Chapter 12.28
HIGHWAY RELATED NUISANCES
Sections:

12.28.010    Conditions prohibited.

12.28.020    Abatement of nuisance.

12.28.030    Emergency abatement.

12.28.040    Payment of costs – Liens.

12.28.050    Assessment for costs – Lien – Payment.

12.28.060    Violation constitutes nuisance.

12.28.010 Conditions prohibited.
No person shall maintain or cause to be maintained any condition on private property which causes damage to a City highway or threatens imminent damage to a City highway or causes a hazard to exist on a City highway. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.701)

12.28.020 Abatement of nuisance.
A. Notice of Violation. In addition to any other procedures or penalties established by law, in the event of a violation of PMC 12.28.020, the Director of Public Services may serve a written notice on the violator personally, or mail such notice postage prepaid and return receipt requested to the address at which in the opinion of the Director of Public Services such notice is most likely to be received by the violator, which notice states the nature of the violation; that the violator is required to abate the condition constituting the violation within 10 days after the notice is received; and that if the violator fails so to abate the violation the Director of Public Services may do so, in which event the violator shall be liable for all costs of such abatement including but not limited to reasonable attorney’s fees. If the owner of the property on which the violation occurred is the violator, the notice shall be sent to the address of the said owner as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or, alternatively, as it appears from such other records of the City Treasurer that contain more recent addresses in the opinion of the Director of Public Services.

B. Abatement by City. If the condition is not abated by the violator in accordance with the notice, the Director of Public Services shall so report to the Council and, if it so directs, abate the conditions; the violator shall be liable to the City for all costs incurred in such abatement including but not limited to reasonable attorney’s fees. The violator shall be provided notice of the hearing before the Council and shall be permitted to present evidence in his own behalf. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.703)

12.28.030 Emergency abatement.
If it appears to the Director of Public Services that an emergency exists because of a violation of PMC 12.28.010, then, without following the procedure established by PMC 12.28.020, the Director of Public Services may order all work done necessary to remove, abate or mitigate the condition creating such emergency. The Director of Public Services may do the work with his own employees or may contract to have the work done; in either event the Director of Public Services shall keep a record of the cost of the work and charge the cost of the work to the violator, who shall repay the City for the cost thereof. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.704)

12.28.040 Payment of costs – Liens.
The cost of any work done by the City pursuant to PMC 12.28.020 and 12.28.030 shall be repaid to the City by the person required to do so by the terms of the respective section. If the owner of the property on which the work is done is responsible for such costs, the sums expended by the City in doing the work may be made a lien upon such property in the manner prescribed in PMC 12.28.050. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.705)

12.28.050 Assessment for costs – Lien – Payment.
The cost of abating a nuisance within the meaning of this title shall be a special assessment against the land on which such abatement was done. The procedure established for the abatement of abandoned excavations by Sections 50244 through 50256, both inclusive, of the Government Code, is incorporated in this chapter as though fully set forth at this point and, pursuant to Government Code Section 25845, is adopted as the procedure for making the cost of the abatement of such nuisances a special assessment against the land involved; provided, that for the purposes of said Sections 50244 through 50426 the Director of Public Services is the “superintendent,” the Council is the “legislative body,” and the City is “local agency”; and, provided further, that at the hearing on the Director of Public Services’ report the property owner may raise, and the Council shall consider, as a complete or partial defense to the imposition of the assessment, questions as to the manner in which the abatement was accomplished. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.706)

12.28.060 Violation constitutes nuisance.
A violation of PMC 12.28.010 is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 71.702)

Chapter 12.32
URBAN FORESTRY
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

12.32.010    Title.

12.32.020    Purpose and intent.

12.32.030    Findings.

12.32.040    Definitions.

Article II. Planting, Trimming, or Removal of Trees on Public Property or on Public Rights-of-Way

12.32.050    Destruction of public trees prohibited.

12.32.060    Interference prohibited.

12.32.070    Topping of public trees is prohibited.

12.32.080    Annual spring pruning of public trees is prohibited.

12.32.090    Tree planting standards.

12.32.100    Tree planting encroachment permit.

12.32.110    Tree removal permit.

12.32.120    Appeal of permit decision.

12.32.130    Replacement of trees.

12.32.140    Property owner’s tree care responsibilities for trees on public rights-of-way.

Article III. Removal of Trees on Private Property

12.32.150    Private tree removal permit.

12.32.160    Appeal of permit decision.

12.32.170    Replacement of trees.

12.32.180    Commercial, industrial, and residential development projects.

Article IV. Poway Tree Committee

12.32.190    Poway Tree Committee.

12.32.200    The Poway tree trust fund.

Article V. Severability, Violations and Penalties

12.32.210    Severability.

12.32.220    Violation – Penalty.

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions

12.32.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “City of Poway Urban Forestry Ordinance.” (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.020 Purpose and intent.
This chapter shall set forth all tree-related policies, regulations, and generally accepted standards necessary for planting, trimming, and removing trees on public property and public rights-of-way. Additionally, this chapter sets forth policies relating to trees native to Poway and trees growing on industrial and commercial property. The provisions of the chapter are enacted to:

A. Ensure that the City of Poway will continue to realize the benefits provided by generally accepted practices of urban forestry;

B. Clarify property owners’ basic responsibilities to ensure that trees on public rights-of-way are properly maintained and that trees native to the Poway area are not arbitrarily removed;

C. Identify the Department of Public Services as the City department responsible for the care of public trees throughout Poway; identify the Director of Public Services as the responsible City Administrator for encroachment permits and public tree removal permits; identify the Development Services Department as the City department responsible for private tree removal permit administration; and identify the Director of Development Services responsible for code enforcement pertaining to private trees;

D. Maintain the practice of protecting native trees and heritage trees by requiring property owners to obtain the appropriate City permit from the Department of Public Services or Department of Development Services prior to any removal of said types of trees;

E. Maintain the maximum amount practical of tree cover on public parks and open space lands within the City of Poway;

F. Maintain the City of Poway’s commitment to generally accepted International Society of Arboriculture practices and standards;

G. Maintain appropriate diversity of tree species and age classes to provide the community with a stable and sustainable urban forest environment;

H. Establish a Poway Tree Committee to hear appeals, make recommendations regarding tree maintenance and landscaping decisions, promote generally accepted International Society of Arboriculture practices and standards within the Poway community, and establish and implement procedures for identifying and designating heritage trees in Poway;

I. Maintain the practice of managing trees on public rights-of-way in a manner that does not damage, obstruct, or interfere with public improvements;

J. Manage the planting of trees on public rights-of-way on residentially classified streets;

K. Maintain the practice of requiring tree removal permits for the removal of trees on public rights-of-way. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.030 Findings.
Information and reports received by the Poway City Council indicate that an urban forestry ordinance acts as a guideline and standard to ensure City staff and City residents implement generally accepted International Society of Arboriculture practices and standards. These practices will sustain, preserve, and enhance the aesthetic qualities found within the Poway community. Moreover, it has been concluded that healthy and growing trees provide shelter and sustenance for indigenous wildlife. Research has shown that air pollution and its unhealthful effects upon residents and fauna are mitigated when there are abundant urban trees. The City Council finds that the preservation of native trees is especially important in the practice of urban forestry. Additionally, the City Council finds that trees having historic or cultural significance in Poway shall be protected. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.040 Definitions.
Words and phrases in the chapter shall have the common and usual meaning except as they may be defined below or elsewhere in this code.

“Heritage tree” means any mature tree or mature stand of trees designated by the City Council as having historic or cultural significance.

“Native tree” means any tree of the following species: Coast Live Oak (Quercus agrifolia), Canyon Live Oak (Quercus chrysolepis), Englemann Oak (Quercus engelmannii), and California Sycamore (Platanus racemosa).

“Private trees” means both trees whose trunks are located upon privately owned property and trees planted by property owners on public rights-of-way.

“Public trees” means both trees growing on publicly owned property and trees planted by the City growing on public rights-of-way.

“Shrubs” means a bush or a plant more than 12 inches but not more than six feet tall.

“Street classification” means the name attributed with a set of street and road characteristics listed in the roadways element of the “Poway General Plan, 1991.”

“Topping” means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter, within the tree’s crown, to such a degree as to remove the tree’s natural canopy and/or severely disfigure the tree’s appearance.

“Tree” or “trees” means any individual or group of self-supporting woody perennial plant or plants growing with a single or multi-stemmed trunk supporting a crown of branches.

“Tree committee” means a body consisting of three at-large members appointed by the City Council and two City staff members charged with the duties identified in PMC 12.32.190.

“Trees growing on public property” means trees whose trunks are located in whole or in part on property owned by the City or any other public agency.

“Trees growing on public rights-of-way” means trees whose trunks are located in whole or in part on property in which the City owns an interest for purposes of vehicular, pedestrian, equestrian, or City utility use. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

Article II. Planting, Trimming, or Removal of Trees on Public Property or on Public Rights-of-Way

12.32.050 Destruction of public trees prohibited.
No person shall break, deface, destroy, or burn public trees. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.060 Interference prohibited.
No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with the Director of Public Services or persons acting under his/her authority while engaged in trimming, planting, mulching, pruning, or removing a public tree or any tree growing on public right-of-way within the City of Poway. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.070 Topping of public trees is prohibited.
The topping of public trees is prohibited, unless the failure to top a tree poses a threat to public safety. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.080 Annual spring pruning of public trees is prohibited.
No person shall annually prune public trees from March 15th until June 15th of any given year to protect bird species during the bird mating season. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.090 Tree planting standards.
All trees planted on public property and on public rights-of-way shall be planted in accordance with the tree-planting standards defined in the adopted “City of Poway Guidelines to Landscape Requirements.” The tree must be planted at a location approved by the Director of Public Services, or his/her designee. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.100 Tree planting encroachment permit.
The Director of Public Services, in cooperation with the Director of Development Services, shall administer the City of Poway’s encroachment permits for trees. A property owner must obtain an encroachment permit to plant a tree on a public right-of-way or City easement. The Director of Development Services is responsible for encroachment permit record keeping. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.110 Tree removal permit.
A. The Director of Public Services, in cooperation with the Director of Development Services, shall administer the City’s tree removal permit program for trees growing on public property and trees growing on public rights-of-way.

B. No person, including the City, shall remove a public tree or a tree growing on a public right-of-way without first obtaining a tree removal permit issued by the Director of Public Services or his/her designee. The City shall notify the adjoining property owner and occupant 10 days prior to the removal of a tree within the public right-of-way on classified residential streets. The tree removal permit authorizing the removal of a specific tree on public property or on a public right-of-way shall be subject to terms and conditions deemed appropriate by the Director of Public Services or his/her designee. The Director of Public Services shall review each tree removal permit application and make a recommendation as to whether the permit shall be issued or denied. The Director of Development Services is responsible for tree removal permit record keeping.

C. The decision to issue or deny the permit and any terms and conditions of the permit shall be based on the following criteria:

1. The condition of the tree with respect to disease, general health, damage, public nuisance, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures and interference with utility services, age or remaining life span, and whether or not the tree acts as host for a plant which is parasitic to other species of trees which are in danger of being infested or exterminated by the parasite;

2. The necessity of the requested action to construct improvements, or allow economic or other enjoyment of the property;

3. The topography of the land and the effect of the requested action on erosion, soil retention, water retention, and diversion or increased flow of surface water;

4. The number, species, size, and location of existing trees in the area and the effect of the requested action in terms of providing shade, protection from wind, air pollution reduction, historic or cultural value, and scenic beauty upon the health, safety, aesthetics, and general welfare of the City as a whole;

5. Generally accepted International Society of Arboriculture practices addressing topics such as, but not limited to, the number of healthy trees a given parcel of land will support. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.120 Appeal of permit decision.
Any action by the Director of Public Services may be appealed to the Poway Tree Committee. To be effective, an appeal shall be filed within 30 working days after the decision of the Director. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Public Services Department. The appeal must clearly specify the reason(s) for which the appeal is requested. The Poway Tree Committee shall have 30 working days to render a decision. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.130 Replacement of trees.
A. Any person removing a tree from public property or public right-of-way pursuant to a tree removal permit issued by the Director of Public Services or his/her designee may be eligible for reimbursement of a portion of the cost of a replacement tree through the Poway tree trust fund. Replacement trees shall be one of the species on the approved street trees or slope plant materials list contained within the adopted “City of Poway Guidelines for Landscape Requirements.” A property owner must obtain an encroachment permit to plant a replacement tree on public right-of-way.

B. Any person removing a native tree from public property or on public right-of-way pursuant to a tree removal permit issued by the Director of Public Services or his/her designee shall replace such tree on a one-for-one basis with a minimum size 24-inch box specimen tree of the same species as the tree removed. The replacement tree shall be planted at a location approved by the Director of Public Services. Where the native tree to be removed exceeds the size of a 72-inch-box specimen (approximately eight inches in diameter), two 48-inch-box specimen trees shall be used as replacements. These requirements may be waived or modified by the Director of Public Services, if it is determined that the requirements impose an unreasonable hardship. A portion of the cost of the replacement trees may be reimbursed through the Poway tree trust fund. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.140 Property owner’s tree care responsibilities for trees on public rights-of-way.
A. Property owners having trees or shrubs growing on public rights-of-way shall maintain these trees and shrubs to a reasonable standard of care. Reasonable care ensures that trees and shrubs growing on public rights-of-way do not block pedestrian visibility; do not obstruct street clearance requirements; do not obstruct sidewalk clearance requirements; do not obstruct traffic signals or signs; do not grow into overhead utility lines; and do not allow tree root structures to undermine sidewalks, curbs, gutters, adjacent roadways, and underground utilities such as water and sewer lines.

B. When necessary, residents shall be notified to exercise reasonable tree and landscaping care on public rights-of-way by the Director of Public Services or his/her designee; the affected homeowner shall comply with the order within 30 calendar days of notice. The cost of this required tree trimming shall be that of the homeowner. If the homeowner does not comply, the City will follow the abatement procedures as defined in Chapter 8.72 PMC, “Nuisance Abatement Procedure.” (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

Article III. Removal of Trees on Private Property

12.32.150 Private tree removal permit.
A. The Director of Development Services shall maintain the City of Poway’s private tree removal permit records and issue such permits.

B. A property owner shall first obtain a private tree removal permit authorizing the removal of a private tree that is a native tree or a heritage tree subject to terms and conditions deemed appropriate by the Director of Development Services or his/her designee. On commercial and industrial property, a permit shall be required for the removal of any living tree greater than three inches in diameter.

C. Applicants shall be expected to replace these types of trees in accordance with PMC 12.32.170; “Replacement of Trees.” The Director of Development Services, or his/her designee shall review each private tree removal permit application and make a recommendation as to whether the permit shall be issued or denied. The decision to issue or deny the permit and any terms and conditions of the permit shall be based on the following criteria:

1. The condition of the tree with respect to disease, general health, damage, public nuisance, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures and interference with utility services, age or remaining life span, and whether or not the tree acts as host for a plant which is parasitic to other species of trees which are in danger of being infested or exterminated by the parasite;

2. The necessity of the requested action to construct improvements, or allow economic or other enjoyment of the property;

3. The topography of the land and the effect of the requested action on erosion, soil retention, water retention, and diversion or increased flow of surface water;

4. The number, species, size, and location of existing trees in the area and the effect of the requested action in terms of providing shade, protection from wind, air pollution reduction, historic or cultural value, and scenic beauty upon the health, safety, aesthetics, and general welfare of the City as a whole;

5. Generally accepted International Society of Arboriculture practices addressing topics such as, but not limited to, the number of healthy trees a given parcel of land will support;

6. Native trees shall be retained unless their removal is absolutely necessary. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.160 Appeal of permit decision.
Any action by the Director of Development Services may be appealed to the Poway Tree Committee. To be effective, an appeal must be filed within 30 working days after the decision of the Director. The appeal must be in writing and be filed with the Public Service Department. The appeal shall clearly specify the reason(s) for which the appeal is requested. The Poway Committee shall have 30 working days to render a decision. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.170 Replacement of trees.
Any person removing a live tree pursuant to a permit issued by the Director of Development Services or his/her designee shall replace such tree on a one-for-one basis with a tree of the same size of a species and in a location approved by the Director of Development Services or his/her designee. Where the tree to be removed exceeds the size of a 72-inch-box specimen (approximately eight inches in diameter), two 48-inch box specimen trees shall be used as replacements. These requirements may be waived or modified by the Director of Development Services if it is determined that the requirements impose an unreasonable hardship. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.180 Commercial, industrial, and residential development projects.
For commercial, industrial, or residential projects requiring City approval, existing on-site trees shall be retained wherever possible and shall be trimmed and maintained in accordance with the adopted “City of Poway Guidelines to Landscape Requirements.” A master plan of the existing on-site trees shall be provided to the Development Services Department prior to the issuance of building and grading permits, to determine which trees shall be retained. Any dead, decaying, or potentially dangerous trees shall be approved for removal at the discretion of the Director of Development Services during review of the master plan of existing on-site trees. All trees that are removed shall be replaced on a one-for-one basis as described in PMC 12.32.170, and replacements should be one of the species contained in the adopted “City of Poway Guidelines to Landscape Requirements.” (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

Article IV. Poway Tree Committee

12.32.190 Poway Tree Committee.
The Poway Tree Committee shall consist of three members appointed by the City Council and two City staff members. The Poway Tree Committee shall consider tree removal and encroachment permit appeals. Additionally, the Poway Tree Committee shall review, study, and make recommendations to the Directors of Public Services and Development Services on issues concerning:

A. Tree maintenance, landscaping policies and work plans impacting public property and trees on public rights-of-way;

B. The promotion of generally accepted International Society of Arboriculture practices within the Poway community, including the discouragement of topping of trees on private property;

C. The maintenance of the tree inventory;

D. The identification of heritage trees in Poway for recommendation to the City Council. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.200 The Poway tree trust fund.
The Poway Tree Committee shall be responsible for administering the Poway tree trust fund and reporting annually to the Director of Public Services on expenditures. The City Council shall receive a copy of the annual report. To encourage the planting of trees in Poway in public open space areas and on public property, while discouraging the planting of trees on public rights-of-way, program funds shall provide for the planting of trees in Poway and the cost of a replacement tree for trees removed from public rights-of-way. Interest earned from the Poway tree trust fund can be used for the costs of providing an annual Arbor Day celebration event. The Poway tree trust fund’s annual contribution to an Arbor Day event cannot exceed the amount of annual interest earned from the Poway tree trust fund. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

Article V. Severability, Violations and Penalties

12.32.210 Severability.
Should any part or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held to be invalid. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

12.32.220 Violation – Penalty.
Any person, partnership, organization, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating any provisions of this title or violating or failing to comply with any order to regulation made under this title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided by Chapter 1.08 PMC. (Ord. 521 § 1(B), 2000)

Chapter 12.36
VENDING RACING FORMS ON STREETS
Sections:

12.36.010    Definitions.

12.36.020    Supervisory finding.

12.36.030    Prohibition.

12.36.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:

A. “Person” means and includes, in addition to the meaning set forth in PMC 1.04.010(K), all agents and employees, apparent or actual, who are acting on their own or on their principal’s behalf and their principal or employer.

B. “Street” means and includes any and every public thoroughfare, way, street, alley and highway, freeway, the curbing, sidewalk, parkway and structures, whether such right-of-way is owned or maintained by a public district, the City, the County, or the State, and all public property bordering upon such thoroughfare, way, street, alley or highway in the City.

C. “To sell” means and includes to print, publish, vend, distribute, disseminate or throw away or to attempt to print, prepare, publish, vend, distribute, disseminate or throw away. “To sell” further means and includes to hold out or offer in return for remuneration or to hold out, suggest, advertise or offer without charge, and includes active as well as passive holding out, suggesting or advertising by any means or manner whatsoever. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.301)

12.36.020 Supervisory finding.
The City Council finds and determines as follows:

That the use of the streets within the City by persons for the purpose of selling or giving away written, printed or duplicated forms, charts, tables, lists, sheets, posters, papers, dodgers, handbills, circulars, letters, booklets and other matter giving or purporting to give the entry or entries or probable entry or entries of contestants in any horse race or other contests concurrently taking place, thereafter to take place or which have taken place in the City, or the selling or giving away of such matter which gives or purports to give tips, information, predictions, selections of or advice as to the winners or probable winners or losers or of the standing or probable standing of any horse or other contestant, or the selling or giving away of such matter which contains or purports to contain the actual, probable or possible state, past, present or future, of the betting, wagering or odds upon or against any horse or other contestant in any such horse race or other contest, has created and will continue to create, unless prohibited, serious, difficult and dangerous traffic conditions upon the streets within the City; that serious congestion of vehicular traffic has resulted and will result to the extent that the health, safety and welfare of persons using said streets has been and will be put in immediate and grave peril. The Council further finds and determines that no other remedy is adequate to control and effectually solve said traffic congestion and peril except to prohibit entirely the activity of persons as described in this chapter upon the streets within the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.302)

12.36.030 Prohibition.
No person shall sell or give away, whether from a fixed location or transiently, upon, over or across any street within the City any written, printed or duplicated form, chart, table, list, sheet, poster, paper, dodger, handbill, circular, letter, booklet or any other printed, typewritten, mimeographed or written matter giving or purporting to give the entries or probable entries of contestants in any horse race or other contest concurrently taking place or thereafter to take place or which has taken place anywhere within the City or any such writing which gives or purports to give any tip, information, prediction or selection of, or advice as to the selection of, or advice as to the winner or probable winner or a loser or probable loser or of the standing or probable standing of any horse or other contestant therein or any writing which contains the actual, probable or possible state, past, present or future of the betting, wagering or odds upon or against any horse or other contestant in any such horse race or contest. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 72.303)

Chapter 12.38
NEWSRACKS AFFECTING PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections:

12.38.010    Purpose and intent.

12.38.020    Definitions.

12.38.030    Prohibitions.

12.38.040    Permit required.

12.38.050    Permit – Applications.

12.38.060    Filing fee.

12.38.070    Issuance of permit.

12.38.080    Permit nontransferable.

12.38.090    Insurance.

12.38.100    Hold harmless agreement.

12.38.110    Standards.

12.38.120    Location.

12.38.130    Maintenance and repair.

12.38.140    Abandonment.

12.38.150    Inspection.

12.38.160    Enforcement.

12.38.170    Hearing.

12.38.180    Revocation or modification of permits.

12.38.190    Hearing for revocation or modification.

12.38.200    Termination.

12.38.010 Purpose and intent.
A. The City Council finds and declares that the unregulated placement of newsracks affecting the public right-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City in that, unless regulated, newsracks may:

1. Interfere with the safe flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic;

2. Impair the vision and distract the attention of motorists and pedestrians, particularly small children, and cause injury to the person or property of such persons;

3. Inhibit safe entry and departure from vehicles or buildings;

4. Detract from the appearance of streets, sidewalks and adjacent businesses;

5. Cause loss of funds to patrons in the event of a malfunction.

B. Newsracks presenting any of the characteristics enumerated in subsection A of this section constitute a public nuisance, which the provisions of this chapter are enacted to prevent. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the following meanings:

A. “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, distribution or sale of publications.

B. “Public right-of-way” means any place owned by or dedicated to use of the public for pedestrian or vehicular travel, including but not limited to a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parkway, highway, alley, mall, court, park or square.

C. “Roadway” means that part of a public right-of-way that is designed or used primarily for vehicular travel. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.030 Prohibitions.
No person shall place or maintain a newsrack so as to endanger safety of person(s) or property or unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a roadway or public right-of-way. In addition, no person shall place or maintain upon or over a public right-of-way a newsrack, unless in conformance with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.040 Permit required.
No person shall place or cause to be placed or maintained or cause to be maintained any newsrack, or other device used or maintained for the display, distribution or sale of publications, hereinafter referred to in this chapter as “newsrack,” in or upon any roadway, public right-of-way or City-owned property in the City, or permit any newsrack to remain upon any roadway, public right-of-way or City-owned property without first obtaining a written permit for the City. This chapter shall not apply to an owner or occupant of property who places or maintains a newsrack on private property, in such manner that the newsrack will not interfere with the movement of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.050 Permit – Applications.
A person desiring a permit for the placement of one or more newsracks as required by this chapter, shall file with the Public Services Department an application for such permit. Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed plan giving a full description of the proposed location of each newsrack, the type and design of the newsrack to be used, and such other information regarding the appearance and placement as may be required by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.060 Filing fee.
A filing fee shall be paid to the City upon the filing of each application for a permit as provided in this chapter for the purpose of defraying the expense of processing the application. The amount of the filing fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 53, 2008; Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.070 Issuance of permit.
The Director of Public Services shall issue the permit applied for if the application meets all the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.080 Permit nontransferable.
The permit shall not be transferable from one person to another. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.090 Insurance.
Prior to the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall file with the Director of Public Services, a policy of insurance, or certificate thereof, issued by a company authorized to do business in the State; said policy shall name the City as a named insured, and shall indemnify the City for any loss, damage or liability suffered by the City by reason of the existence of such newsrack in or upon the City right-of-way and/or the operation and maintenance of such newsracks. Said policy of insurance shall indemnify the City in the sum of $1,000,000 or more against loss or liability arising from the injury or death of one person, and shall indemnify the City in the sum of $1,000,000 or more against loss or liability arising from the injury or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and the sum of $300,000 or more with respect to any property damage aforesaid. Such indemnity, public liability and property damage insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect during the entire term of the permit granted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.100 Hold harmless agreement.
Prior to the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City whereby the permittee shall agree as follows: The City, its agents, officers and employees, shall not be, nor be held liable for any claims, liabilities, penalties, fines or for any damage to any goods, properties or effects of any person whatsoever, or for personal injuries to or deaths of any person, whether caused by or resulting from any acts or omission of permittee, or his agents, employees or representatives, or for dangerous or defective conditions of the property of permittee or any way caused by newsracks placed or maintained pursuant to the permit; permittee further agrees to indemnify and save free and harmless and defend in any lawsuit the City and its authorized agents, officers, and employees against any of the foregoing liabilities and any cost and expenses incurred by the City, its agents, officers or employees on account of any claims therefore. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.110 Standards.
A. No newsrack shall exceed 40 inches in height, 20 inches in width or 20 inches in depth.

B. Each newsrack shall be constructed entirely of opaque, shatterproof materials, and shall be dark brown in color in order to coordinate with the color of street signs, bus benches, and other facilities in the public right-of-way.

C. No photographs, drawings, advertising signs, or material other than the printed name of the publication contained within the newsrack, and the notice described in subsection D of this section, shall be displayed on the outside of any newsrack.

D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place, a notice not larger than three inches high and six inches long, setting forth the name and address of the person responsible for maintaining the newsrack and a working telephone number to call to report a malfunction, or to obtain a refund in the event a person using the newsrack is unable to receive the publication paid for. The name, address and telephone number given shall be those desired for receipt of all notices provided by this chapter.

E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.120 Location.
A. No newsrack shall be located, maintained or placed at or within:

1. Twenty-five feet of the intersection of two or more roadways;

2. Five feet of any crosswalk, bus bench, fire hydrant or other emergency facility;

3. Forty-five feet ahead or 45 feet to the rear of a bus stop as measured along the street curb;

4. Ten feet of any driveway;

5. Five hundred feet of any other three newsracks, whether or not containing the same edition of the publication.

B. Newsracks upon sidewalks or other pedestrian ways shall be located only at the edge thereof farthest from the roadway. If a roadway adjoins such sidewalk or pedestrian way, newsracks shall only be located at the edge away from the roadway, and if the wall of a building adjoins the edge away from the roadway, then newsracks must be parallel to and within six inches of such wall, but neither directly in front of any display window nor within three feet of any entrance to such building.

C. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to the ground or to any fixture. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.130 Maintenance and repair.
The permittee shall at all times keep and maintain each of the newsracks in a good state of repair and in a neat, clean condition to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Services. Said maintenance shall include: painting at such intervals as may be specified from time to time by the Director of Public Services to ensure that the newsracks have a neat appearance; repairing of any damage within 72 hours after written notification of damage given by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.140 Abandonment.
No newsrack shall remain empty for a period of 30 continuous days. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.150 Inspection.
The Director of Public Services or his designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and shall make necessary inspections of newsrack locations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.160 Enforcement.
Upon determining that a newsrack exists in violation of any provision of this chapter, the City Manager shall:

A. If the newsrack is in violation of PMC 12.38.110(D), and the City Manager is unable to otherwise ascertain the name and address of its owner, cause it to be removed and processed as unclaimed property under applicable provisions of law.

B. If the newsrack is in compliance with PMC 12.38.110(D), cause an order to be issued to the person named in the notice required by PMC 12.38.110(D) to correct the offending condition. The order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person at the address shown on the notice required by PMC 12.38.110(D). The order shall specifically describe the offending condition and suggest actions necessary to correct it. If the distributor fails to correct properly within five days’ (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) receipt of the order, and no request for a hearing is filed, the City Manager shall cause the offending newsrack to be seized. The person named in the notice required by PMC 12.38.110(D) shall be notified of the seizure by certified mail in 30 days. If no response is made, the City Manager shall cause the newsrack to be processed as unclaimed property under applicable law.

C. Whether or not a newsrack is in compliance with PMC 12.38.040(D), if the newsrack poses an immediate danger to pedestrians or vehicles, cause it to be seized and processed as under the provisions of subsection B of this section.

D. In the case of minor violations of this chapter that can be corrected at the site, any City employee, as an alternative to removal of the newsrack, is authorized to correct the violation summarily.

E. Any newsrack existing in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance, and may be abated in accordance with applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.170 Hearing.
Within five days after receipt of the order of the City Manager, pursuant to the provisions of PMC 12.38.160(B), any party affected by the order may file with the City Manager a written request for a hearing before the City Manager. The City Manager shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the party thereof at least five days before the hearing date. The hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. At any hearing held pursuant to this section or PMC 12.38.190, the permittee shall have the right to be heard and to present witnesses and documentary evidence on its behalf. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.180 Revocation or modification of permits.
After a hearing as provided in this chapter or without a hearing if no hearing is requested, the City Manager may revoke or modify any permit which has been granted pursuant to this chapter on any one or more of the following grounds:

A. That such permit was obtained by fraud;

B. That the use for which such permit was granted is not being exercised;

C. That the use for which such permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for one month or more;

D. That any person making use of or relying upon the permit has violated any conditions of such permit, or that the use for which permit was granted, is being, or recently has been exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of the permit, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation or such person has failed to comply with any order of the Director of Public Services authorized by this chapter;

E. That the use for which the permit was granted is so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or so as to be a nuisance. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.190 Hearing for revocation or modification.
A. The City Manager upon the filing of a complaint by the Director of Public Services shall hold a hearing of the modification or revocation of any permit provided for in this chapter. Such hearing shall be held within 40 days after the filing of a written complaint with the City Clerk which sets forth the grounds of revocation or modification in clear and concise language. At least 10 days before the hearing, a copy of said complaint shall be mailed to the permittee together with a notice of the time and place of the hearing. The permittee may file an answer to the grounds set forth in the complaint at or before the hearing. After the hearing, the City Manager may:

1. Revoke or modify the permit as requested in the complaint; or

2. Deny the revocation and modifications requested in the complaint in whole or in part.

B. The decision of the City Manager shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

12.38.200 Termination.
A. Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance by the Public Services Department unless the permit is issued for a shorter period, in which event it shall terminate at the end of such shorter period. In the event no use in reliance on a permit issued pursuant to this chapter is commenced within a period of 30 days from the date of issuance, or within an extension of said time as granted by the City Manager, then the permit shall terminate and expire.

B. Upon the termination or revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the person to whom the permit was issued shall remove all newsracks placed or maintained upon any City right-of-way or City-owned property pursuant to such permit. In the event such person fails to remove such newsracks within 10 days after notice by the Director of Public Services to do so, the City may elect to treat such newsracks as having been abandoned and may remove and dispose of such newsracks at the expense of such person. (Ord. 251 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 12.40
REFUSE CONTAINERS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY*
Sections:

12.40.010    Permit – Required.

12.40.020    Permit – Applications.

12.40.030    Filing fee.

12.40.040    Approval or denial of permits.

12.40.050    Applicant must establish public benefit.

12.40.060    Nonexclusive permits.

12.40.070    Maintenance and repair.

12.40.080    Advertising matter on refuse containers.

12.40.090    Permit nontransferable.

12.40.100    Insurance.

12.40.110    Identification of refuse containers.

12.40.120    Hold harmless agreement.

12.40.130    Report for license fees.

12.40.140    Permit fees.

12.40.150    Revocation or modification of permits.

12.40.160    Hearing for revocation or modification.

12.40.170    Termination.

12.40.180    Inspection.

*    Code reviser’s note: Refer to Chapter 8.68 PMC for solid waste management regulations.

12.40.010 Permit – Required.
No person shall place or cause to be placed or maintain or cause to be maintained any trash container, refuse container, “litter can” or other container intended for use by the public to deposit refuse, hereinafter referred to in this chapter as “refuse container,” in or upon any City highway or City-owned property in the City or permit any refuse container to remain upon any City highway or City-owned property without first obtaining a written permit from the City Council; provided, however, this section shall not apply to an owner or occupant of property who places or maintains a refuse container adjacent to the traveled way of the City highway abutting such property, in such manner that the private refuse container will not interfere with the movement of pedestrians or vehicular traffic or the parking of vehicles, for use by the public to deposit refuse or for the purpose of permitting such container to be emptied by a refuse collector. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.101)

12.40.020 Permit – Applications.
A person desiring a permit required by this title shall file with the City Council an application for such permit. Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed plan giving a full description of the proposed location of each refuse container applied for, the type and design of the container to be used, and such other information as may be required by the City Council. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.102)

12.40.030 Filing fee.
A filing fee shall be paid to the City upon the filing of each application for a permit as provided in this chapter for the purpose of defraying the expense of investigating the application. The amount of the filing fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 54, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.103)

12.40.040 Approval or denial of permits.
The authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny applications for refuse container permits is vested in the City Council. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.104)

12.40.050 Applicant must establish public benefit.
A. If the City Council determines that the granting of the permit will benefit the public health, safety or welfare, that there is a need for refuse containers at the location proposed in the application, and that the establishment of refuse containers at the proposed locations will not be detrimental to the public or to property, the City Council may grant the permit upon such terms and conditions and for such period of time as it finds to be in the public interest.

B. The City Council may deny an application in whole or in part if it determines that the refuse containers are not needed at the proposed location, that such containers would impair the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or create a hazard to persons or property, or that the proposed containers are not of a type or designed or constructed so as to properly serve their intended purpose, or if it determines that the granting of such permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.105)

12.40.060 Nonexclusive permits.
The City Council shall have the right to grant more than one permit to establish and maintain refuse containers in the same area during the same period of time; provided, however, in issuing a permit the City Council may grant an exclusive right within a prescribed area for a period not to exceed two years upon such conditions as may be specified by said Council which shall include a condition that the permittee shall be required to establish and maintain a refuse container at each location in such area determined by the Director of Public Services to require a refuse container to serve the public. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.106)

12.40.070 Maintenance and repair.
The permittee shall at all times keep and maintain each of the refuse containers in a good state of repair and in a neat, clean and sanitary condition and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Services. Said maintenance shall include: painting at such intervals as may be specified from time to time by the Director of Public Services to ensure that the containers have a neat appearance; repairing of any damage within 72 hours after written notification of damage given by the Director of Public Services; and emptying at such times or intervals of time as may be prescribed by the Director of Public Services. Said times or intervals of time may be changed by the Director of Public Services from time to time. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.107)

12.40.080 Advertising matter on refuse containers.
The permittee may use the sides of the refuse containers for the purpose of placing advertising matter thereon; provided, however, that no advertising determined by the Director of Public Services to be detrimental to the public interest shall be placed thereon. The Director of Public Services may order the removal of any advertising matter determined by him to be detrimental to the public interest and the permittee shall forthwith remove the same. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.108)

12.40.090 Permit nontransferable.
The permit shall not be transferable from one person to another. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.109)

12.40.100 Insurance.
The permittee shall file with the Director of Public Services a policy of insurance, or copy thereof, issued by a company authorized to do business in the State; said policy shall name the City as a named insured, and shall indemnify the City for any loss, damage or liability suffered by the City by reason of the existence of said refuse containers in or upon the City highways and/or the operation and maintenance of said refuse containers. Said policy of insurance shall indemnify the City in the sum of $100,000 or more against loss or liability arising from the injury or death of one person, and shall indemnify the City in the sum of $300,000 or more against loss or liability arising from the injury or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and the sum of $10,000 or more with respect to any property damage aforesaid. Such indemnity, public liability and property damage insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect during the entire term of the permit granted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.110)

12.40.110 Identification of refuse containers.
Each refuse container shall have placed thereon at a location approved by the Director of Public Services a small identification marker giving the name of the permittee, his address, and serial number of each refuse container. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.111)

12.40.120 Hold harmless agreement.
A. Prior to the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall enter into an agreement with the City whereby the permittee shall agree as follows: The City, its agents, officers and employees, shall not be, nor be held liable for any claims, liabilities, penalties, fines or for any damage to any goods, properties or effects of any person whatsoever, or for personal injuries to or deaths of any person, whether caused by or resulting from any acts or omissions of permittee, or his agents, employees or representatives, or for dangerous or defective conditions of the property of permittee or in any way caused by refuse containers placed or maintained pursuant to the permit; permittee further agrees to indemnify and save free and harmless and defend in any lawsuit the City and its authorized agents, officers, and employees against any of the foregoing liabilities and any cost and expenses incurred by the City, its agents, officers or employees on account of any claim therefor. In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction should determine that the City has no authority to provide by ordinance, permit or agreement for the placing of refuse containers on City highways with the right to display advertising matter thereon, the permittee nevertheless agrees to assume the foregoing obligations and liabilities. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.112)

12.40.130 Report for license fees.
The permit shall specify the locations at which refuse containers may be maintained or authorize the Director of Public Services to approve such locations within a prescribed area. The permittee shall file with the Director of Public Services within 90 days after the issuance of the permit a report showing each approved location at which a refuse container is maintained and whether advertising matter is displayed on the container at such location. Thereafter, every three months or at such times as the Director of Public Services prescribes, the permittee shall file with the Director of Public Services an itemized report showing any additional approved locations at which refuse containers have been established and those approved locations at which refuse containers are no longer maintained. The permittee shall have the right to establish and maintain the number of refuse containers specified in the permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.113)

12.40.140 Permit fees.
For each refuse container maintained and upon which is displayed advertising matter, the permittee shall pay a license fee. Said fee shall be payable in arrears to the Director of Public Works quarterly on January 1st, April 1st, July 1st and October 1st of each year. The amount of the license fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. (Ord. 683 § 55, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.114)

12.40.150 Revocation or modification of permits.
After a public hearing as provided in this chapter, the City Council may revoke or modify any permit which has been granted pursuant to this chapter on any one or more of the following grounds:

A. That such permit was obtained by fraud;

B. That the use for which such permit was granted is not being exercised;

C. That the use for which such permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for two months or more;

D. That any person making use of or relying upon the permit has violated any conditions of such permit, or that the use for which permit was granted, is being, or recently has been, exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of the permit, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation or such person has failed to comply with any order of the Director of Public Services;

E. That the use for which the permit was granted is so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or so as to be a nuisance;

F. That the permittee fails to pay the license fees required by PMC 12.40.140 within 10 days after the due date. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.115)

12.40.160 Hearing for revocation or modification.
A. The City Council on its own motion may, or upon the filing of a complaint by the Director of Public Services shall, hold a hearing for the modification or revocation of any permit provided for in this chapter. Said hearing shall be held within 40 days after the filing of a written complaint with the City Clerk which sets forth the grounds of revocation or modification in clear and concise language. At least 10 days before the hearing, a copy of said complaint shall be mailed to the permittee together with a notice of the time and place of the hearing. The permittee may file an answer to the charges set forth in the complaint within five days after the notice of hearing is deposited in the United States mail. After the hearing the Council may:

1. Revoke or modify the permit as requested in the complaint; or

2. Deny the revocations and modifications requested in the complaint in whole or in part.

B. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.116)

12.40.170 Termination.
A. Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate at the expiration of two years from the date of issuance by the City Council unless the permit is issued for a shorter period in which event it shall terminate at the end of such shorter period. In the event no use in reliance on a permit issued pursuant to this chapter is commenced within a period of 12 months from the date of issuance, or within an extension of said time as granted by the City Council, then said permit shall terminate and expire.

B. Upon the termination or revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter the person to whom the permit was issued shall remove all refuse containers placed or maintained upon any City highway or City-owned property pursuant to such permit. In the event such person fails to remove such refuse containers within 10 days after notice by the Director of Public Services to do so, the City may elect to treat said containers as having been abandoned and may remove and dispose of said containers at the expense of such person. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.117)

12.40.180 Inspection.
The Director of Public Services shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and shall make necessary inspections of refuse container locations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 74.118)

Chapter 12.44
CENTERLINES
Sections:

12.44.010    Definition of street.

12.44.020    Establishment of centerline.

12.44.030    Change of existing centerline.

12.44.050    Persons authorized to appeal.

12.44.060    Notice and hearing.

12.44.010 Definition of street.
As used in this chapter, “street” means a City road, County road, State highway, public road, street, or alley, or a private thoroughfare not less than 10 feet in width connecting with a City road, County road, State highway, public road, street, or alley which affords primary access to an abutting lot. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 75.101)

12.44.020 Establishment of centerline.
The centerline of a street shall be as follows:

A. The centerline of the street as shown on a final subdivision map filed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act (California Business and Professions Code Section 11500, et seq.), a record of survey map filed pursuant to Section 11535(c) of the Business and Professions Code, a record of survey map filed according to and prior to the repeal (Statutes 1955, c. 1593, p. 2890) of Section 11575 of the Business and Professions Code, or a road survey map prepared by and filed in the officer of the Director of Public Services, shall be the centerline shown on such map.

B. If no such map is filed or if there is an ambiguity within or between such maps, the centerline of the street shall be established by the Director of Public Services with the concurrence of the Director of Development Services after notice and hearing pursuant to PMC 12.44.060.

C. In the event that the centerline of a street has not been established according to subsections A or B of this section, or that the map filed as in subsection A of this section does not show a centerline, then until such time as the centerline is established pursuant to subsections A or B of this section it is presumed that the centerline is a line equidistant between the exterior right-of-way lines of the street. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 75.102)

12.44.030 Change of existing centerline.
No established centerline shall be changed except by a new subdivision map or a resubdivision map filed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, by a new record of survey map filed pursuant to Section 11535 and Chapter 15 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, by a new road survey map prepared by and filed in the office of the Director of Public Services, or by the Director of Public Services with the concurrence of the Director of Development Services after notice and hearing pursuant to PMC 12.44.060. An established centerline shall not be deemed changed by the vacation of a part of the right-of-way on either or both sides thereof, or by the widening of the right-of-way on either or both sides thereof. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 75.103)

12.44.050 Persons authorized to appeal.
The following persons, and no others, are authorized to appeal from the decision of the Director of Public Services and the Director of Development Services:

A. Persons owning real property adjoining the portion of the street for which the centerline is proposed to be established or changed; and

B. Persons owning real property that adjoins said street and is within 300 feet of the portion thereof for which the centerline is to be established or changed and is not separated from such portion by an intersecting street. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 75.105)

12.44.060 Notice and hearing.
A. The notice of the hearing required by PMC 12.44.020(B) and 12.44.030 shall be given by mailing a written notice not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to the owners of real property referred to in PMC 12.44.050 as said owners appear on the Master Property Record Books of the Assessor.

B. At the hearing conducted by the Director of Public Services or by the City Council the centerline shall be established at the location most in keeping with the public health, safety and welfare, taking into consideration the proposed ultimate width of the street. The Director of Public Services, or the Council, shall hear evidence presented by persons authorized to appeal by PMC 12.44.050 and may hear evidence from other persons. If for any reason the hearing cannot be completed on the day set for hearing, before adjournment the Director of Public Services or the Council may publicly announce the time and place until and at which said hearing shall be continued and no further notice shall be required. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 75.106)

Chapter 12.48
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sections:

Article I. Removal of Overhead and Undergrounding Utilities

12.48.010    Definitions.

12.48.020    Resolution of intention – Public hearing by Council.

12.48.030    Establishment of Underground Utility Districts.

12.48.040    Unlawful acts.

12.48.050    Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.

12.48.060    General exceptions.

12.48.070    Notice to property owners and utility companies.

12.48.080    Notification of adoption of resolution.

12.48.090    Responsibility of utility companies.

12.48.100    Responsibility of property owner.

12.48.110    Authority of Director of Development Services.

12.48.120    Disconnection of premises.

12.48.130    Construction of service connection and assessment of cost.

12.48.140    Responsibility of City.

12.48.150    Extension of time.

Article II. Establishment of Underground Utility Districts

12.48.160    Application of regulations.

12.48.170    Underground Utility District No. 16.

12.48.180    Underground Utility District No. 20.

12.48.190    Underground Utility District No. 21.

12.48.200    Underground Utility District No. 25.

12.48.210    Underground Utility District No. 30.

12.48.220    Underground Utility District No. 42.

12.48.230    Underground Utility District No. 52.

12.48.240    Underground Utility District No. 65.

12.48.250    Underground Utility District No. 66.

12.48.260    Underground Utility District No. 67.

12.48.270    Underground Utility District No. 68.

Article I. Removal of Overhead and Undergrounding Utilities

12.48.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meaning assigned to them in the following definitions:

A. “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the State.

B. “Director of Development Services” means the Director of Development Services or an authorized representative.

C. “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district which are used or are useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

D. “Underground Utility District” or “District” means an area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited, which area is established pursuant to and described in this chapter.

E. “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.101)

12.48.020 Resolution of intention – Public hearing by Council.
The City Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated services. Prior to establishing an area as an Underground Utility District the City Council shall adopt a resolution of intention to establish such District and hold a public hearing thereon. The City Clerk shall notify all owners of property within the proposed District as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and all utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of the hearing on such resolution at least 15 days prior to the date thereof. Such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 106 § 9, 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.102)

12.48.030 Establishment of Underground Utility Districts.
If, after such public hearing on the resolution of intention, the City Council finds that the public health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, said Council shall, by ordinance amending this code, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and underground installation. Such ordinance shall include a description of the area comprising such District and shall provide that the City Council shall subsequently fix by resolution the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. Notification of the passage of such resolution fixing time shall be given pursuant to PMC 12.48.070(A) and (B). A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.103)

12.48.040 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the City Council establishes an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in PMC 12.48.020, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the District after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such ordinance and the resolution of the City Council fixing said removal date, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in PMC 12.48.090 and for such reasonable time as may be required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.104)

12.48.050 Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed 10 days, without authority of the Director of Development Services in order to provide emergency service. The Director of Development Services may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.105)

12.48.060 General exceptions.
This chapter and any ordinance adopted pursuant to PMC 12.48.030 shall, unless otherwise provided, in such ordinance, not apply to the following types of facilities:

A. Any City facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services;

B. Poles and electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C. Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of an Underground Utility District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of such a District, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

D. Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;

E. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

F. Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility or person for furnishing or receiving communication services;

G. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

H. Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.

I. New or existing pole-to-anchor guy wires within the District necessary to support overhead facilities outside the boundary of the District or poles within the District which have been specifically excepted in the ordinance creating the District. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.106)

12.48.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
A. Within 10 days after the effective date of an ordinance establishing an Underground Utility District adopted pursuant to PMC 12.48.030, the City Clerk shall give notice of the adoption of such ordinance to all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the Underground Utility District established by said ordinance.

B. Notification by the City Council shall be made by mailing to all owners of property within the District as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities a copy of the ordinance adopted pursuant to PMC 12.48.030. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.107)

12.48.080 Notification of adoption of resolution.
A. Within 10 days of adoption, the City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners of the adoption of a resolution by the City Council setting the date for undergrounding of said utilities and of the necessity that if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric connections or associated service they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

B. Within 10 days of adoption, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities of the adoption of a resolution of the City Council setting the date by which the utilities must furnish the necessary underground service facilities and remove their overhead service facilities. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.107(A), (B))

12.48.090 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a District created by ordinance adopted pursuant to PMC 12.48.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.108)

12.48.100 Responsibility of property owner.
Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a District shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in PMC 12.48.090 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.109)

12.48.110 Authority of Director of Development Services.
If the requirements of PMC 12.48.100 are not met by any person within the time prescribed in the resolution establishing the date by which such on premises undergrounding must be accomplished, the Director of Development Services may proceed in accordance with one or more of PMC 12.48.120 through 12.48.150. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.110)

12.48.120 Disconnection of premises.
The Director of Development Services shall conspicuously post on the property being served a written notice to comply with the requirements of PMC 12.48.100. Such notice shall state that if the service connection required by PMC 12.48.100 is not completed within 30 days after the posting of such notice the Director of Development Services may order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated service facilities supplying utility service to the property. If such service connection is not completed within said 30-day period, the Director of Development Services shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated service facilities supplying utility service to said property. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.111)

12.48.130 Construction of service connection and assessment of cost.
A. Notice to Construct. The Director of Development Services shall give written notice to the person in possession of the premises and to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to comply with the requirements of PMC 12.48.100 within 30 days after service of such notice. The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if such work is not completed within 30 days after service of such notice, the Director of Development Services will cause such work to be done, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property and become a lien upon such property. Such written notice may be given either by personal service or by mail.

B. Service by Mail. In case of service by mail on the person in possession, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises. In case of service by mail on the owner, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the premises as such owner and address are shown on the last equalized assessment roll. When no address appears on said roll it shall be addressed to the owner, General Delivery at the United States Post Office nearest the property. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it was addressed within 48 hours after the mailing thereof.

C. Posting. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or person in possession of the premises, the Director of Development Services shall within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof to be conspicuously posted on the premises.

D. Engineer Performs Work. If upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the said work has not been done, the Director of Development Services shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the Director of Development Services shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property.

E. Report and Assessment. Upon completion of the work by the Director of Development Services, he shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property for which such required underground facilities were provided and against which such cost is to be assessed. The City Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than 15 days thereafter.

F. Notice of Hearing on Assessment. The Director of Development Services shall give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this chapter for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the City Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. Such notices shall be permanently served or mailed and posted not less than 15 days prior to the date of hearing.

G. Confirmation of Assessment. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the City Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any. After completing the hearing the City Council shall confirm, modify or reject the assessment.

H. Assessment Becomes Lien – Collection. If any assessment is not paid within 10 days after its confirmation by the City Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property and the Director of Development Services shall deliver to the County Tax Collector a notice that the assessment has not been paid. The County Tax Collector shall enforce such liens and collect such assessments. Each assessment shall be due and payable at the time said assessment is confirmed by the City Council and if not paid within 10 days after its confirmation shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year from the date of its confirmation. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.112)

12.48.140 Responsibility of City.
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the ordinance establishing the District. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.113)

12.48.150 Extension of time.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by ordinance adopted pursuant to PMC 12.48.030 and the resolution setting the time for performance, cannot be performed within the time provided by said resolution on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within such act will be accomplished shall, upon written request by the person required to perform the act, be extended by the City Council or City Engineer for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.114)

Article II. Establishment of Underground Utility Districts

12.48.160 Application of regulations.
The provisions of Article I of this chapter shall apply to all Underground Utility Districts described in PMC 12.48.170 through 12.48.270. (Ord. 807 § 2, 2017; Ord. 806 § 2, 2017; Ord. 676 § 2, 2008; Ord. 610 § 2, 2004; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.201)

12.48.170 Underground Utility District No. 16.
The following described portion of the County is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 16 of the County:

All that unincorporated territory in the County of San Diego, State of California lying within the following described boundaries:

Beginning at the Southeasterly corner of Lot 16, of Poway Estates Unit No. 1, Map No. 4998, as filed in the Office of the County Recorder; thence northerly along the easterly line of Lot 16 to the Northeast corner of said lot; thence westerly along the northerly line of Lot 16 to the Northwest corner of said lot; thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 15 to the Northwest corner of said lot; thence westerly along the prolongation of the North boundary of Lot 15 to the easterly boundary of Lot 20; thence southerly along the easterly line of Lot 20 to the Southeast corner of said lot; thence westerly along the southerly line of Lot 20 to the Southwest corner of said lot; thence southerly along the prolongation of the westerly line of Lot 20 to the Southwest corner of Lot 17; thence westerly along the prolongation of the southerly line of Lot 17 to the Northwest corner of Parcel 317-540-13; thence southerly along the westerly line of Parcel 317-540-13 to the Northeast corner of Parcel 317-540-45; thence westerly along the northerly line of Parcel 317-540-45 to the Northwest corner of said parcel; thence southerly along the prolongation of the West side of Parcel 317-540-45 to the intersection with the prolongation of the northerly line of Parcel 317-151-27; thence westerly along the prolongation of the northerly line of Parcel 317-151-27 to the westerly line of Parcel 317-151-32; thence southerly along westerly line of

Parcel 317-151-32 to the intersection with the prolongation of northerly line of Parcel 316-120-17; thence westerly along the prolongation of the northerly line of Parcel 316-120-17 to the Northwest corner of Parcel 316-120-22; thence southerly along the westerly line of Parcel 316-120-22 to the Southwest corner of said parcel; thence westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of Poway Road to the Southwest corner of Parcel 316-082-03; thence southerly along the prolongation of the westerly line of Parcel 316-082-03 to the centerline of Poway Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Poway Road to the intersection with the prolongation of the westerly line of Parcel 316-062-20; thence southerly along the West side of Parcel 316-062-20 to a point which is one hundred and seventy-five feet from centerline of Poway Road as measured on a perpendicular line; thence easterly on a line one hundred and seventy-five feet South of and parallel to the centerline of Poway Road to the East side of Parcel 316-70-40; thence northerly on the East side of Parcel 316-70-40 to the intersecting point of the following parcels: 316-70-40, 316-120-10 and 316-120-19; thence southerly along the Southwest line of Parcel 316-120-19 to the most southerly point of said parallel; thence northerly along the centerline of Oak Knoll Road to a point one hundred and thirty feet South of centerline of Poway Road as measured on a perpendicular line; thence easterly on a line one hundred and thirty feet South of and parallel to the centerline of Poway Road to the East side of Parcel 317-151-44; thence southerly along the East side of Parcel 317-151-44 to a point two hundred and twenty feet from the centerline of Poway Road; thence easterly on a line two hundred and twenty feet South of and parallel to the centerline of Poway Road to the East side of Parcel 317-540-21; thence northerly on the East side of Parcel 317-540-21 to the Northeast corner of said parcel; thence northerly in a straight line to the most southerly point of Parcel 317-460-08; thence easterly along the Southeast side of Parcel 317-46-08 to the Point of Beginning.

The City Council shall by subsequent resolution set the dates by which all affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground utility service and by which the utility or utilities must remove all poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and make the necessary underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service within the Underground Utility District No. 16 and notice of the adoption of such subsequent resolution shall be given by the City Clerk in the manner provided in PMC 12.48.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.217)

12.48.180 Underground Utility District No. 20.
The following described portion of the County, is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 20 of the County:

All the unincorporated territory of the County of San Diego, State of California, lying within the following described boundaries:

1. Beginning at the most southerly point of Lot 16, of Poway Estates Unit 1 Map 4998 as filed in the Office of the County Recorder;

2. Thence northeasterly along the southerly side of Lot 16 to the southeasterly corner of said lot;

3. Thence northerly along the East side and prolongation of Lot 16 to a point two hundred and sixty-three feet from the centerline of Poway Road as measured on a perpendicular line to said centerline;

4. Thence northeasterly along a line parallel to and two hundred and sixty-three feet from the centerline of Poway Road to the Southwest corner of Lot 96 of Heritage Hills Unit #3 Map 6250 as filed in the Office of the County Recorder;

5. Thence easterly along the southerly boundary of said subdivision to the centerline of La Venta Drive;

6. Thence northerly along said centerline to the intersection of the westerly prolongation of the southerly side on a Lot 59 of said subdivision;

7. Thence easterly along the southerly boundary of Heritage Hills Unit #2 to the centerline of Tarascan Drive;

8. Thence southerly along said centerline and prolongation to a point two hundred and fifteen feet South of the centerline of Poway Road;

9. Thence westerly three hundred fifty feet along a line two hundred fifteen feet from and parallel to the centerline of Poway Road;

10. Thence southerly to the East prolongation of the North side of Russ Estates Unit #1 Map 4472 as filed in the Office of the County Recorder;

11. Thence westerly along said prolongation to the Northeast corner of said subdivision;

12. Thence westerly along the northerly side of Russ Estates Unit #1 to the Northwest corner of said subdivision;

13. Thence westerly along the West prolongation of said North side to a point which measures two hundred and fifty feet from the centerline of Poway Road as measured on a perpendicular line to said centerline;

14. Thence southwesterly along a line parallel to and two hundred and fifty feet from the centerline of Poway Road until it intersects with the North-South centerline of Sec. 14, Township 14 South, Range 2 West, S.B.B.& M.;

15. Thence northerly along said Section centerline until it intersects with the southerly right-of-way line of Poway Road;

16. Thence northerly along a straight line to the point of beginning.

The City Council shall by subsequent resolution set the dates by which all affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground utility service and by which the utility or utilities must remove all poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and make the necessary underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service within the Underground Utility District No. 20 and notice of the adoption of such subsequent resolution shall be given by the City Clerk in the manner provided in PMC 12.48.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.221)

12.48.190 Underground Utility District No. 21.
The following described portion of the County, is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 21 of the County:

1. Beginning at the southwesterly corner of Lot 22, Dauer and Westover, Map No. 728, filed in the Office of the Recorder of the County, said corner being a point in the City of La Mesa Boundary as shown on Road Survey No. 1069, filed in the Office of the County Engineer of said County;

2. Thence southerly in a direct line to the northerly terminus of the westerly line of Lot 1, Block N of Vista La Mesa Unit No. 2, Map 2113, filed in said Recorder’s office;

3. Thence southerly, southeasterly, and easterly along the westerly, southwesterly, and southerly lines of said Lot 1 to the southeasterly corner thereof;

4. Thence southerly along the southerly prolongation of the easterly line of said Lot 1 to the northerly line of Block K of Map 2113;

5. Thence easterly along said northerly line and along the prolongation thereof to the centerline of Marian Street as shown on said Map 2113;

6. Thence northerly along said centerline to the westerly prolongation of the southerly line of Block P of said Map 2113;

7. Thence easterly, northeasterly, and northerly along said prolongation and along said southerly line and along that curve joining the southerly and easterly lines of said Block P to the point of tangency of said easterly line;

8. Thence easterly at right angles to said easterly line in a direct line to a point in the westerly line of Lot 14, Block 2 Vista La Mesa Villas, Map 2440 filed in said Recorder’s office;

9. Thence northerly along said easterly line to the northerly corner of said Lot 14;

10. Thence easterly along the northerly line of Lots 15 through 23, all of Block 2 of said Map 2440 to the Northeasterly corner of said Lot 23 being also a point in said City of La Mesa Boundary;

11. Thence northerly along the easterly line of Lot 1, Block 1 of said Map 2440 to the northeasterly corner thereof;

12. Thence westerly along the northerly line of said Lot 1 to the southerly prolongation of the westerly line of Lot 29, Academy Heights, Map 2361 filed in said Recorder’s office;

13. Thence northerly along said prolongation to said City of La Mesa Boundary;

14. Thence generally westerly along the various courses of said boundary to the point of beginning.

The City Council shall by subsequent resolution set the dates by which all affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground utility service and by which the utility or utilities must remove all poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and make the necessary underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service within Underground Utility District No. 21 and notice of the adoption of such subsequent resolution shall be given by the City Clerk in the manner provided in PMC 12.48.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.222)

12.48.200 Underground Utility District No. 25.
The following described portion of the County, is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 25 of the County:

All that unincorporated territory in the County of San Diego, State of California, lying within the following described boundary:

Beginning at the southwesterly corner of Lot 5, Heritage Hills Unit No. 1, according to Map thereof No. 5934 filed in the office of the Recorder of said County; thence along the southerly line of said Lot 5 and along the easterly prolongation thereof to the westerly line of Record of Survey Map No. 3395 filed in said Recorder’s office; thence North 1°54'00? East to the northerly line of the southwesterly parcel of said Record of Survey Map No. 3395; thence South 89°08'30? East 229.75 feet to the easterly line of said parcel; thence South 1°54' West along said easterly line 169.33 feet; thence South 89°08'30? East 196.75 feet to the westerly line of Community Road as shown on said Record of Survey Map No. 3395; thence South 1°54? West along said westerly line to a line lying 250.00 feet northerly of and parallel to said centerline of Poway Road according to Road Survey Map No. 1713 filed in the office of the Engineer of said County; thence easterly along said parallel line to the northerly prolongation of the westerly line of the easterly parcel of Record of Survey Map No. 2713 filed in said Recorder’s office; thence South 0°09? East along said prolongation and along said westerly line to the southerly line of said Record of Survey Map No. 2713; thence North 89°08'30? West along said southerly line and along the westerly prolongation thereof 1185.53 feet; thence due North to a line lying 80.00 feet southerly of and parallel to said centerline of Poway Road; thence westerly along said parallel line to a point distant thereon 500.00 feet easterly of the easterly line of Community Road; thence due South to a line lying 150.00 feet southerly of and parallel to said centerline of Poway Road; thence westerly along said parallel line to said easterly line of Community Road; thence southerly along said easterly line to a line lying 267.00 feet southerly of and parallel to said centerline of Poway Road; thence westerly along said parallel line to the westerly line of said Community Road; thence northerly along said westerly line to said line lying 150.00 feet southerly of and parallel to the centerline of Poway Road; thence westerly along said parallel line to a line lying 70.00 feet westerly of and parallel to the easterly line of the westerly parcel of Record of Survey Map No. 3966 filed in said Recorder’s Office; thence South 01°38'15? West along said parallel line to a line lying 320.00 feet southerly of and parallel to said centerline of Poway Road; thence westerly along said parallel line to the easterly line of Bowron Road; thence southerly along said easterly line to the northerly line of Remlap Way; thence westerly along said northerly line to the westerly line of said Bowron Road; thence northerly along said westerly line to said line lying 320.00 feet southerly of and parallel to the centerline of Poway Road; thence westerly along said parallel line to the southerly prolongation of the centerline of Tarascan Road as shown on said Map No. 5934; thence North 01°33'47? East along said prolongation and along said centerline to the westerly prolongation of said southerly line of Lot 5, Map 5934; thence South 89°08'30? East along said prolongation 30.00 feet to the point of beginning.

The City Council shall by subsequent resolution set the dates by which all affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground utility service and by which the utility or utilities must remove all poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and make the necessary underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service within Underground Utility District No. 25 and notice of the adoption of such subsequent resolution shall be given by the City Clerk in the manner provided in PMC 12.48.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.226)

12.48.210 Underground Utility District No. 30.
The following described portion of the County is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 30 of the County:

All of that unincorporated territory in the County of San Diego, State of California, lying within the following described boundary:

1. Beginning at the southwesterly corner of the easterly parcel of Record of Survey Map No. 2713 filed in the Office of the Recorder of said County;

2. Thence northerly along the westerly line of said parcel to an intersection with the westerly prolongation of the southerly line of the northerly 150.00 feet of the southerly half of Section 18, Township 14 South, Range 1 West, San Bernardino Base and Meridian, the northerly line of said southerly half being also along a portion of the centerline of Poway Road according to Road Survey thereof 1713 filed in the Office of the County Engineer of said County, said intersection being the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING;

3. Thence South 88°41'47? East along said prolongation and along said southerly line to the easterly line of the westerly 30.00 feet of the easterly half of said Section 18;

4. Thence northerly along said easterly line to the easterly prolongation of the northerly line of Parcel 4 of Parcel Map No. 1081 filed in the office of the Recorder of said County;

5. Thence North 84°12'46? West along said prolongation and along said northerly line to a point distant thereon 104.67 feet westerly of the northeasterly corner of said Parcel 4, said point also being along a 450.00 foot radius curve concave northwesterly, a radial through said point bears North 65°10'19? West, said curve being concentric with a six-hundred-foot radius curve in the centerline of said Poway Road;

6. Thence southwesterly and westerly 521.44 feet along said curve through an angle of 66°23'31? to the northerly line of the southerly 150.00 feet of the northerly half of said Section 18, said line being tangent to said curve;

7. Thence North 88°48'46? West along said northerly line and along the prolongation thereof to the northerly prolongation of the westerly line of said easterly parcel of Record of Survey Map No. 2713;

8. Thence southerly along said northerly prolongation and along said westerly line to the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING.

The City Council shall by subsequent resolution set the dates by which all affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground utility service and by which the utility or utilities must remove all poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and make the necessary underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service within Underground Utility District No. 30 and notice of the adoption of such subsequent resolution shall be given by the City Clerk in the manner provided in PMC 12.48.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.231)

12.48.220 Underground Utility District No. 42.
The following described portion of the County is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 42 of the County:

TWIN PEAKS ROAD UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT LEGAL DESCRIPTION

Those portions of Sections 1 and 12 of Township 14 South, Range 2 West and Sections 6 and 7 of Township 14 South, Range 1 West, San Bernardino Base and Meridian in the County of San Diego, State of California, described as follows:

1. Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of the County road known as Midland Road with the easterly prolongation of the centerline of the County road known as Blossom Lane;

2. Thence easterly along a line which is perpendicular to the centerline of said Midland Road to the easterly boundary of said Midland Road;

3. Thence southerly along the easterly boundary of Midland Road to its intersection with the northerly boundary of Twin Peaks Road;

4. Thence easterly along said northerly boundary of said Twin Peaks Road to its intersection with the westerly boundary of a private road known as Budwin Lane;

5. Thence northerly along the westerly boundary of said Budwin Lane to a point which is one hundred and six feet north of the centerline of Twin Peaks Road;

6. Thence easterly in a line which is parallel to and one hundred and six feet north of the centerline of Twin Peaks Road for 536.95 feet;

7. Thence South 0°01'00? East to a point which is fifty-one feet north of the centerline of said Twin Peaks Road, said point also being on the northerly boundary of said Twin Peaks Road;

8. Thence along the northerly boundary of said Twin Peaks Road and along the easterly prolongation of said northerly boundary of Twin Peaks Road to its intersection with the centerline of the County road known as Espola Road, as shown in Road Survey No. 1673-2 on file with San Diego County;

9. Thence southerly along said centerline of Espola Road for ninety-one feet;

10. Thence North 88°34'00? West along the easterly prolongation of the southerly boundary of Twin Peaks Road to the southerly boundary of Twin Peaks Road;

11. Thence along the southerly boundary of said Twin Peaks Road for 165.97 feet;

12. Thence south 0°31'00? East for 79 feet;

13. Thence westerly in a line which is parallel to and one hundred and thirty feet South of the centerline of said Twin Peaks Road, to its intersection with easterly boundary of the property as described in deed to the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) of the Southern California and Southern Nevada Region as filed with the office of County Recorder of said San Diego County, document number 78-026742;

14. Thence southerly along said easterly boundary as described in course 13 above;

15. Thence westerly in a line parallel to and 332.66 feet South of the centerline of said Twin Peaks Road and along the westerly prolongation of said parallel line which is 332.66 feet South of the centerline of Twin Peaks Road to its intersection with the westerly boundary of said County Road, known as Midland Road;

16. Thence northerly along said westerly boundary of Midland Road to its intersection with the centerline of the County Road, known as Blossom Lane;

17. Thence easterly along the easterly prolongation of said centerline of Blossom Lane to the Point of Beginning.

The City Council shall by subsequent resolution set the dates by which all affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground utility service and by which the utility or utilities must remove all poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and make the necessary underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service within Underground Utility District No. 42 and notice of the adoption of such subsequent resolution shall be given by the City Clerk in the manner provided in PMC 12.48.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.243)

12.48.230 Underground Utility District No. 52.
The following described portion of the County is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 52 of the County:

POMERADO ROAD UUD

Those portions of Sections 14, 11, 2, Township 14 South, Range 2 West, and Section 35, Township 13 South, Range 2 West, San Bernardino Base and Meridian, County of San Diego, State of California, described as follows:

Beginning at a point on the centerline of a County road known as Pomerado Road, said point also being on the Boundary of Rancho San Bernardo;

1. Thence northeasterly along the boundary of Rancho San Bernardo to the intersection with the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

2. Thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road to the southwesterly corner of property described in an Individual Grant Deed to Melchoir Richard Rangel and Anna Maria Rangel and Augustine C. Rangel and Julia Rangel dated June 9, 1976 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 76-257805;

3. Thence South 88°52'52? East to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and three hundred and one feet easterly thereof;

4. Thence southerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and three hundred and one feet easterly thereof to a point on said parallel which is on the northerly line of the southerly one thousand nine hundred and seventy feet of Lots 3, 4, and the West 1/2 of the Southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 13 South, Range 2 West;

5. Thence westerly along the northerly line of the southerly one thousand nine hundred and seventy feet of the West 1/2 of the Southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 13 South, Range 2 West to the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

6. Thence southerly along the easterly boundary of Pomerado Road to the northernmost boundary of Lot 215 of Map 8885 filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

7. Thence South 87°04'05? East to the northeasterly corner of said Lot 215;

8. Thence southerly along the easterly boundary of said Lot 215 to the intersection with a line parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred fifty feet easterly thereof;

9. Thence southerly parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred fifty feet easterly thereof to the northerly right-of-way of a County road known as Glen Oak Road;

10. Thence westerly along said northerly right-of-way of Glen Oak Road to the intersection with a line perpendicular to the centerline of Glen Oak Road at a point on said centerline one hundred twenty-five feet easterly of its intersection with the centerline of Pomerado Road;

11. Thence southerly along said perpendicular line to the centerline of Glen Oak Road and its southerly extension to the southerly right-of-way of Glen Oak Road;

12. Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way of said Glen Oak Road fifty feet to the beginning of a tangent curve concave southeasterly having a radius of twenty-five feet;

13. Thence westerly and southerly following the arc of said curve to the intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Pomerado Road;

14. Thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road one thousand two hundred and twenty feet to the beginning of a tangent curve concave northeasterly with a radius of twenty-five feet;

15. Thence along the arc of said curve 39.27 feet to its intersection with the northerly right-of-way of a County road known as Holland Road;

16. Thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way of Holland Road to its intersection with a line perpendicular to the centerline of Holland Road at a point one hundred and twenty-five feet easterly of the intersection of the centerline of Holland Road and the centerline of Pomerado Road;

17. Thence southerly along said perpendicular line and its southerly extension to the southerly right-of-way of Holland Road;

18. Thence westerly along the southerly right-of-way of Holland Road to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and seventy feet easterly thereof, said point also being the beginning of a tangent twenty-five-foot radius curve, concave southeasterly;

19. Thence following the arc of said curve 39.27 feet to its intersection with the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

20. Thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road one thousand two hundred and ninety feet to the beginning of a tangent twenty-five-foot radius curve concave northeasterly;

21. Thence following the arc of said curve 39.25 feet to the intersection with the northerly right-of-way of a County road known as Vaughan Road;

22. Thence easterly along said northerly right-of-way to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and seventy-five feet easterly thereof;

23. Thence southerly parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and seventy-five feet easterly thereof to a point on said parallel line ten feet southerly of the northerly boundary of Lot 91, Map 6399 filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

24. Thence North 89°40'47? West to the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

25. Thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road one thousand nine hundred and thirty-six feet to the beginning of a tangent curve with a radius of twenty-five feet concave northeasterly;

26. Thence along the arc of said curve 38.49 feet to the northerly right-of-way of McFeron Road;

27. Thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way of McFeron Road to the intersection with a line perpendicular to the centerline of McFeron Road at a point one hundred and twenty-five feet easterly of the intersection of the centerline of McFeron Road with the centerline of Pomerado Road;

28. Thence southerly along said perpendicular and its southerly extension to the southerly right-of-way of McFeron Road;

29. Thence westerly along the southerly right-of-way of McFeron Road fifty-four feet to the beginning of a tangent curve with a radius of twenty feet concave southeasterly;

30. Thence along the arc of said curve 31.77 feet to the intersection with the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

31. Thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road to the northerly boundary of Parcel 1 of Parcel Map 1272 as filed with the County Recorder of San Diego County;

32. Thence South 89°17' East to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and seventy-five feet easterly thereof;

33. Thence southerly parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and seventy-five feet easterly thereof to the southerly boundary of the property described in a Grant Deed to Harold F. Kenton and Alice F. Kenton dated July 6, 1973 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 73-187277;

34. Thence North 89°17' West to the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

35. Thence southerly along the easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road to the intersection with a line perpendicular to the centerline of Pomerado Road at a point two hundred and twenty feet northerly of the intersection of the centerline of Pomerado Road with the centerline of Poway Road;

36. Thence westerly along said perpendicular line and the westerly extension thereof to the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

37. Thence northerly along the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road to the southwesterly corner of Lot A, Map 8558 filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

38. Thence easterly along the southerly boundary of said Lot A to the southeasterly corner of said Lot A;

39. Thence northerly along the easterly boundary of said Lot A to the northeasterly corner of said Lot A;

40. Thence North 88°45'50? West to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and fifty-one feet westerly thereof;

41. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and fifty-one feet westerly thereof to the southerly boundary of property described in Grant Deed to Forrest H. Paulson and Patricia A. Paulson and Susan J. Paulson dated October 24, 1977 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 77-455701;

42. Thence South 88°40'20? East to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and eighty feet westerly thereof;

43. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and eighty feet westerly thereof to the northerly boundary of property described in said document number 77-455701;

44. Thence North 88°34'55? West to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and five feet westerly thereof;

45. Thence northerly parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and five feet westerly thereof to the southerly boundary of a private road known as Leona Lane;

46. Thence South 88°34'55? East to the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

47. Thence northerly along said westerly right-of-way 644.32 feet to the beginning of a twenty-foot radius tangent curve concave southwesterly;

48. Thence northwesterly along the arc of said curve to the southerly right-of-way of a County road known as Ninth Street;

49. Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way of Ninth Street to the southeasterly corner of Lot 35, Tract F, Map 536 filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

50. Thence northerly along the easterly boundary of Lot 35, Tract F, Map 536, sixty feet to the northerly right-of-way of Ninth Street;

51. Thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way of Ninth Street to the southwesterly corner of property described in an Individual Grant Deed to Patrick Finn and Bridget M. Finn dated March 15, 1978 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 78-142213;

52. Thence northerly along the westerly boundary of said property described in document 78-142213 to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Ninth Street and eighty feet northerly thereof;

53. Thence easterly parallel to the centerline of Ninth Street and eighty feet northerly thereof to the easterly boundary of property described in document number 78-142213;

54. Thence southerly along said easterly boundary of property described in said document 78-142213 to the northerly right-of-way of Ninth Street;

55. Thence easterly along said northerly right-of-way of Ninth Street three hundred and thirty-four feet to the beginning of a tangent curve with a radius of twenty feet concave northwesterly;

56. Thence along the arc of said curve to the intersection with the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

57. Thence northerly along the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road to the southerly boundary of property described in a Grant Deed to Albert C. Herter, Jr. and Sandra A. Herter filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 77-534097;

58. Thence westerly along the southerly boundary of said property described in document number 77-534097 to the intersection with a line parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred ninety-five feet westerly thereof;

59. Thence northerly parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and ninety-five feet westerly thereof to the northerly boundary of Parcel 3 of Parcel Map 3046 as filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

60. Thence South 88°27'14? East to the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

61. Thence northerly along said westerly right-of-way to the northerly boundary of Parcel 1 of Parcel Map 3422 as filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

62. Thence North 89°10'53? West along said northerly boundary of Parcel 1, Parcel Map 3422, one hundred and thirty-four feet;

63. Thence North 0°22'12? West one hundred and twenty feet;

64. Thence South 89°10'53? East to the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

65. Thence northerly along said westerly right-of-way one hundred and eighty feet;

66. Thence westerly along the northerly boundary of Parcel 2 of Parcel Map 3422 to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and eighty-five feet westerly thereof;

67. Thence northerly parallel to said centerline and one hundred and eighty-five feet westerly thereof to the southerly right-of-way of a County road known as Meadowbrook Lane;

68. Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way of Meadowbrook Lane 183.25 feet;

69. Thence northerly perpendicular to said southerly right-of-way of Meadowbrook Lane ninety feet;

70. Thence easterly parallel to the centerline of Meadowbrook Lane and ninety feet northerly thereof to the easterly right-of-way of a County road known as Eisenhower Avenue;

71. Thence southerly along said easterly right-of-way of Eisenhower Avenue forty feet to the beginning of a tangent curve with the radius of twenty feet concave northeasterly;

72. Thence southeasterly along the arc of said curve to the intersection with the northerly right-of-way of Meadowbrook Lane;

73. Thence easterly along said northerly right-of-way of Meadowbrook Lane one hundred and twenty-two feet;

74. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and ninety-three feet westerly thereof to the northwesterly corner of the property described in a Grant Deed to Leroy Bunten and Barbara Jean Bunten dated May 25, 1978 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 78-322366;

75. Thence easterly along the southerly boundary of property described in a Corporation Grant Deed to George McCarthy dated March 13, 1978 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 78-330243 to the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

76. Thence northerly along the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road to the northerly boundary of Lot 4, Block 22, Map 536, Tract E filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

77. Thence westerly along said northerly boundary of Lot 4 to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and eighty feet westerly thereof;

78. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and eighty feet westerly thereof to the northerly boundary of property described in an Individual Grant Deed to Charles Vincent Shay and Gale June Shay dated September 27, 1978 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 78-532027;

79. Thence easterly along the northerly boundary of property described in document number 78-532027 to the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

80. Thence northerly along the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road to fifty feet North of the northerly boundary of Lot 39, Map 4261 filed with the Recorder of San Diego County, to the beginning of a tangent curve with a twenty-five-foot radius and concave southwesterly;

81. Thence northwesterly along the arc of said curve 39.27 feet to the intersection with the southerly right-of-way of a County road known as Holland Road;

82. Thence westerly along said southerly right-of-way of Holland Road to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and thirty-five feet westerly thereof;

83. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and thirty-five feet westerly thereof to the northerly right-of-way of Holland Road;

84. Thence easterly along said northerly right-of-way sixty feet to the beginning of a tangent curve with a twenty-five-foot radius and concave northwesterly;

85. Thence along the arc of said curve 39.27 feet to the intersection with the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

86. Thence northerly along said westerly right-of-way one thousand two hundred and twenty feet to the beginning of a tangent curve with a radius of twenty-five feet concave southwesterly;

87. Thence along the arc of said curve 39.27 feet to the intersection with the southerly right-of-way of a County road known as Glenoak Road;

88. Thence westerly along the southerly right-of-way of Glenoak Road ten feet;

89. Thence northerly perpendicular to said southerly right-of-way of Glenoak Road to the northerly right-of-way of Glenoak Road;

90. Thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way of Glenoak Road ten feet to the beginning of a tangent curve with a twenty-foot radius concave northwesterly;

91. Thence along the arc of said curve 31.25 feet to the intersection with the westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road;

92. Thence northerly along said westerly right-of-way to the northeastern corner of Map 7134, Unit No. 1 as filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

93. Thence westerly along the northern boundary of said Map 7134 to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and one feet westerly thereof;

94. Thence northerly parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and one feet westerly thereof to the southerly boundary of property described in a Grant Deed to Robert I. Sowles and Mary Jacqueline Sowles dated August 20, 1975 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 75-295173;

95. Thence North 87°22'40? West to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred fifty-one feet westerly thereof;

96. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred fifty-one feet westerly thereof to the northerly boundary of Lot 14, Map 536 filed with the Recorder of San Diego County;

97. Thence westerly along the northerly boundary of said Lot 14, Map 536 to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and two hundred and one feet westerly thereof;

98. Thence northerly parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and two hundred and one feet westerly thereof to the northerly boundary of property described in a Grant Deed to Theodore Sztechmiler and Janina Sztechmiler dated December 4, 1969 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 69-233327;

99. Thence easterly along the northerly boundary of property described in said document number 69-233327 to the intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred fifty-one feet westerly thereof;

100. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred and fifty-one feet westerly thereof to the southerly boundary of property described in Individual Quitclaim Deed to Riley D. Fleischman dated July 13, 1977 and filed with the Recorder of San Diego County as document number 77-288990;

101. Thence North 87°39'07? West to the intersection with a line parallel with the centerline of Pomerado Road and two hundred fifty-one feet westerly thereof;

102. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and two hundred fifty-one feet westerly thereof to the northerly line of South 1/2 of Southeast quarter of the Northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 14 South, Range 2 West;

103. Thence easterly along said northerly line of South 1/2 of the Southeast quarter of the Northwest quarter of Section 2 to its intersection with a line parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred fifty-one feet westerly thereof;

104. Thence northerly parallel to the centerline of Pomerado Road and one hundred fifty-one feet westerly thereof to the boundary of Rancho Bernardo;

105. Thence northeasterly along said boundary to the Point of Beginning.

The City Council shall by subsequent resolution set the dates by which all affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground utility service and by which the utility or utilities must remove all poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and make the necessary underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service within Underground Utility District No. 52 and notice of the adoption of such subsequent resolution shall be given by the City Clerk in the manner provided in PMC 12.52.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 89.253)

12.48.240 Underground Utility District No. 65.
The north-south line of the Midland Road centerline is considered a basis for due north for the purposes of the following description.

1. Starts 50 feet north and 50 feet west of the intersection of the northern Aubrey Street right-of-way line with the western Midland Road right-of-way line.

2. Heads east across Midland Road to a point 50 feet east of the eastern Midland Road right-of-way line.

3. Heads south to a point 50 feet north and 50 feet east of the intersection of the eastern Midland Road right-of-way line with the northern Adrian Street right-of-way line.

4. Heads east to a point 60 feet east and 50 feet north of the southwest corner of the APN 314-193-38 parcel off Adrian Street.

5. Heads south to a point 50 feet south of the southern Temple Street right-of-way line.

6. Heads west to a point 50 feet south and 50 feet east of the intersection of the southern Temple Street right-of-way line with the eastern Midland Road right-of-way line.

7. Heads south to a point 50 feet north and 50 feet east of the intersection of the western Midland Road right-of-way line with the northern Edgemoor Street right-of-way line.

8. Heads east to a point 50 feet north and 200 feet east of the intersection of the western Midland Road right-of-way line with the northern Edgemoor Street right-of-way line.

9. Heads south to a point 50 feet south of the southern Edgemoor Street right-of-way line.

10. Heads west to a point 50 feet west of the western Midland Road right-of-way line.

11. Heads north to a point 50 feet north and 50 feet west of the intersection of the northern Aubrey Street right-of-way line with the western Midland Road right-of-way line (same point as mentioned in item #1).

(Ord. 610 § 1, 2004)

12.48.250 Underground Utility District No. 66.
All that unincorporated territory in the County of San Diego, State of California, lying within the following described boundaries:

Beginning at the Southeast corner of Section 15, Township 14 South, Range 2 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence Northwesterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcels 316-120-08 and 316-120-19 to the Southwesterly line of said Assessor Parcel 316-120-19; thence along said Southwesterly line to the Northwesterly line of said Assessor Parcel 316-120-19; thence along said Northwesterly line to a point of intersection of the Southeasterly right-of-way of Poway Road and the Southwesterly right-of-way of Oak Knoll Road; thence Northeasterly to the Southerly point of curve of a 25.00 foot radius curve, concave Easterly on Assessor Parcel 316-120-16, said point being on the Northeasterly right-of-way of said Oak Knoll Road, 20.00 feet half width from centerline; thence along said Northeasterly right-of-way to an angle point as shown on Assessor Parcel 317-151-59; thence Northerly to a point 30.00 feet measured at right angle to the centerline of said Oak Knoll Road; thence along said Northeasterly right-of-way to the Southwest corner of Parcel 1, Parcel Map No. 16072; thence along the Westerly line of said Parcel 1 to the Northwest Corner of said Parcel 1; thence along the Northerly line of said Parcel 1 to the Northeast corner of said Parcel 1; thence along the Easterly line of said Parcel 1 to the Southeast corner of said Parcel 1, said point being on the Northerly right-of-way of Oak Knoll Road; thence along said Northerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Parcel 2, Parcel Map No. 17631; thence along the Easterly line of said Parcel 2 to the Northeast corner of said Parcel 2, said point being on the Northerly line of Parcel 1 of said Parcel Map No. 17631; thence along the Northerly line of said Parcel 1 to the Northeast corner of said Parcel 1; being a point on the Westerly line of Parcel 3 of Parcel Map No. 455; thence along said Westerly line to the Southwest corner of said Parcel 3; thence along the Southerly line of said Parcel Map No. 455 to the Westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road; thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Northerly point of curve at the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 317-151-55; thence Easterly to the Easterly point of curve of a 25.00 foot radius curve, concave Northeasterly, said 25.00 foot radius curve being the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 317-540-36, said point of curve being on the Northerly right-of-way of Oak Knoll Road; thence Easterly along said Northerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 317-540-35; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of said Assessor Parcel 317-540-35 to the Northeast corner of said Assessor Parcel 317-540-35; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of said Assessor Parcel 317-540-35 to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 317-540-37; thence continuing Westerly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 317-540-37 to the Easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road; thence Northerly along said right-of-way to the Northwest Corner of Assessor Parcel 317-540-37; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 317-540-37 to the Southerly prolongation of the Westerly line of Lot 1, Map No. 7929; thence Northerly along said Southerly prolongation to the Southwesterly corner of said Lot 1; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of said Lot 1, and the Easterly prolongation thereof to the Easterly line of Assessor Parcel No. 317-540-44; thence Southerly along said Easterly line to the Northerly right-of-way of Oak Knoll Road; thence Easterly along said Northerly right-of-way to the Westerly line of Assessor Parcel No. 317-500-11; thence Northerly along said Westerly line to the Northwest corner of said Assessor Parcel 317-500-11; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said Assessor Parcel No. 317-500-11 and an Easterly prolongation thereof to the Northeast corner of Assessor Parcel 317-500-12; thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said Assessor Parcel 317-500-12 to the Northerly right-of-way of Oak Knoll Road; thence Easterly along said Northerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel No. 317-500-13; thence on a perpendicular line to said Northerly right-of-way Southerly to the Southerly right-of-way of Oak Knoll Road; thence Westerly along said Southerly right-of-way to the Westerly line of Map No. 14479; thence Southerly along said Westerly line to the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel No. 317-501-07; thence Westerly along said Northerly line to the Northwest corner of said Assessor Parcel 317-501-07; thence Southerly along said Westerly line to the Northerly line of Map No. 4442; thence Westerly along said Northerly line to the Westerly line of said Map No. 4442; thence Northerly along said Westerly line to the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 317-550-21; thence Easterly along said Southerly line to the Westerly line of the East one-half of Section 14, Township 14 South, Range 2 West, San Bernardino Meridian, being the Southeast corner of said Assessor Parcel 317-550-21; thence Northerly along said Westerly line of the East one-half to the Southerly right-of-way of Oak Knoll Road; thence Westerly along said Southerly right-of-way to the Easterly line of Assessor Parcel 317-550-11; thence Southerly along said Easterly line to the Southerly line of said Assessor Parcel No. 317-550-11 to the Southwesterly corner of said Assessor Parcel 317-550-11; thence Northerly along said Westerly line to the Southerly right-of-way of Oak Knoll Road; thence Westerly along said Southerly right-of-way to the Westerly line of Parcel 1 of Parcel Map No. 6814; thence Southerly along said Westerly line to the Southeast corner of Parcel 2 of said Parcel Map No. 6814; thence along the Southerly line of said Parcel 2 to the Southwest corner of said Parcel 2, being on the Easterly right-of-way of Pomerado Road; thence Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Southerly point of curve of a 25.00 foot radius curve concave Southeasterly; thence on a perpendicular line to said Easterly right-of-way Westerly to the Westerly right-of-way of Pomerado Road; thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel No. 317-152-14; thence along the Southerly line of Record of Survey 3621 to the Easterly line of Section 22, Township 14 South, Range 2 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence along said Easterly line to the POINT OF BEGINNING.

(Ord. 681 § 1, 2008; Ord. 676 § 1, 2008)

12.48.260 Underground Utility District No. 67.
The following described portion of the City of Poway, San Diego County, State of California, is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 67 of the City of Poway:

Beginning at the Southeast corner of Parcel 4, Parcel Map No. 10915; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of said Parcel 4 to the Northwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-06; thence Southerly along the Westerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-06 to the Southwest corner thereof; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-06 to the Northwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-18 (said point also being the Northeast corner of Parcel 2, Parcel Map No. 13884); thence Southerly along the Westerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-18 to the Southwest corner thereof (said point also being the Southeast corner of Parcel 2, Parcel Map No. 13884); thence Easterly along the Southerly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-011-18 to the Northwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-10 (said point also being the Northeast corner of Parcel 3, Parcel Map No. 13884); thence Southerly along the Westerly line said Assessor Parcel 321-011-10 to the Southwest corner thereof (said point also being the Southeast corner of Parcel 3 of Parcel Map No. 13884); thence Easterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-10 to a point on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road, said point also being the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-10; thence retracing Westerly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-10 to the Northeast corner of Lot 2, Espola Verde Map No. 7570, said point being on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Lot 1 of Espola Verde Map No. 7570, said point being on the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-020-40; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-020-40 to the Northeast corner thereof (said point being on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road); thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-020-40, said point being on the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-020-69; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-020-69 to the Northeast corner thereof (said point being on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road); thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-020-69; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-020-69 to the Northwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-020-64; thence Southerly along the Westerly lines of Assessor Parcels 321-020-64, 66, 55 and 56 to the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-020-56; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-020-56 to the Southeast corner thereof, said point being on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-020-41; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-020-41 to the Northeast corner of Parcel “A” of City of Poway Tract Map No. 87-08, said point being on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Southeast corner of said Parcel “A”; thence Easterly, leaving said Westerly right-of-way, perpendicular to said Westerly right-of-way, to a point on the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Northwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-241-01; thence Easterly, leaving said right of way line, along the Northerly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-241-01 to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-210-50; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of Assessor Parcel 321-210-50 to the Northeast corner thereof; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-210-50 to the Northwest corner thereof, said point being on the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Northwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-210-45; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-210-45 to the Northeast corner thereof; thence leaving said Northerly line Northwesterly to the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-210-31; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-210-31 to the Southwest corner thereof, said point being on the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Northerly along the said Easterly right-of-way to the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-210-33; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-210-33 to the Southeast corner thereof; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-210-33 to the Northeast corner thereof; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-210-33 to the Northwest corner thereof, said point being on the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-210-40; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-210-40 to the Southeast corner thereof; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-210-40 to the Northeast corner thereof; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of said Assessor Parcel 321-210-40 to the Northwest corner thereof, said point being on the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-24; thence continuing Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to a point on said Easterly right-of-way which bears approximately 107’ Northwesterly from the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-24; thence Westerly, leaving said Easterly right-of-way and perpendicular to said Easterly right-of-way, to a point on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the POINT OF BEGINNING.

(Ord. 806 § 1, 2017)

12.48.270 Underground Utility District No. 68.
The following described portion of the City of Poway, San Diego County, State of California, is declared to be Underground Utility District No. 68 of the City of Poway:

Beginning at the Southeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-24; thence Northerly along the Easterly lines of Assessor Parcels 321-011-24, 321-011-13, 321-011-14 and 321-011-15 to the Northeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-15; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-15 to the Northwest corner thereof, said point being on the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-030-71; thence leaving said right-of-way Easterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-030-71 to the Southeast corner thereof; thence along the Easterly line of Assessor Parcel 321-030-71 Northwesterly along a curve concave to the East to the Northeast corner thereof, said point being on the Southerly right-of-way of High Valley Road; thence Westerly along said Southerly right-of-way to the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-012-52; thence leaving said right-of-way Northeasterly along the Southeasterly line of Assessor Parcel 321-012-52 to the Northeast corner thereof; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-012-52 to the Northwest corner thereof, said point being on the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 278-450-29; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 278-450-29 to the Southeast corner thereof; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of Assessor Parcel 278-450-29 to the Northeast corner thereof; thence Westerly and Northwesterly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 278-450-29 to the Northwest corner thereof, said point being on the Easterly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Southerly along said Easterly right-of-way to the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 278-450-29; thence Westerly to the Northeast corner of Assessor Parcel 278-450-24, said point being on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Northeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-012-50; thence leaving said right-of-way Westerly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-012-50 to the Northwest corner of thereof; thence Southerly along the Westerly lines of Assessor Parcels 321-012-50, 321-012-49 and 321-012-48 to the Southwest corner of Assessor Parcel 321-012-48; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-012-48 to the Southeast corner thereof, said point being on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Southerly along said Westerly right-of-way to the Northeast corner of Assessor Parcel 321-011-41; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-41 to the Northwest corner thereof; thence Southerly along the Westerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-41 to the Southwest corner thereof; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of Assessor Parcel 321-011-41 to the Southeast corner thereof, said point being on the Westerly right-of-way of Espola Road; thence Easterly to the POINT OF BEGINNING.

(Ord. 807 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 12.52
BRIDGE CROSSINGS AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARES – CONSTRUCTION FEES
Sections:

12.52.010    Purpose.

12.52.020    Definitions.

12.52.030    Application of chapter.

12.52.040    Areas of benefit.

12.52.050    Public hearing.

12.52.060    Protest and hearing.

12.52.070    Resumption of hearing.

12.52.080    Notice.

12.52.090    Payment of fees.

12.52.100    Contracts for construction.

12.52.110    Payment.

12.52.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to make provision for bridge and/or major thoroughfare construction fees as a condition of approval of issuing a building permit pursuant to a subdivision map or development review where such fees are to be collected for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges and/or major thoroughfares as provided by Section 66484 of the Government Code. (Ord. 358 § 1, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.101)

12.52.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following words are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Bridge” means any portion of a City road which crosses a stream at an elevation higher than the bed of the stream on a structure with a single or multiple span with a total length of 20 feet or more.

B. “Bridge crossing” means any location on a stream at which a bridge is contemplated to be constructed pursuant to the flood-control provisions of the circulation element of the City’s general plan.

C. “Bridge facility” means a bridge or an addition or improvement to a bridge which increases its traffic-carrying capacity.

D. “Construction” means design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction.

E. “Land developer” means any person who has applied for a building permit which affects property any portion of which is located within an area of benefit which has been established pursuant to this chapter.

F. “Major thoroughfare” means any roadway, other than a freeway shown on the circulation element of the City’s general plan.

G. “Reconstruction” means any construction, improvement or widening of an existing road which is necessary to carry projected traffic and includes design, right-of-way acquisition and contract administration.

H. “Stream” means any body of water or area subject to periodic inundation for which a bridge crossing is required pursuant to the flood-control provisions of this circulation element of the City’s general plan.

I. “Subdivider” means any person who submits for approval a final subdivision map which affects property any portion of which is located within an area of benefit which has been established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.102)

12.52.030 Application of chapter.
This chapter provides an alternative system of doing the work authorized by this chapter and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect any other provisions of this code. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.103)

12.52.040 Areas of benefit.
After holding a hearing pursuant to this chapter, the City Council may establish an area of benefit and may impose a reasonable fee on property within the area which, in the opinion of the City Council, is benefitted by the construction of the bridge facility and/ or major thoroughfare. The area of benefit may include land or improvements in addition to the land or improvements which are the subject of a subdivision map or building permit application considered at such proceeding. The fee collected shall be secured or paid to the City in accordance with PMC 12.52.090 at the time of issuance of a building permit pursuant to approval of any final subdivision map or development review for such property. (Ord. 358 § 1, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.104)

12.52.050 Public hearing.
A. At any public hearing held pursuant to this chapter, the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of fee apportionment based on estimated traffic generation in the next 20 years shall be established.

B. A description of the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment established at the hearing shall be incorporated in a City Council resolution, a certified copy of which shall be recorded by the City Council with the County Recorder.

C. Such apportioned fees shall be payable as a condition of issuance of a building permit pursuant to approval of a final subdivision map or development review for such property or portions thereof.

D. The City Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether a bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare is required and to determine the area of benefit of such bridge and/or major thoroughfare when a developer proposes to develop land in a location substantially isolated by a stream or served by a major thoroughfare.

E. Prior to establishing an area of benefit, the City Council shall adopt a resolution of intention to establish such area and hold a public hearing thereon. The City Clerk shall notify owners of property within the proposed area of the time and place of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the date thereof.

F. Such hearings shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearings persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive.

G. At such public hearing, the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of fee apportionment based on estimated traffic generation in the next 20 years shall be established.

H. The areas of benefit may include land or improvements in addition to the land or improvements which are the subject of a subdivision map or development review application considered at such proceedings. (Ord. 358 § 1, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.105)

12.52.060 Protest and hearing.
A. At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to the proposed bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare, any owner of property subject to fees for the work may make protests against the proposed bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare or against the extent of the area of benefit or against both of them. Such protests must be in writing and must contain a description of the property in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify the same and if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence that such signers are the owners of such property. All such protests shall be delivered to the City Clerk and no other protests or objections shall be considered. Any protests may be withdrawn by the owners making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the conclusion of a public hearing.

B. If there is a written request filed with the City Clerk by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to be benefitted, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the City Clerk shall not, for one year from the filing of the written protests, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this chapter.

C. If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this chapter to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the City Council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement or acquisition so protested against. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City Council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of a portion of the improvement so protested against if it finds by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of a majority of the property within the area of benefit are in favor of going forward with such portion of the improvement or acquisition. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.106)

12.52.070 Resumption of hearing.
Whenever in any proceeding under this chapter a time and place for any hearing by the legislative body is fixed and, from any cause, the hearing is not then and there held or regularly adjourned to a time and place fixed, the power of the legislative body in the premises shall not thereby be divested or lost, but the legislative body may proceed anew to fix a time and place for the hearing, and cause notice thereof to be given by publication by at least one insertion in a daily, semiweekly or weekly newspaper, such publication to be at least five days before the date of the hearing, and thereupon the legislative body shall have power to act as in the first instance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.107)

12.52.080 Notice.
Notice of any hearing held pursuant to this chapter shall be given in accordance with Section 65905 of the Government Code. In addition to the requirements of Section 65905 of the Government Code, such notice shall contain preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost and method of fee apportionment. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.108)

12.52.090 Payment of fees.
A. No building permit shall be issued if any portion of the property which is the subject of a subdivision map or development review is located in an area of benefit established pursuant to this chapter unless there has first been paid the fee established and apportioned to said property pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing the bridge and/or major thoroughfare facilities. In the case of residential development, the fee may be deferred by posting of a security satisfactory to the City Attorney.

B. Nothing in this chapter is intended to relieve a subdivider or applicant for a building permit from the requirements imposed under other provisions of this code to dedicate and improve roads as a condition of approval of a tentative map or building permit.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required:

1. Unless for major thoroughfares such major thoroughfares are in addition to or a reconstruction of any existing or planned major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the area of benefit; and

2. For bridge facilities unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit.

D. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is intended to be constructed at a bridge crossing which is identified as such on the flood-control provisions of the circulation element of the City’s general plan or unless the planned major thoroughfare is intended to be constructed on a route shown on the circulation element of the City’s general plan; provided such provisions were adopted not less than 30 days prior to the filing of the subdivision map or application for building permit.

E. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required for the following:

1. The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided, however, that:

a. The construction of an addition to and/or reconstruction of a single-family home results in less than an additional 750 square feet of habitable space;

b. Construction of an addition to and/or reconstruction of a single-family home that has, at some time in the past, paid a similar fee for mitigation of traffic impact; or

c. Remodeling, alterations or additions to other residential and all nonresidential buildings of less than 10,000 square feet or 25 percent of the existing square footage whichever is more restrictive; or

d. If the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such as to change its classification of occupancy as defined by Section 501 of the Uniform Building Code;

2. The following accessory buildings and structures:

a. Private garages,

b. Children’s playhouses,

c. Radio and television receiving antennas,

d. Windmills,

e. Silos,

f. Tank houses,

g. Shops,

h. Barns,

i. Coops, and

j. Other uninhabitable buildings which are accessory to one-family dwellings;

k. Outdoor advertising;

l. Agricultural buildings;

m. Oil wells.

F. If the fee is secured for a residential project prior to building permit issuance then the fee shall be paid prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy at the rate in effect at the time of final payment.

G. Security required by this chapter shall be in that form authorized by the Subdivision Map Act.

H. Fees deferred by posting of security must be paid prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 358 § 1, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.109)

12.52.100 Contracts for construction.
Whenever, pursuant to this chapter a subdivider or land developer is required to pay a fee for the construction of a bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare as a condition precedent to the acceptance of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit and the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare is dedicated to the public, the City Council may contract with the subdivider or land developer for the construction of the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare, and reimburse the subdivider or land developer for the cost of constructing the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.110)

12.52.110 Payment.
A. Consideration in lieu of the payment of fees may be accepted.

B. Fees shall be deposited in a planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare fund. A separate fund shall be established for each area of benefit. Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares serving the area to be benefitted and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected or to reimburse the City for the cost of constructing the bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares.

C. The City may advance money from its general fund or road fund to pay the cost of constructing the bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares and may reimburse the general fund or road fund for such advances from planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfares funds established to finance the construction of such bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares.

D. The City may incur an indebtedness for the construction of bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares; provided, that the sole security for repayment of such indebtedness shall be moneys in planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare funds.

E. The City may contract with the subdivider or land developer for the construction of the bridge and/or major thoroughfare and reimburse the subdivider or land developer for the cost of constructing the facility.

F. The City may require or accept the dedication and/or improvement of right-of-way along a major thoroughfare and may reduce the fees assessed against that property by an amount equal to the cost of that right-of-way and improvements as determined by the Director of Public Services if the value of the right-of-way or improvements were included in the calculation of the fee.

G. No property shall be assessed a fee under this chapter for both a final subdivision and a building permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 77.111)

Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapters:

13.03    Sewer Service Charges

13.04    Sewer Regulations

13.05    Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Program

13.08    Reserved Sewerage Capacity

13.09    Stormwater Management and Discharge Control

13.10    Water Reclamation

13.11    Water Service

13.12    Cemeteries

13.14    Cross-Connection Control

13.15    Street Lighting

13.16    Municipal Solar Utility

13.20    Airports

13.24    Reimbursement for Permanent Improvements

13.25    Repealed

Chapter 13.03
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
Sections:

13.03.010    Sewer service charges – Set by resolution.

13.03.010 Sewer service charges – Set by resolution.
Bimonthly sewer service charges for residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional customers shall be established by resolution as may be adopted by the City Council from time to time, to be imposed on the sewer services provided as set forth in the resolution establishing such charges. (Ord. 784 § 3, 2016)

Chapter 13.04
SEWER REGULATIONS
Sections:

13.04.010    Title.

13.04.020    Purpose of rules and regulations.

13.04.030    Grammatical interpretation.

13.04.040    Sewer system.

13.04.050    Sewer service and connection conditions.

13.04.060    Tampering with City property.

13.04.080    Definitions.

13.04.090    Notice to customers.

13.04.100    Application for sewer connections and/or monthly sewer service – Applicant responsibilities.

13.04.140    Use of plumbing interceptors.

13.04.150    Water conservation devices.

13.04.160    Right to inspect.

13.04.170    Unlawful to make sewer connection without payment of fee.

13.04.180    Enforcement measures in case of delinquency.

13.04.190    Construction of sewer lateral.

13.04.195    Sewer extension line charge.

13.04.200    Payment of sewer connection fees.

13.04.205    Alternative method of collecting sewer connection fees for high volume sewer users.

13.04.210    Payment of sewer service charges.

13.04.220    Responsible party for payment of sewer service charge.

13.04.230    Changes in use resulting in increased rates, sewer service charges and/or connection fees.

13.04.240    Violation – Penalty.

13.04.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as “the City of Poway sewer ordinance.” (Ord. 107 § 3.1, 1983)

13.04.020 Purpose of rules and regulations.
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to set forth the terms and conditions under which the City will authorize connections and provide sewer service to customers. (Ord. 107 § 2, 1983)

13.04.030 Grammatical interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter:

A. All words used in the present tense shall include the future;

B. All words in the plural number shall include the singular number; and

C. All words in the singular number shall include the plural number. (Ord. 107 § 3.2, 1983)

13.04.040 Sewer system.
The City will furnish a system, works and undertakings used for and useful for collection of domestic and industrial sewage, including all parts of the enterprises, all appurtenances to it, and lands, easements, rights in land, contract rights, franchises and other sewage collection facilities and equipment. (Ord. 107 § 3.3, 1983)

13.04.050 Sewer service and connection conditions.
All applicants for sewer service or sewer connections shall be required to accept such conditions of connection and service as may be provided by the City. (Ord. 107 § 3.5, 1983)

13.04.060 Tampering with City property.
No one except an employee or representative of the City shall at any time in any manner operate the valves, motors, gates, machinery, sewage treatment plant, sewer manholes, or siphons of the City system or interfere with sewer lines or other parts of the sewer system. (Ord. 107 § 3.6, 1983)

13.04.080 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

A. “Applicant” means any person or group of persons who applies for sewer service.

B. “City service lateral” means the pipe between the City’s main or collection line and the customer’s service connection at the edge of the street, easement or property line.

C. “Collector line” means the City’s pipeline to which the City’s service laterals are connected.

D. “Cost” means the cost of labor, material, transportation, supervision, engineering and all other necessary overhead expenses.

E. “Customer” means any person, firm, association, corporation or government agency served or entitled to be served sewer service by the City for compensation.

F. “Developer” means any person or group of persons, including corporations or public entities, who request the City to extend its sewer facilities.

G. “High volume sewer and users” means any applicant that generates more than 25,000 gallons per day ADF (average daily flow).

H. “Owner” means the person owning the fee, or the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the County Recorder’s office, or the person in possession of the property or buildings under claims of, or exercising acts of ownership over same for himself, or as executor, administrator, guardian or trustee of owner.

I. “Regular sewer service” means sewer service and facilities rendered for normal domestic and industrial or commercial purposes on a permanent basis and the sewer system available therefor.

J. “Sewer connection” means the connection of any domestic, commercial or industrial sewer lines to the City’s system after the payment of established fees and charges and City’s approval.

K. “Sewer Department” means the administrative and operations facilities of the City performing functions to the City’s sewer service, together with the City Manager, City Attorney, City Engineer and other duly authorized City representatives.

L. “Trunk line” means a main sewer line to which many collection lines are connected and which serves the primary purpose of transporting sewage from collection lines to the disposal. (Ord. 473, 1997; Ord. 107 § 4, 1983)

13.04.090 Notice to customers.
Notices from the City to a customer will normally be given in writing and either delivered or mailed to the customer at the customer’s last known address. However, in emergencies the City may notify the customer either by telephone or messenger. Notice from the customer to the City may be given by the customer, or the customer’s authorized representative in writing to the City Clerk. (Ord. 107 § 5, 1983)

13.04.100 Application for sewer connections and/or monthly sewer service – Applicant responsibilities.
A. Applications. Applications for sewer connections and/or sewer service may be made at the City Hall on prescribed forms provided by the City.

B. Undertaking of Applicant. Application approved for sewer service and/or sewer connections will signify the applicant’s willingness and intention to comply with all ordinances and regulations relating to sewer service and/or connections and to make payment for such sewer service fees, connection fees and inspection fees, as well as other pertinent contingent fees set forth by resolution and by other applicable rules and regulations. (Ord. 107 § 6, 1983)

13.04.140 Use of plumbing interceptors.
Except in the case of private dwelling units, the City may order any person connecting to the sewer system to install interceptors for grease, oil, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located so as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be installed and maintained by the owner at his expense and shall be kept in good and continuous operation at all times. (Ord. 107 § 10, 1983)

13.04.150 Water conservation devices.
It is the intent of this chapter to promote and facilitate a policy of water conservation and reclamation. New construction units, residential or commercial will not be permitted to connect to the sewer system unless water saver type toilet fixtures are utilized in the dwelling or commercial buildings. Water saver toilets are defined as those specifically designed and manufactured so as to utilize no more than three and three-quarters gallons of water per flush. In addition, installation of water saver faucets and shower heads is required. (Ord. 107 § 11, 1983)

13.04.160 Right to inspect.
The officers, employees and agents of the City shall have the right to enter upon any premises within the City to inspect and determine if this chapter is being complied with. (Ord. 107 § 12, 1983)

13.04.170 Unlawful to make sewer connection without payment of fee.
A. No person shall connect to the City’s sewer system without first executing an application for sewer connection and obtaining the approval of the City Manager authorizing such connection. Approval of the application shall be based on the applicant’s ability to deliver sewage to points and elevations designated by the City and payment of all fees and charges. All applicants for new connections must provide evidence that the property or properties to be served are within the boundaries of the City or shall have submitted a request and “Consent to Annexation” to the City and paid the prescribed fees and charges for such annexation prior to approval of such annexation and complied with all local and State laws related to annexations.

B. No person shall discharge or allow the discharge of or dump sewage or other waste matter into the City’s sewer system except in compliance with the terms of this chapter and payment of the fees and charges established by resolution pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 107 § 13, 1983)

13.04.180 Enforcement measures in case of delinquency.
When any fee or charge imposed by this chapter becomes delinquent, the enforcement agents are authorized to take any or all of the following actions:

A. Any steps authorized by law to collect fees and charges;

B. Disconnect the premises from the City’s sewer system; prior to such disconnection, notice of such delinquency shall be given to the occupant of the premises by United States mail with return receipt, or by posting such notice on the premises; the occupant will be given the opportunity for informal hearing with the City Manager prior to said disconnection, and if requested, within five days thereafter appeal to the City Council; concurrently with the disconnect, a copy of the City’s notice to occupant will be furnished to the regional office of the County Health Department. When a premises has been disconnected, it shall not be reconnected until all delinquent fees and charges have been paid, together with a charge for such disconnection and reconnection, as established by resolution of the City Council;

C. Discontinuance of water services. (Ord. 107 § 14, 1983)

13.04.190 Construction of sewer lateral.
A. Obligation of Applicant. The expense of construction of the applicant’s sewer line and the City’s lateral from the property line to the City main or collection system, including, but not limited to, City permits, excavation, pipe, wyes, tees, backfill, surface restoration and construction of No. 3 cleanout box and property line cleanout, is the responsibility of and shall be borne entirely by the applicant.

B. General Rule. Sewer laterals shall be installed on a main fronting the parcel to be served. In the case of a parcel not fronting an existing main, the sewer lateral may be installed on an existing main that does not front the parcel if the City Engineer determines that the nonfronting main is the main from which the parcel should ultimately receive regular service; and provided, that all necessary easements have been acquired.

C. Temporary Service. In the case of a parcel not fronting an existing main, where the City Engineer has determined that the main from which the parcel should ultimately receive regular service does not currently exist but could be built in the future, an application for temporary service from an existing main not fronting the parcel may be approved at the discretion of the Director of Development Services.

As a condition of receiving temporary service from a main not fronting the parcel, the owner of the parcel, in addition to payment of all fees and charges applicable to regular service, shall pay all fees associated with temporary service, and shall execute and acknowledge a recorded agreement providing for:

1. Installation and maintenance of a pipeline and other required facilities from the temporary lateral connection to the owner’s parcel and acquisition of any required easements, all at owner’s expense;

2. Discontinuance of temporary service and application for regular service at an appropriate point closer to the owner’s parcel upon installation of a main that the City Engineer determines is the main from which the parcel should ultimately receive regular service;

3. Payment by the owner of the entire cost of relocation and any applicable connection charges, including a pro rata share of the cost of installation of such main and any service area charge, the total of which shall not be less than the City’s then-established connection fee and service area charge to others for such regular service; and

4. Such other matters as the City may reasonably require. (Ord. 772 § 3, 2014)

13.04.195 Sewer extension line charge.
At the time of application for connection to a sewer main installed by the City and funded by the sewer fund after the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, the applicant shall pay a sewer extension line charge. The line charge shall be $5,600 per parcel subject to revision from time to time by resolution of the City Council as necessary to reflect current construction cost. The charge is separate and above all other connection charges. Connections subject to the sewer extension line charge are exempt from the sewer line charge. The charge shall be collected at building permit issuance for new construction or application to construct a sewer lateral for existing dwellings. (Ord. 428 § 1, 1994)

13.04.200 Payment of sewer connection fees.
Connection fees and inspection fees are due and payable at the time of application for connection. The applicants for connection to an established home may pay the connection fee on an installment plan of 25 percent down at the time of application with the balance in monthly installments calculated to pay the balance in full within 12 months. This provision is intended for hardship cases when converting from septic system to public sewer. Evidence of the payment and approval of connection to a public sewer must be presented before issuing a building permit. The City will provide a copy of the approved sewer connection application for this purpose when all fees and charges have been paid. (Ord. 107 § 16, 1983)

13.04.205 Alternative method of collecting sewer connection fees for high volume sewer users.
A. Once an applicant is declared a “high volume sewer user” by generating more than 25,000 gallons per day, then they will be eligible to lease their required sewer capacity. The lease payments will be collected on their bimonthly sewer bill based on the average daily flow calculated for the bimonthly period.

An applicant will have the option of either paying all of their connection fees prior to building permit issuance or participating in the lease rate. Participating in the lease program will provide sewer capacity as needed; however, the property owner would obtain no ownership in sewer capacity and could not be transferred in the future other than the minimum purchased capacity.

B. A high volume user applicant will be required to construct a sewer discharge metering facility upon which their bimonthly sewer rate and connection fee lease rate will be based.

If any portion of this section should be determined to be unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this section shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 473, 1997)

13.04.210 Payment of sewer service charges.
A. The sewer service charges shall be set by resolution of the City Council and, except for schools, will be collected on the bimonthly water bill if water service is provided. Schools and those customers not receiving water service will be billed annually in advance during the month of July for the entire year.

B. Bills for periods of service for 30 days or less shall be one-half of the bimonthly charge. For periods greater than 30 days, the bill shall be equal to the full bimonthly charge.

C. Bills are due and payable on presentation and are delinquent if unpaid within 30 days of the date mailed. A delinquency charge shall be added to the service charge for all payments not received within 30 days of the date the bill was mailed to the customer. The amount or rate of the delinquency charge shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

D. The City may discontinue service as provided in PMC 13.04.180 for failure to pay the service charge or delinquency charge. (Ord. 107 § 17, 1983)

13.04.220 Responsible party for payment of sewer service charge.
A. Bimonthly Service Charge. The party responsible for payment of the bimonthly service charge shall be the party who is being billed for water service. However, the record owner of the property shall ultimately be responsible for payments of the sewer service charges. Any agreement between landlords and tenants to the contrary will not relieve the landlord or record owner of the property of the responsibility for payment of the sewer service charges to the City.

B. Annual Service Charge. The record owner of the property shall be responsible for payment of the annual service charge. Any agreement between landlords and tenants to the contrary will not relieve the landlord or record owner of the property of the responsibility for payment of the sewer service charges to the City. (Ord. 107 § 18, 1983)

13.04.230 Changes in use resulting in increased rates, sewer service charges and/or connection fees.
Whenever the use of any premises previously connected to the City’s system is changed so that there is a fee applicable to such premises different from that which existed at time original application was made, there shall immediately become due, owing and payable to the City the increase in fees applicable, and in addition thereto the increased rate for sewer service charges applicable to the premises for the remainder of the month in which the change is made, and all past sewer service charges shall be paid to the current time of the next billing period or July 1st following. The charges imposed by this regulation shall become delinquent 60 days following the date it becomes due. (Ord. 107 § 19, 1983)

13.04.240 Violation – Penalty.
For the failure of a customer to comply with all or any part of this chapter and any ordinance, resolution or order of the City pertaining to the delivery of public services in addition to any other penalty or remedy provided by law, the City may discontinue sewer service. (Ord. 107 § 3.7, 1983)

Chapter 13.05
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT PROGRAM
Sections:

13.05.010    Title.

13.05.020    Purpose.

13.05.030    Scope.

13.05.040    Liquid waste disposal policy.

13.05.050    Definitions.

13.05.060    Responsibility for administration.

13.05.070    Penalty for violations.

13.05.080    Notice and appeal procedures.

13.05.090    Time limits.

13.05.100    Inspection and sampling.

13.05.110    Recording of fees and charges.

13.05.120    Estimated quantities and values.

13.05.130    Approval of plans and issuance of permits.

13.05.140    Malicious damage to City’s facilities.

13.05.150    Waste disposal – Permit required.

13.05.160    Permit for industrial wastewater discharge.

13.05.170    Discharge reports.

13.05.180    Permit application.

13.05.190    Permit conditions.

13.05.200    Duration of industrial wastewater discharge permits.

13.05.210    Transfer of an industrial wastewater discharge permit or changed use.

13.05.220    Revocation of industrial wastewater discharge permit.

13.05.230    Industrial wastewater discharge permit fee.

13.05.235    Collection of monitoring fees.

13.05.240    Sampling, self-monitoring, and flows.

13.05.250    Pretreatment.

13.05.260    Protection from accidental discharge.

13.05.270    Prohibited discharges.

13.05.280    Limitations on the use of garbage grinders.

13.05.300    Limitations on point of discharge.

13.05.310    Availability of the City’s wastewater facilities.

13.05.320    Discrepancies between actual and reported industrial wastewater discharge permit quantities.

13.05.330    Records retention.

13.05.340    Validity.

13.05.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Poway Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Ordinance.” (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum beneficial public use of the City’s wastewater system through adequate regulation of sewer construction, sewer use, and industrial wastewater discharge, to provide for equitable distribution of the City’s costs, and to provide procedures for complying with wastewater discharge requirements placed upon the City by other regulatory bodies. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.030 Scope.
This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth herein and the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all waste into the City’s wastewater system.

This chapter provides for the regulation of sewer construction in areas within the City’s boundaries, the quantity and quality of discharged wastes, the degree of waste pretreatment required, the setting of waste discharge fees to provide for equitable distribution of costs, the issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharge and of other miscellaneous permits, and the establishment of penalties for violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.040 Liquid waste disposal policy.
The City builds and operates public sewers and wastewater facilities serving homes, industries, and commercial establishments. The following policies apply to wastewater discharges within the City’s boundaries and to other discharges that are tributary to the City’s wastewater facilities.

Generally, wastewater originating within the City’s boundaries will be removed by the City’s wastewater system provided the wastewater will not (1) damage structures, (2) create nuisances such as odors, (3) menace public health, (4) impose unreasonable collection, treatment, or disposal costs on the City, (5) interfere with wastewater treatment processes, (6) exceed quality requirements set by regulatory government agencies, or (7) detrimentally affect the local environment.

The City is committed to a policy of wastewater renovation and reuse in order to provide an alternate source of water supply and to reduce overall costs of wastewater treatment and disposal. The renovation of wastewater through secondary and tertiary wastewater treatment processes may necessitate more stringent quality requirements on industrial wastewater dischargers than those required by other regulatory agencies.

To comply with stated policies of the Federal government and to permit the City to meet increasingly higher standards, provisions are made in this chapter for the regulation of industrial wastewater discharges. This chapter establishes quantity and quality limitations on industrial wastewater discharges. Methods of cost recovery from industrial wastewater dischargers where the discharges impose inequitable collection, treatment, or disposal costs on the City will be established by a resolution of the City Council.

Recovery and reuse procedures established by industrial wastewater dischargers themselves to meet the limitations set on their discharges will be preferred by the City over those procedures designed solely to meet wastewater discharge limitations. Methods providing for beneficial reuse of otherwise wasted resources shall be the approved method of industrial wastewater treatment wherever feasible.

Optimum use of the City’s wastewater facilities may require that certain industrial wastewaters be discharged during periods of low flow in the City’s wastewater system. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.050 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms relating to water and wastewater shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

The meaning of other various terms as used in this chapter shall be as follows:

A. “Applicant” means a person, or group of persons, who applies for sewer service.

B. “Director of Public Services” means the department head of the Public Services Department of the City of Poway or his/her designee.

C. “Discharger” means any person that discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer.

D. “Domestic wastewater” means the liquid and waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes in a dwelling unit, said wastes being of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into a public sewer or by means of a private disposal system.

E. “Industrial wastewater” means all wastewater, excluding domestic wastewater, and shall include all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, service, agricultural, or other operation. These may also include wastes of human origin similar to domestic wastewater.

F. “Mass emission rate” means the weight of material discharged to a public sewer during a given time interval.

G. “Person” means any individual, partnership, entity, firm, association, corporation, or public agency including the State of California and the United States of America.

H. “Public sewer” means a sewer owned and operated by the City of Poway.

I. “Standard methods” means procedures described in the current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

J. “Suspended solids” means any insoluble material contained as a component of wastewater and capable of separation from the liquid portion of said wastewater by laboratory filtration as determined by the appropriate testing procedure and standard methods.

K. “Treatment facilities” means treatment works actually used in the treatment of wastewater or for the reclamation of wastewater.

L. “Waste” means wastewater and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature, prior to and for the purpose of disposal.

M. “Wastewater” means waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer.

N. “Wastewater constituents and characteristics” means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, or radiological parameters, including volume, flow rate, and such other parameters that define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater.

O. “Wastewater system or facilities” means any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.060 Responsibility for administration.
The Director of Public Services shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director of Public Services may be delegated by the Director of Public Services to persons in the employ of the City of Poway or any other duly authorized representative, agent, or agency.

The Director of Public Services shall make and enforce regulations necessary to the administration of this chapter. The Director may amend such regulations from time to time as conditions require. These regulations shall be consistent with the general policy established herein by the City Council. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.070 Penalty for violations.
A. Public Nuisance. Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the Director of Public Services, as authorized by this chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Director of Public Services. Any person creating such a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. Injunction. Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of the provisions of this chapter or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance, the Director of Public Services may cause the City to seek a petition to the Superior Court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of such discharge.

C. Costs of Damage. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the City’s facilities shall become liable to the City for all expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation or discharge.

D. Falsifying of Information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, record, report, plan, or other document filed with the Director of Public Services or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

E. Termination of Service. The City may revoke any industrial wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to PMC 13.05.160 or terminate or cause to be terminated any wastewater service to any premises if a violation of any provision of this chapter is found to exist or if a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance. This provision is in addition to other statutes or rules authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment.

When deemed necessary by the Director of Public Services, for the continuing preservation of public health or safety or for the protection of public or private property, the Director may suspend sewer service to any person or persons using the wastewater system in a manner or way to endanger the public health or safety of public or private property. In suspending service, the Director may sever all pertinent connections to the public sewer. If such endangerment shall be imminent, then the Director of Public Services may act immediately to suspend sewer service without notice or warning to said person or persons.

F. Civil Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or permit condition, or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation or national pretreatment standard, shall be liable civilly for a penalty not to exceed $300.00 for each day in which such violation occurs.

G. Criminal Penalties. Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this chapter or permit condition or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation or national pretreatment standard shall be liable, upon conviction, for a sum not to exceed $10,000 for each day in which such violation occurs, or for imprisonment for not more than one year or both. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.080 Notice and appeal procedures.
Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required to be given by the Director of Public Services under this chapter shall be in writing and served in person or by registered or certified mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address known to the Director of Public Services. Where the address is unknown, service may be made upon the owner of record of the property involved.

Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service.

Any person found to be violating any provision of the chapter shall be served by the Director of Public Services with written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days after the date of the notice, unless a shorter time is necessary due to the nature of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Director of Public Services. If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, or a satisfactory correction plan submitted within the specified time, the Director of Public Services may order any person to show cause before the Director of Public Services why enforcement action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the person specifying the time and place of a hearing, the reason why the action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action. The Director of Public Services may propose any enforcement action reasonably necessary to abate the violation. Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the Director of Public Services shall determine the appropriate enforcement action which should be taken, if any. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.090 Time limits.
Any time limit provided in any written notice or in any provision of this chapter may be extended only by a written directive of the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.100 Inspection and sampling.
Adequate identification shall be provided by the Director of Public Services for all inspectors and other authorized personnel and those persons shall identify themselves when entering any property for inspection purposes or when inspecting the work of any contractor.

Inspection and sampling of every facility that is involved directly or indirectly with the discharge of wastewater to the City’s wastewater system may be made by the Director of Public Services as he deems necessary. These facilities shall include but not be limited to sewers, wastewater pumping stations, pollution control plants, all industrial processes, food establishment facilities or other facilities which discharge grease and oil at levels which cause blockages to the sewer, industrial wastewater generation, conveyance and pretreatment facilities, and all similar wastewater facilities. Inspections may be made to determine that such facilities are maintained and operated properly and are adequate to meet the provisions of this chapter.

Access to all of the above facilities or to other facilities directly or indirectly connected to the City’s wastewater system shall be given to authorized personnel of the City at all reasonable times including those occasioned by emergency conditions. Any permanent or temporary obstruction to easy access to the wastewater facility to be inspected shall promptly be removed by the facility user or owner at the written or verbal request of the Director of Public Services and shall not be replaced.

No person shall interfere with, delay, resist, or refuse entrance to an authorized City inspector attempting to inspect any wastewater generation, conveyance, or treatment facility connected directly or indirectly to the City’s wastewater system.

The City, through its representative or inspectors, shall have the right to inspect and copy pertinent records relating to a permittee’s wastewater discharge or pretreatment operations including inventories, chemical usage, materials sources, hazardous materials manifests and disposal records, treatment and operations log books and materials invoices. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.110 Recording of fees and charges.
The Director of Public Services shall keep a permanent and accurate account of all fees and charges received under this chapter, giving the names and addresses of the persons on whose account the fees and charges were paid, the date and amount thereof, and the purpose for which charges were paid. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.120 Estimated quantities and values.
Unless otherwise provided herein, whenever the fees and charges required by this chapter are based on estimated values or estimated quantities, the Director of Public Services shall make such determinations in accordance with established estimating practices. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.130 Approval of plans and issuance of permits.
The Director of Public Services will approve plans for wastewater facilities construction, approve issuance of a permit for industrial wastewater discharge or any other permit under the ordinance codified in this chapter only if it appears to the Director of Public Services that the wastewater facilities construction, sewer connection, industrial wastewater discharge, or other procedure conforms to the requirements of this chapter.

All required fees and charges shall be paid before approval of plans or issuance of a permit.

The approval of plans or the issuance of a permit shall not relieve the discharger of any duty imposed upon him pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.140 Malicious damage to City’s facilities.
Any unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing or tampering with any structure, equipment, or appurtenance which is a part of the City’s wastewater system shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.150 Waste disposal – Permit required.
Any person, municipality, sanitation district, or governmental agency desiring to discharge industrial waste into a public sewer shall obtain a permit to discharge said wastes into said system from the Director of Public Services known as a permit for industrial wastewater discharge. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.160 Permit for industrial wastewater discharge.
The permit for industrial wastewater discharge may require pretreatment of industrial wastewaters before discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain wastewaters only to specified sewers of the City, relocation of point of discharge, prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater components, restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day, payment of additional charges to defray increased costs of the City of Poway created by the wastewater discharge, and such other conditions as may be required to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.

No person shall discharge industrial wastewaters in excess of the quantity or quality limitations set by the permit for industrial wastewater discharge. Any person desiring to discharge wastewaters or use facilities which are not in conformance with the industrial wastewater permit should apply to the City of Poway Public Services Department for an amended permit. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.170 Discharge reports.
The City may require that any person discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater into a public sewer file a periodic discharge report. The discharge report may include, but not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation, or other information which relates to the generation of waste, including wastewater constituents and characteristics in the wastewater discharge. Such reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site even though they may not normally be discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the City may require information in the form of industrial wastewater discharge permit applications and self-monitoring reports.

In addition to the foregoing, the City may also require permittees to provide baseline monitoring reports, compliance schedule reports and final compliance reports. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.180 Permit application.
A. Persons seeking an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the Director of Public Services, an application in the form prescribed by the Director of Public Services, and accompanied by the applicable fees. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:

1. Name, address and standard industrial classification number of applicant;

2. Volume of wastewater to be discharged;

3. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not necessarily limited to those mentioned in PMC 13.06.270 as determined by a laboratory approved by the City;

4. Time and duration of discharge;

5. Average and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations if any;

6. Description of activities, facilities, and plant process on the premises including all materials, processes, and types of materials which are or could be discharged; and

7. Any other information as may be deemed by the Director of Public Services to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

B. The Director of Public Services will evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, an on-site inspection of the waste discharge system, treatment systems, or other systems relating to the waste discharge may be required. The Director of Public Services may then issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.190 Permit conditions.
Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges, and fees established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The conditions of industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced by the Director of Public Services in accordance with this chapter, and applicable local, State, and Federal regulations. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.200 Duration of industrial wastewater discharge permits.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. If the permittee is not notified by the Director of Public Services 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall be extended one additional year. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the City of Poway during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in PMC 13.05.270 are modified and changed. The permittee shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.210 Transfer of an industrial wastewater discharge permit or changed use.
Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be issued only for specific use for a specific operation. Any sale, lease transfer or assignment of the premises or operation for which the permit was issued shall require a new permit to be issued. Any new or changed conditions of operation shall require a new permit to be issued. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.220 Revocation of industrial wastewater discharge permit.
The Director of Public Services may revoke the permit of any permittee who is found to be in violation of this chapter or applicable local, State, or Federal regulations or who:

A. Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

B. Fails to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

C. Refuses reasonable access to the permittee’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or

D. Violates conditions of the permit. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.230 Industrial wastewater discharge permit fee.
An industrial wastewater discharge permit fee will be collected annually from all permittees. The permit fee will be established periodically by a resolution of the City Council; provided, however, that prior to considering any change in said permit fee by resolution as aforesaid, a notice of the proposed change shall be posted by the City Clerk at least 10 days prior to consideration of such a resolution by the City Council. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.235 Collection of monitoring fees.
Where monitoring services are provided by either the City of Poway or an outside agency on the City’s behalf, the City of Poway shall assess the individual discharge permit holder the actual costs incurred by the City of Poway in conjunction with the monitoring and the administrative overhead for the management of the pretreatment program. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.240 Sampling, self-monitoring, and flows.
The Director of Public Services shall require the permittee to provide results of periodic measurements of its discharge which is to include chemical analyses and flow. The Director of Public Services may require a monitoring facility to be furnished and operated at permittee’s expense. All permittees making periodic measurements shall furnish and install at an appropriate location, a calibrated flume, weir, flow meter, or similar device suitable to measure flow rate and total volume approved by the Director of Public Services. In lieu of wastewater flow measurement, the Director of Public Services may accept records of water usage and adjust the flow volume by suitable factors to determine peak and average flow rates for the specific industrial wastewater discharge. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the permittee’s premises, but the Director of Public Services may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Director of Public Services requirements and shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the Director of Public Services, unless a time extension is granted by the Director of Public Services. Those permittees required by the Director of Public Services to make periodic measurements of industrial wastewater flows and constituents shall annually make the minimum number of such measurements as required in the permit. When required by the Director of Public Services, permittees shall install and maintain in proper order automatic flow-proportional sampling equipment and/or automatic analysis and recording equipment. Permittees shall allow the City or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for purposes of sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The Director of Public Services shall have the right to set up on the permittee’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operation. Where a permittee has security measures in force, the permittee shall make the necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel of the City shall be permitted to enter without delay.

All sampling, analysis and flow measurement procedures, equipment, results, and records shall be subject at any time to inspection by the Director of Public Services. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.250 Pretreatment.
Permittees shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established herein before discharging to any public sewer. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Director of Public Services shall be provided and maintained at the permittee’s sole expense. Detailed plans, compliance schedules, and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Director of Public Services for review and shall be approved by the Director of Public Services before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the permittee from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Director of Public Services under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the Director of Public Services. No permittee shall increase the use of processed water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with any local, State, or Federal discharge standard.

The Director of Public Services shall have the authority in negotiation with any industrial permittee, to impose compliance schedules relating to installation of specific pretreatment equipment, filing of reports, and achievement of specific discharge conditions including target parameter concentrations. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.260 Protection from accidental discharge.
A. Each permittee shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or from other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the permittee’s own cost and expense.

B. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the permittee to immediately notify both the Director of Public Services of the City of Poway and the City Manager of the City of San Diego of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the permittee shall submit to the Director of Public Services a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the permittee to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the permittee of any expense, loss, damages, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater systems, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. A notice shall be permanently posted on the permittee’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Permittees shall ensure that all employees who may cause, allow, or observe such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedures. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.270 Prohibited discharges.
In most cases, the concentration or amount of any particular constituent which will be judged to be excessive or unreasonable cannot be foreseen but will depend on the results of technical determinations and the actions of regulatory agencies. The list of constituents which may be regulated provides specific limits only where they are not reasonably well established. The other constituents in the list are presented with the objective of enumerating the types of wastes which will be regulated from time to time. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sewer, which directly or indirectly connects to the City’s wastewater system, the following:

A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, solvent, fuel oil, or any liquid, solid or gas that would cause or tend to cause flammable or explosive conditions to result in the wastewater system;

B. Any matter containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in such quantities that, alone or in combination with other substances, may create a health hazard for humans, animals, or the local environment, interfere detrimentally with wastewater treatment processes, cause a public nuisance, or cause any hazardous condition to occur in the wastewater system;

C. Any matter having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any corrosive or detrimental characteristic that may cause injury to wastewater treatment or maintenance personnel or may cause damage to structures, equipment, or other physical facilities of the wastewater system;

D. Any solids or viscous substances or other matter of such quality, size, or quantity that they may cause obstruction to flow in the sewer or be detrimental to proper wastewater treatment plant operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to, asphalt, dead animals, offal, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, wood, whole blood, manure, bones, hair and fleshings, entrails, fatty acids, grease and oil, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, or other similar paper products, either whole or ground;

E. Any rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds, or lawn sprays, or any other uncontaminated water;

F. Any matter having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or at a temperature which causes the influent to the waste treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (26 degrees Celsius);

G. Any matter containing more than 500 mg/l of oil or grease;

H. Any strongly odorous matter or matter tending to create odors;

I. Any matter containing over 1.0 mg/l of dissolved sulfides;

J. Any matter with a pH high enough to cause alkaline incrustations on sewer walls;

K. Any matter promoting or causing the promotion of toxic gases;

L. Any matter requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes;

M. Any excessive amounts of deionized water, steam condensate, distilled water, or single-pass cooling water;

N. Any radioactive matter, except:

1. When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials, and

2. When the matter is discharged in strict conformity with current California Radiation Control Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 17), and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission regulations and recommendations for safe disposal, and

3. When the person is in compliance with all rules and regulations of all other applicable regulatory agencies;

O. Any matter producing excessive discoloration of the wastewater treatment plant effluent;

P. Any toxic materials including, but not limited to, all heavy metals, cyanide, phenols, chlorinated hydrocarbons, and other organic compounds unless limited to that concentration which complies with all local, State, and Federal discharge limitations, and which does not interfere with the operation of the wastewater facilities. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.280 Limitations on the use of garbage grinders.
Matter from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into a public sewer except matter generated in preparation of food normally consumed on the premises, or where the permittee has obtained a permit for that specific use from the Director of Public Services, and agrees to undertake whatever self-monitoring is required to enable the Director of Public Services to equitably determine the sewer service charges based on the waste constituents and characteristics. Such grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the public sewer. Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials, or garden refuse. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.300 Limitations on point of discharge.
No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a public sewer other than through an approved sewer connection unless upon written application and payment of the applicable charges and fees and the Director of Public Services approves the issuance of a permit for such direct discharges. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.310 Availability of the City’s wastewater facilities.
If wastewater facilities capacity is not available, the Director of Public Services may require the industrial waste discharger to restrict his discharge until sufficient capacity can be made available. When requested, the Director of Public Services will advise persons desiring to locate new facilities as to the areas where industrial wastewater of their proposed quantity and quality can be received by available wastewater facilities. The Director of Public Services may refuse service to persons locating facilities in areas where their proposed quantity or quality of industrial wastewater is unacceptable in the available treatment facility. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.320 Discrepancies between actual and reported industrial wastewater discharge permit quantities.
Should measurements or other investigations reveal that the permittee is discharging a flow rate or a quantity of flow, chemical oxygen demand, or suspended solids significantly in excess of that stated on the permit or in excess of the quantities reported to the Director of Public Services by the permittee and upon which the sewer service charge is based, the permittee shall apply for an amended permit and shall be assessed for all delinquent charges together with penalty and interest. Before these charges shall be assessed at least two additional 24-hour samples and flow measurements shall be obtained by the Director of Public Services with all costs of sampling and analyses to be paid by the permittee.

For the purpose of establishing the correct sewer service charge, the data obtained in these samplings along with any other relevant information obtained by the Director of Public Services or presented by the permittee shall be used by the Director of Public Services in determining the quantity parameters for use in determining the sewer service charge. A permittee who violates this section shall, in the absence of other evidence, be presumed to have been discharging at the determined parameter values over the preceding three years or since the Director of Public Services previous verification of quantity parameters, whichever period is shorter. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.330 Records retention.
All permittees subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for not less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring, sampling, and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a permittee in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative action or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the City shall be retained and preserved by the permittee until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

13.05.340 Validity.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remaining portions of the chapter and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances are to be considered valid. (Ord. 440 § 1, 1995)

Chapter 13.08
RESERVED SEWERAGE CAPACITY
Sections:

13.08.010    Purpose.

13.08.020    Letters of availability.

13.08.030    Procedure.

13.08.040    Expiration of reservation – Refunds.

13.08.050    Extension for completion – Connection fee.

13.08.060    Transfer, sale or assignment of project.

13.08.070    Reserve account.

13.08.080    Waiting list.

13.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the reservation of sewerage capacity and promote the completion of projects with due diligence and to discourage speculation in, and/or the nonuse of, reserved sewerage capacity, a valuable public resource. (Ord. 83 § 1, 1983)

13.08.020 Letters of availability.
A. A letter of availability (LOA) shall be issued committing the City to reserve sewerage availability to a parcel with an approved project as defined in this chapter. Said letter shall only be issued for and after the applicant has received approval of a tentative tract map, tentative parcel map, use permit, or development review application. The applicant shall, within 30 days thereafter, apply for an LOA and make concurrent payment to the City, a nonrefundable reservation fee equal to 20 percent of the appropriate sewerage connection fee in effect at the time the LOA is issued.

B. The LOA shall represent that sewerage capacity is available to complete the applicant’s project, but in no circumstance for a period to exceed two years from the date the applicant makes the initial 20 percent reservation fee payment pursuant to subsection A of this section.

C. Within the two-year period designated in subsection B of this section, the applicant shall pay the City the balance of the sewerage connection fee of the City then in effect, and thereafter the City shall provide such sewerage capacity paid for the applicant’s project. In no case shall building permits be issued prior to the payment of the balance of the sewerage connection fee then in effect. (Ord. 83 § 1.1 – 1.3, 1983)

13.08.030 Procedure.
A. Where the applicant’s project is a tentative tract or parcel map, it shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter except the time limitations of PMC 13.08.020(B). In such case, the City shall represent in the LOA that sewerage availability is assured for applicant’s project for a period of time equal to the time of expiration of the tentative map.

B. If, upon approval of a tentative map time extension, the adoption of a general plan amendment, approval of a use permit or development review application, the applicant’s then approved or adopted project density is less than that previously approved for said project, the sewerage capacity units no longer required, shall revert back to the City’s use. All fees charged for reservation of the excess units shall be credited to the fees then charged for reservation of units to serve the new project density.

C. Within 30 days of the date the applicant records the final map for a previously approved tentative map, the applicant shall pay to the City, a nonrefundable reservation fee equal to 30 percent of the sewerage connection fee then in effect. Upon paying this second fee, the City shall reserve sewerage capacity for the applicant’s project not to exceed 36 months from the date of recordation.

D. Within the 36-month period designated in subsection C of this section, the applicant shall pay the City the balance of the sewerage connection fee then in effect. Thereafter, the City shall provide such sewerage capacity paid for to the applicant’s project. In no case shall building permits be issued prior to payment of the balance of the sewerage connection fee then in effect. (Ord. 83 § 2, 1983)

13.08.040 Expiration of reservation – Refunds.
A. Except for the provisions of PMC 13.08.050, each reservation of sewerage capacity obtained pursuant to this chapter, shall expire on the date provided therein. After the date of expiration, the applicant shall lose all rights to the previously reserved sewerage capacity for that project. Upon the expiration of a reservation of sewerage capacity, the City shall return any fees paid in consideration of the City’s reservation of sewerage capacity. Such fees shall not be credited against the payment of future sewerage connection fees. The City’s previous representation to provide sewerage capacity shall, as to that project, be null and void.

B. After an expiration, the applicant shall be required to initiate a new application for reservation of sewerage capacity, pursuant to the rules, regulations and fees of the City then in effect. Payments made for reservation of sewerage capacity are only refundable when reserved sewerage capacity cannot be provided to a project otherwise qualified to receive sewer capacity. The City will not unreasonably withhold reserved capacity to the applicant. This refund shall be the only recourse against the City for the City’s inability to deliver reserved capacity. The applicant shall agree to this as a condition of receiving the LOA. (Ord. 83 § 3, 1983)

13.08.050 Extension for completion – Connection fee.
A. An applicant shall at all times proceed with due diligence to complete a project. If an applicant is unable to meet any time limit established pursuant to this chapter, the applicant may, at any time, apply to the City Council for an extension of such time limit. Any such application shall not be made later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the time limit for which an extension is being sought.

B. If an applicant provides satisfactory proof to the City that the applicant has proceeded with due diligence to complete the project, the City may grant an extension of time consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The City may condition the granting of an extension upon the applicant’s compliance with certain conditions, such as, but not limited to, the payment of an annual, nonrefundable fee. The fee shall be that amount determined by the City to reimburse the City for costs associated with extending the time during which the City reserves sewerage capacity for the applicant’s project.

C. The decision as to:

1. What is due diligence;

2. For what period of time a particular time limit should be extended; and

3. What conditions, if any, shall be placed upon the granting of the extension;

shall be matters within the discretion of the City. An applicant’s failure to proceed with due diligence shall be grounds for denial of an extension of a time limit.

D. If an extension of a time is granted, it shall not exceed 12 months. Upon grant of an extension, the applicant shall pay to the City, within 10 days of the City Council approval, a nonrefundable fee equal to 10 percent of the sewerage connection fee in effect at that time. Failure to make the 10 percent payment within the 10-day period shall render the LOA null and void. The payment required by this section shall be credited toward the final sewerage connection fee. In addition, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable charge to the City in an amount as established by City Council resolution from time to time. This latter charge shall not be credited toward the sewerage connection fee as it represents compensation to the City for the costs incurred in processing the time extension application.

E. The connection fee shall not be paid in full at the time of processing a tentative parcel map, tentative map, special use permit, or development review application. (Ord. 683 § 56, 2008; Ord. 83 § 4, 1983)

13.08.060 Transfer, sale or assignment of project.
A. Any transfer, sale or assignment of a project may transfer the applicable LOA. If a transfer to the LOA is accomplished, the new owner of the project will be subject to all the provisions of this chapter and shall have the same rights and obligations as the original applicant for the project. To transfer the LOA, the transferee or assignee must immediately notify the City in writing of such change in ownership of the project. The City will not provide sewerage connection and capacity or recognize the validity of the LOA until the provisions of this section are satisfied.

B. An LOA shall pertain specifically to the project as described within the LOA. The LOA is not transferable to any other project property or any changed condition of the applied project which increases required sewer capacity. Any attempt to transfer, sell, assign, or change as described in this section, renders the LOA null and void. (Ord. 83 § 5, 1983)

13.08.070 Reserve account.
A. When the unobligated sewer capacity available to the City reaches 30 equivalent dwelling units, the Director of Public Services shall place that number of equivalent dwelling units into a reserve account.

B. A letter of availability shall not be written against the reserve account.

C. The Director of Public Services shall allocate the reserve account to:

1. Failing septic systems; and

2. Single lateral, single-family dwellings. (Ord. 83 § 6, 1983)

13.08.080 Waiting list.
A. If the City has allocated all of its sewerage capacity, approved projects will be placed on a waiting list. The waiting list shall list only approved projects in the order of time they requested to be placed upon the list and paid the 20 percent sewerage reservation fee.

B. When capacity becomes available, projects on the waiting list will be allocated capacity subject to PMC 13.08.010 through 13.08.050, as set forth above in order of their position on the waiting list. (Ord. 83 § 7, 1983)

Chapter 13.09
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Sections:

13.09.010    Title.

13.09.020    Purpose and intent.

13.09.030    Definitions.

13.09.040    General provisions.

13.09.050    Discharge prohibitions.

13.09.060    Exemptions to discharge prohibitions.

13.09.070    Best management practice requirements for all dischargers.

13.09.080    Additional requirements for land disturbance activity.

13.09.090    Additional requirements for all land development and redevelopment projects.

13.09.100    Maintenance of best management practices.

13.09.110    Inspection and sampling.

13.09.120    Enforcement authority.

13.09.130    Other acts and omissions that are violations.

13.09.140    Penalties.

13.09.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Poway stormwater management and discharge control ordinance.” (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.020 Purpose and intent.
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:

A. To establish requirements for discharges into the stormwater conveyance system, receiving waters, and the environment;

B. To protect, to the maximum extent practicable (MEP), life, property, receiving waters, aquatic life, and the environment from loss, injury, degradation, or damage by discharges from within the City’s jurisdiction;

C. To protect the stormwater conveyance system from damage; and

D. To meet the requirements of State and Federal law and the MS4 Permit. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.030 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this chapter (including use in the City of Poway’s Best Management Practices Manual), whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized:

“Authorized enforcement official” means the City Manager of the City of Poway or any designee of the City Manager of the City of Poway who is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the directors, their management staff, and designees.

“Best management practices” or “BMPs” are the schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or the stormwater conveyance system. BMPs also include, but are not limited to, treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure, approved by the City and consistent with the MS4 Permit, that can help to achieve compliance with this chapter.

“BMP Manual” or “Manual” means the City’s Best Management Practices (BMP) Manual, described in PMC 13.09.040(C) and 13.09.080. The BMP Manual shall be adopted, and amended from time to time, by resolution as a part of the City’s Jurisdictional Runoff Management Program.

“Channel” means a natural or improved watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conveys continuously or intermittently flowing water.

“City” means the City of Poway.

“Contamination,” as defined in Section 13050 of the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Division 7 of the California Water Code), is “an impairment of the quality of waters of the State by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. “Contamination” includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste whether or not waters of the State are affected.” In the event Section 13050 of the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act is amended or superseded, the amended or superseding section shall define “contamination.”

“County” means the County of San Diego.

“Developer” means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activity.

“Development project proponent” means developer.

“Director” means the Director of the City’s Development Services Department.

“Discharge,” when used as a verb, means to allow pollutants to directly or indirectly enter stormwater, or to allow stormwater or nonstormwater to directly or indirectly enter the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters, from an activity or operations which one owns or operates. When used as a noun, “discharge” means the pollutants, stormwater and/or nonstormwater that is discharged.

“Discharge directly to” means that stormwater or nonstormwater is conveyed overland a distance of 200 feet or less from a site, or conveyed in a pipe or open channel any distance as an isolated flow from a site (i.e., not commingled with flows from adjacent lands).

“Discharger” means any person or entity engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities, which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the stormwater conveyance system, or receiving waters; and the owners of real property on which such activities, operations or facilities are located; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

“Erosion” refers to any process in which land is diminished or worn away due to wind, water or glacial ice. Often the eroded debris (silt or sediment) becomes a pollutant via stormwater runoff. Erosion occurs naturally but can be intensified by land clearing activities such as farming, development, road building, and timber harvesting.

“Groundwater” means subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic formations that are fully saturated.

“Illegal connection” means a pipe, facility or other device connected to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters, which has not been reviewed and authorized by the City; or a permitted/authorized pipe, facility or other device which conveys illegal discharges.

“Illegal discharge” means any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters that is prohibited by this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, discharges of nonstormwater that are not exempt discharges listed in PMC 13.09.060, discharges of irrigation runoff to the stormwater conveyance system, any discharge from an illegal connection, and any discharge that contains additional pollutants due to the absence of a required BMP or the failure of a BMP. Discharges that require an NPDES permit that has not been issued or has not been acknowledged by the discharger to be applicable are illegal discharges. Discharges regulated under an applicable NPDES permit are illegal discharges for purposes of this chapter unless compliance with all applicable permit and stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) conditions is maintained.

“Impervious surface” means constructed or modified surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall. The term includes, but is not limited to, building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, and driveways.

“Land development activity” means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction of any public or private projects.

“Land disturbance activity” means any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the preexisting vegetated or manmade cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil; placement of fill materials; paving, pavement removal, exterior construction; substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed, including, but not limited to, removal by clearing or grubbing; or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. “Land disturbance activity” does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities or maintenance activities required to protect public health and safety.

“Land owner” means the holder of legal title to the land, and other persons or entities who exercise control over a land development project pursuant to rights granted in a purchase agreement, joint venture agreement, development agreement, or long-term lease.

“Low impact development” or “LID” means a stormwater management and land development strategy that emphasizes conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect predevelopment hydrologic functions.

“Maintenance of a BMP” means periodic action taken to maintain the as-designed performance of a BMP, and includes, but is not limited to, repairs to the BMP as necessary and replacement of the BMP by an equally effective or more effective BMP at the end of its useful life.

“Maximum extent practicable” or “MEP” is an acceptability standard for BMPs. When BMPs are required to meet this standard, the BMPs must be the most effective set of BMPs that is still practicable. A BMP is effective if it prevents, reduces or removes the pollutants that would otherwise be present in runoff due to human activity. A BMP is practicable if it complies with other regulations as well as stormwater regulations; is compatible with the area’s land use, character, facilities, and activities; is technically feasible (considering area soil, geography, water resources, and other resources available); is economically feasible; and provides benefits that are reasonable in relation to costs.

“MS4 Permit” refers to RWQCB Order No. R9-2013-0001, NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266, as may be amended.

“Nonstormwater discharge” is any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

“NPDES permit” means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB), or the RWQCB.

“Nuisance” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 8.72.020.

“Pollutants” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 8.68.020.

“Pollution,” as defined in Section 13050 of the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Division 7 of the California Water Code), is “the alteration of the quality of the waters of the State by waste, to a degree which unreasonably affects either of the following: (1) the waters for beneficial uses; or (2) facilities that serve these beneficial uses.” In the event Section 13050 of the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act is amended or superseded, the amended or superseding section shall define “pollution.” Pollution may include contamination.

“Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act” or “Act” means Division 7 of the California Water Code as may be amended from time to time.

“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved.

“Priority development project” refers to new development and redevelopment project categories as more fully set forth in Section E.3.b of the MS4 Permit and in the BMP Design Manual.

“Receiving waters” means all waters that are “waters of the United States.”

“Redevelopment” means any construction, alteration or improvement of an already developed site. “Redevelopment” can include, but is not limited to, the expansion of building footprints, the addition or replacement of a structure, exterior construction and remodeling, replacement of existing impervious surfaces that are not part of a routine maintenance activity, and other activities that create additional impervious surfaces.

“Runoff” means all flows in a stormwater conveyance system, including stormwater (wet weather flows) and nonstormwater (dry weather flows).

“RWQCB” means the Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego Region.

“Sediment” means soils or other surficial materials eroded and then transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. Sediment resulting from anthropogenic sources (i.e., human induced land disturbance activities) is considered a pollutant.

“Standard urban stormwater mitigation plan” means a plan designed to reduce pollutants and runoff flows from new development and significant redevelopment.

“State” means the State of California.

“State general construction stormwater permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000002 and any amendments thereto.

“State general industrial stormwater permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000001 and any amendments thereto.

“Stop work order” means an order issued which requires that specifically identified activity or all activity on a site be stopped.

“Stormwater” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 8.68.020.

“Stormwater conveyance system” means facilities owned or operated by the City of Poway by which stormwater may be conveyed to receiving waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, pipes, natural and manmade channels or storm drains.

“Stormwater management” means the use of structural or nonstructural BMPs that are designed to reduce urban runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes and/or peak discharge flow rates or velocities. When applied to the City or another municipality, stormwater management also includes planning and programmatic measures.

“Stormwater management plan” means a plan, submitted on a City form or in a City-specific format in connection with an application for a City permit or other City approval, identifying the measures that will be used for stormwater and nonstormwater management during the permitted activity.

“Stormwater pollution prevention plan” or “SWPPP” means a document that meets the requirements for an SWPPP set out in the State general construction stormwater permit or the State general industrial stormwater permit.

“Stormwater quality management plan” (SWQMP) is a report that documents how a priority development project complies with applicable BMP requirements for land development and redevelopment activities listed in the BMP Manual.

“Structural BMP” means a BMP that relies on either a physical condition (other than an entirely natural and undisturbed condition), or a constructed or installed device to reduce or prevent pollutants in stormwater discharges and authorized nonstormwater discharges. Constructed or enhanced BMPs that depend on natural materials and processes (e.g., constructed drainage swales or buffers, or constructed wetlands), and that require periodic maintenance to function as designed, are structural BMPs.

“Structural post-construction BMP” means a structural BMP (other than a temporary construction-related BMP) put in place in connection with a land development or redevelopment project to prevent or reduce pollution of stormwater or receiving waters, or to prevent or reduce erosion downstream from the project. All treatment control BMPs are structural post-construction BMPs.

“SWRCB” means the State Water Resources Control Board.

“Water quality standards” are defined as the beneficial uses (e.g., swimming, fishing, municipal drinking water supply, etc.) of water and the water quality objectives adopted by the State or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to protect those uses.

“Watercourse” means a permanent or intermittent stream, creek or other body of water, either natural or improved, which gathers or carries surface water.

“Waters of the State” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the State (State Water Code Section 10350(e)). The definition of the “waters of the State” is broader than that for the “waters of the United States” in that all water in the State is considered to be “waters of the State” regardless of circumstances or condition.

“Waters of the United States” means water subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States under the Federal Clean Water Act and applicable case law. (In general, this includes “navigable” waters, waters tributary to “navigable” waters and adjacent wetlands.) (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.040 General provisions.
A. Responsibility for Administration. This chapter shall be administered for the City of Poway by its authorized enforcement officials.

B. Construction and Application. Interpretation of this chapter shall assure consistency with the purpose and intent of this chapter and shall implement the requirements of the MS4 Permit. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. Stormwater and nonstormwater discharges regulated under a valid facility-specific NPDES permit or facility-specific RWQCB waste discharge requirements permit are not subject to this chapter, but shall instead be regulated exclusively by the RWQCB.

C. BMP Manual. The City may establish and adopt a written description of the runoff management measures and programs, including minimum BMPs that the City will implement, or require to be implemented, to ensure compliance with this chapter. These documents shall be known collectively as the BMP Manual. Amendments to the BMP Manual shall be approved by the authorized enforcement official.

D. Severability and Validity. If any section of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of law, the remaining sections shall remain valid. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this chapter should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.050 Discharge prohibitions.
A. Illegal Discharges. The direct or indirect discharge of pollutants into the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters is prohibited, except as exempted in PMC 13.09.060. The direct or indirect discharge of pollutants into the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters in stormwater is prohibited, unless the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met.

B. Illegal Connection. The establishment of illegal connections is prohibited. The use of illegal connections is prohibited, even if the connection was established pursuant to a valid City permit and was legal at the time it was constructed.

C. Prevention of Illegal Discharges. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining, or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an illegal discharge is prohibited.

D. Violations of the MS4 Permit. It is unlawful for any responsible person as defined in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC to cause, or threaten to cause, either individually or jointly, any discharge into or from the stormwater conveyance system that results in or contributes to a violation of the MS4 Permit. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.060 Exemptions to discharge prohibitions.
A. Permitted Discharges. Any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system that is regulated under an NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State pursuant to the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act is allowed; provided, that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations.

B. Groundwater Discharges Typically Requiring Permits. Nonstormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system from the following categories are allowed if: (1) the discharger obtains coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2008-0002, or subsequent order) for discharges to surface waters other than San Diego Bay, and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the applicable NPDES permit, and all other applicable laws and regulations; or (2) the RWQCB determines in writing that coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (or subsequent permit) is not required. Otherwise, nonstormwater discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges:

1. Discharges from uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

2. Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year;

3. Discharges from water from crawl space pumps; or

4. Discharges from water from footing drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year.

C. Discharges from Water Lines. Nonstormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system from water line flushing and water main breaks are allowed if the discharges have coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG679001 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2010-0003, or subsequent order), and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of that NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. This category includes water line flushing and water main break discharges from water purveyors issued a water supply permit by the California Department of Public Health or Federal military installations. Discharges from recycled or reclaimed water lines to the stormwater conveyance system are allowed if the discharges have coverage under an NPDES permit, and the discharger is in compliance with the applicable NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. Otherwise, discharges from water lines are illegal discharges.

D. Allowable Discharges. Nonstormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system from the following categories are allowed, unless an authorized enforcement official or the RWQCB identifies the discharge as a source of pollutants to receiving waters, in which case the discharge is considered an illegal discharge:

1. Discharges from diverted stream flows;

2. Discharges from flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

3. Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce nonstormwater discharges under unusual circumstances;

4. Discharges from footing drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce nonstormwater discharges under unusual circumstances;

5. Discharges from rising groundwater;

6. Discharges from uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to the stormwater conveyance system;

7. Discharges from springs; and

8. Discharges from potable water sources, except as set forth in subsection C of this section and except that irrigation runoff discharges are considered illegal discharges and are not allowed.

E. Conditionally Allowed Discharges. Nonstormwater discharges from the following categories are allowed if they are addressed as set forth below; otherwise, nonstormwater discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges:

1. Air Conditioning Condensation. Air conditioning condensation discharges shall comply with applicable BMPs identified in the BMP Manual.

2. Individual Residential Vehicle Washing. Wash water from individual residential vehicle washing must be directed to landscaped areas or other pervious surfaces, where feasible. Where discharges cannot be feasibly prevented, BMPs must be implemented in accordance with the BMP Manual. Noncommercial car washes, such as fundraisers and other similar activities, are not considered individual residential vehicle washing. Discharges from such activities are, therefore, considered illegal discharges.

3. Water from Swimming Pools.

a. Chlorinated Swimming Pool Water. Chlorine, algaecide, filter backwash, and other pollutants shall be eliminated prior to discharging swimming pool water to the stormwater conveyance system.

b. Saline Swimming Pool Water. Saline swimming pool water must be directed to the sanitary sewer, landscaped areas, or other pervious surfaces that can accommodate the volume of water, unless the saline swimming pool water can be discharged directly to a naturally saline water body.

F. Firefighting Activities. Nonstormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system from firefighting activities are allowed if they are addressed as follows:

1. Nonemergency Firefighting Discharges. Nonemergency firefighting discharges, including building fire suppression system maintenance discharges (e.g., sprinkler line flushing), controlled or practice blazes, training, and maintenance activities, shall be addressed by BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system.

2. Emergency Firefighting Discharges. BMPs are encouraged to prevent pollutants from entering the stormwater conveyance system. During emergencies, priority of efforts should be directed toward life, property and the environment (in descending order). BMPs shall not interfere with emergency response operations or impact public health and safety.

G. Exemptions Not Absolute. Notwithstanding the categories of nonstormwater discharges conditionally allowed by subsections A through F of this section, if the RWQCB or the authorized enforcement official determines that any of these categories of otherwise conditionally allowed nonstormwater discharges are a source of pollutants to receiving waters, are a danger to public health or safety, or are causing a public nuisance, such discharges shall be prohibited from entering the stormwater conveyance system. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.070 Best management practice requirements for all dischargers.
A. Best Management Practices. Any responsible person as defined in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC engaged in activities which may result in discharges to the stormwater conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, undertake all measures to reduce the risk of nonstormwater discharges and pollutant discharges. The following requirements shall apply:

1. Every responsible person as defined in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC undertaking any activity or use of premises that may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illegal discharges, or nonstormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system shall comply with BMP guidelines or pollution control requirements, as may be established by the authorized enforcement official. BMPs shall be maintained routinely throughout the life of the activity. Such BMPs include the minimum BMPs set forth in the BMP Manual.

2. An authorized enforcement official may require any business or operations that are engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to the stormwater conveyance system to develop and implement an SWPPP, which must include an employee training program and the applicable minimum BMPs from the BMP Manual.

3. Each discharger that is subject to any NPDES permit shall comply with all requirements of all such permits. The discharger must also make reports submitted to the RWQCB or other permitting agency, including monitoring data, available to the City upon request.

4. Parties undertaking land disturbance activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter, the BMP Manual, and Division III of PMC Title 16 (Chapters 16.40 through 16.54 PMC).

5. Parties undertaking land development and redevelopment activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and the BMP Manual.

B. Guidance Documents. Any authorized enforcement official under the supervision of the City Engineer may prepare, disseminate and maintain guidance documents addressing the use of BMPs for specific activities or facilities, illegal connections and illegal discharges. These guidance documents may set out additional compliance alternatives that, in specified circumstances, can provide the same environmental protection that is afforded by the BMPs required by this chapter or specified in the BMP Manual.

C. Significant Sources of Pollutants. Where an authorized enforcement official identifies a discharge that is in violation of PMC 13.09.050(D) or 13.09.060(G), an authorized enforcement official may order the discharger to install, implement and maintain additional BMPs to prevent or reduce contamination in stormwater and nonstormwater to the MEP. Any such order shall specify a reasonable date by which those BMPs must be put in place. The failure to install, implement or maintain additional BMPs as required by any such order is a violation of this chapter.

D. Collection and Use of Stormwater. An authorized enforcement official may modify any requirement imposed by this chapter to allow the on-site collection and use of stormwater, or the collection of stormwater for delivery to and use at City-designated sites, provided the modified requirements are enforceable and provide equivalent environmental protection. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.080 Additional requirements for land disturbance activity.
A. Permit Issuance. No land owner or development project proponent shall receive any City grading, clearing, building, or other land development permit or equivalent approval required for land disturbance activity without first meeting the requirements of this chapter, the BMP Manual, and Division III of PMC Title 16, with respect to the portion of the development project and the land disturbance activity to which the permit at issue would apply.

B. Owners and Operators Both Responsible and Liable. Persons or entities performing land disturbance activity (including, but not limited to, construction activities) in the City, and the owners of land on which land disturbance activity is performed, are dischargers for purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

C. BMP Plan Submittals. All applications to the City for a permit or approval associated with a land disturbance activity must demonstrate how the proposed activity will comply with all applicable BMP requirements in a format specified by the City. The submitted materials shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the BMPs required by this chapter, the BMP Manual, and Division III of PMC Title 16 for the activity at issue, including, but not limited to, the applicable BMPs required by subsection D of this section.

D. Agricultural Grading and Clearing. The BMP requirements imposed by this section for land disturbance activities apply to agricultural grading and clearing, whether or not a City-issued grading and clearing permit is required for that activity. Tilling or cultivating land exclusively for the purpose of growing plants or animals is not considered to be grading or clearing, provided all disturbed material remains on the same site, the tilling or cultivating will not block or divert any natural drainage way, and the land to be tilled or cultivated has been in agricultural production for at least one of the preceding five years. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.090 Additional requirements for all land development and redevelopment projects.
A. Application to Development and Redevelopment Projects. No land owner or development project proponent in the City shall receive any City grading, clearing, building or other land development permit required for land development activity or redevelopment activity unless the project meets or will meet the requirements of this chapter and the applicable requirements defined in the City’s BMP Manual. For priority development projects, the project’s post-construction BMP plan must be approved prior to the issuance of such permits.

B. Owners and Developers Responsible and Liable. Developers, development project proponents, and land owners for land on which land development activity is performed are dischargers for purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

C. Post-Construction BMPs Required. Land development and redevelopment projects with the potential to add pollutants to stormwater or to affect the flow rate or velocity of stormwater runoff after construction is completed shall be designed to include and shall implement post-construction BMPs to ensure that pollutants and runoff from the development will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable, will not significantly degrade receiving water quality, and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards in accordance with the requirements defined in the BMP Manual.

D. Land Development Associated with Agricultural Operations. The requirements imposed by this section for land development activities apply to such activities when they are associated with agricultural operations.

E. Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan. All applications to the City for a permit or approval associated with a land development or redevelopment activity must be accompanied by a post-construction stormwater management plan on a form or in a format specified by the City. The plan shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the post-construction BMPs required by this chapter. The plan must address those aspects of the project that, at the time a complete application is submitted, are subject to further environmental review pursuant to Section 15162 of the California Environmental Quality Act. Post-construction BMPs for other aspects of the project need not be addressed in this plan.

F. Stormwater Management Plan Review Fee and Deposit. Fees for stormwater management plan review and deposit thereof shall be adopted by resolution.

G. Control to the Maximum Extent Practicable. All dischargers engaged in land development and significant redevelopment activities shall install, implement and maintain post-construction BMPs as needed to prevent or reduce pollutant discharges in stormwater from land disturbance to the MEP. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.100 Maintenance of best management practices.
A. Existing Development. Dischargers shall maintain the designed functionality of BMPs they rely upon to achieve and maintain compliance with this chapter.

B. Structural Post-Construction BMPs. The owners and occupants of lands on which structural post-construction BMPs, including treatment control BMPs, have been installed to meet the requirements of this chapter shall ensure the maintenance of those BMPs, and shall themselves maintain those BMPs (by contract or covenant, or pursuant to this chapter). Such owners and occupants shall provide annual written verification that appropriate maintenance is conducted for all treatment control BMPs.

C. Maintenance Obligations Assumed by Contract or Other Agreement. Primary responsibility to maintain a structural post-construction BMP may be transferred through a contract or other agreement. If that contract provides that it will be submitted to the City pursuant to this chapter as part of a development permit application, and if that contract is so submitted, the person or entity accepting a maintenance obligation in such a contract or agreement will also be legally obligated to maintain that BMP pursuant to this chapter.

D. Obligation to Maintain BMPs Not Avoided by Contracts or Other Agreements. For purposes of City enforcement, no contract or other agreement imposing an obligation to maintain a structural post-construction BMP can relieve a person or entity of any obligation to maintain a BMP imposed by this chapter.

E. Disclosure of Maintenance Obligations. Any developer who transfers ownership of land on which a BMP is located or will be located, or who otherwise transfers ownership of a BMP or responsibility for the maintenance of a BMP to another person or entity, shall provide clear written notice of the maintenance obligations associated with that BMP to the new or additional responsible party prior to that transfer.

F. Maintenance Plans for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development project or significant redevelopment project that requires installation of structural post-construction BMPs shall provide to the City for review and approval prior to issuance of permits for the project a plan for maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the project. The plan shall specify the persons or entities responsible for maintenance activity, the persons or entities responsible for funding, schedules and procedures for inspection and maintenance of the BMPs, worker training requirements, and any other activities necessary to ensure BMP maintenance. The plan shall provide for servicing of all structural post-construction BMPs at least annually and for the retention of inspection and maintenance records for at least three years.

G. Access for Maintenance. Structural post-construction BMPs shall provide for adequate access on the part of the City for long-term inspection and maintenance purposes.

H. Assurance of Maintenance for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development activity or redevelopment activity that requires a City permit shall provide to the City, prior to issuance of permits for the project, proof of a mechanism acceptable to the City which will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the proposed project. The proponents shall be responsible for maintenance of BMPs unless, and until, an alternative mechanism for ensuring maintenance is accepted by the City and becomes effective.

I. Security for Maintenance for Land Development Projects. If it is determined by the authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of a bond or other security to assure the maintenance of a BMP, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.110 Inspection and sampling.
A. Regulatory Inspections and Certification Programs. The authorized enforcement official may establish inspection or certification programs to evaluate and enforce compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Authorized enforcement officials may inspect facilities, activities and residences subject to this chapter at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to carry out the purposes of this chapter. If entry for a regulatory inspection is refused by the facility owner or operator, or by the occupant of a residence, an inspection warrant shall be obtained prior to inspection.

B. Inspections of New Construction. When any new storm drain system or structural BMP is installed on private property as part of a project that requires a City permit, in order to comply with this chapter, the responsible person as defined in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC shall agree to a condition of approval that provides the City access for inspection and maintenance of storm drain system or BMPs or, at the discretion of the City, shall provide to the City for review an easement to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to ensure that the storm drain system or BMP is working properly. This includes the right to enter the property without prior notice for routine inspections, to enter as needed for additional inspections when the City has a reasonable basis to believe that the storm drain system or BMP is not working properly, to enter for any needed follow-up inspections, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter.

C. Scope of Inspections. Inspections may include all actions necessary to determine whether any illegal discharges or illegal connections exist, whether the BMPs installed and implemented are adequate to comply with this chapter, whether those BMPs are being properly maintained, and whether the facility or activity complies with the other requirements of this chapter. This may include but may not be limited to sampling, metering, visual inspections and records review. Where samples are collected the owner or operator may request and receive split samples. Records, reports, analyses or other information required under this chapter may be inspected and copied, and photographs taken to document a condition and/or a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.120 Enforcement authority.
Authorized enforcement officials may enforce this chapter and abate public nuisances as set forth in Chapters 1.08, 1.10, 8.72 and 15.32 PMC and as follows:

A. Administrative Authorities.

1. Administrative Penalties. In addition to administrative penalties permitted elsewhere in the PMC, administrative penalties may include the recovery of fines assessed against the City by the RWQCB.

2. Cease and Desist Orders. Written orders, verbal orders or both may be issued to stop illegal discharges and/or remove illegal connections. If it is determined by an authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of a bond or other security to assure the violation is corrected, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official.

3. Notice and Order to Clean, Test or Abate. Written orders, verbal orders or both may be issued to perform activities to comply with the BMP Manual, this chapter, or as directed by an authorized enforcement official where conditions warrant.

4. Public Nuisance Abatement. Violations of this chapter are deemed a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and constitute a public nuisance. If actions ordered under subsections (A)(2) and (3) of this section are not performed, the authorized enforcement official may abate any public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 8.72 PMC. City costs for pollution detection and abatement, if not paid in full by the discharger in addition to any other penalties, may be made a lien against the property in accordance with the abatement procedure.

5. Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or other laws implemented through enforcement of this chapter, an authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the authorized enforcement official to proceed with the work.

6. Permit Suspension or Revocation. Violations of this chapter may be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit and other City license pursuant to PMC 1.08.010(T).

B. Judicial Authorities.

1. Civil Penalties and Remedies. The City Attorney is hereby authorized to file criminal and civil actions to enforce this chapter and to seek civil penalties and/or other remedies as provided in this section and in PMC 13.09.140, as well as Chapters 1.08, 1.10, 8.72 and 15.32 PMC. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement procedures must be pursued before such actions are filed.

2. Injunctive Relief. The City may enforce compliance with this chapter by judicial action for injunctive relief.

3. Arrest or Issue Citations. The assistance of a peace officer may be enlisted to arrest violators or issue a citation and notice to appear as prescribed in the California Penal Code, including Section 853.6. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement remedies be exhausted or otherwise used before such actions are taken. The immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code are applicable to authorized enforcement officials acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.130 Other acts and omissions that are violations.
In addition to failing to comply with any of the other requirements described in this chapter, including a BMP Manual, the MS4 Permit, and a stormwater quality management plan, the following acts and omissions are violations of this chapter, whether committed by a discharger or by another person or entity:

A. Causing, Permitting, Aiding, or Abetting Noncompliance. Causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting noncompliance with any part of this chapter constitutes a violation of this chapter.

B. Concealment, Misrepresentation and False Statements. Any falsification or misrepresentation made to the City concerning compliance with this chapter, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure, any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission, and any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this chapter in order to delay City enforcement action, is a violation of this chapter. Concealing a violation of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.

C. Failure to Promptly Correct Noncompliance. Violations of this chapter must be corrected within the time period specified by an authorized enforcement official. Each day (or part thereof) in excess of that period during which action necessary to correct a violation is not initiated and diligently pursued is a separate violation of this chapter.

D. City Permits and SWPPPs. Any failure to conform to an applicable SWPPP prepared pursuant to this chapter; any failure to comply with stormwater-related provisions of a City-issued grading permit or grading plan prepared to secure such a permit; and any failure to comply with stormwater-related provisions in any other City permit or approval is also a violation of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter a permit provision or condition of approval is “stormwater- related” if compliance with the provision or condition would have the effect of preventing or reducing contamination of stormwater or of moderating runoff flow rates or velocities, whether or not the provision or condition was initially imposed to promote those outcomes. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

13.09.140 Penalties.
A. Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to this code. Any administrative penalty provision in this code shall also be applicable to violations of this chapter, unless otherwise provided therein.

B. Misdemeanor Penalties. Noncompliance with any part of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor, and may be enforced and punished as prescribed in the Penal Code and Government Code of the State of California, and this code.

C. Penalties for Infractions. Any violation of this chapter may be charged as an infraction at the discretion of the prosecutor. Infractions may be abated as a nuisance or enforced and punished as prescribed in this code, Penal Code and Government Code of the State of California.

D. For Civil Actions. In addition to other penalties and remedies permitted in Chapters 1.08, 1.10, 8.72 and 15.32 PMC, a violation of this chapter may result in the filing of a civil action by the City. The following may also be awarded without monetary limitations in any civil action:

1. Injunctive relief;

2. Costs to investigate, inspect, monitor, survey, or litigate;

3. Costs to place or remove soils or erosion control materials, costs to correct any violation, and costs to restore environmental damage or to end any other adverse effects of a violation;

4. Compensatory damages for losses to the City or any other plaintiff caused by violations; and/or restitution to third parties for losses caused by violations;

5. Civil penalties;

6. Reasonable attorney fees; and

7. Fines assessed against the City by the RWQCB.

As part of a civil action filed by the City to enforce provisions of this chapter, a court may assess a civil penalty in the maximum amount permitted by law per violation of this chapter for each day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, permitted, or maintained by such person(s).

In determining the amount of any civil liability to be imposed pursuant to this chapter, the court shall take into consideration the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation or violations, whether any discharge caused by the violation is susceptible to cleanup or abatement, and, with respect to the violator, the ability to pay, the effect on ability to continue in business, any voluntary cleanup efforts undertaken, any prior history of violations, the degree of culpability, economic savings, if any, resulting from the violation, and such other matters as justice may require.

E. Penalties and Remedies Not Exclusive. Penalties and remedies under this section may be cumulative and in addition to other administrative, civil or criminal remedies. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 775 § 3, 2015)

Chapter 13.10
WATER RECLAMATION
Sections:

13.10.010    Purpose.

13.10.020    Water reclamation policy.

13.10.030    Definitions.

13.10.040    Water reclamation master plan.

13.10.050    Procedures.

13.10.070    Sanctions.

13.10.080    Validity.

13.10.010 Purpose.
The State policies described in Water Code Sections 461 and 13510 are in the best interest of the City of Poway. The majority of jurisdictions in San Diego County have adopted measures to promote water reclamation. This chapter is necessary to protect the common water supply of the region which is vital to public health and safety, and to prevent endangerment of public and private property. San Diego County is highly dependent on limited imported water for domestic, agricultural and industrial uses. The reliability of the supply of imported water is uncertain. By developing and utilizing reclaimed water, the need for additional imported water can be reduced. In light of these circumstances, certain uses of potable water may be considered unreasonable or to constitute a nuisance where reclaimed water is available or production of reclaimed water is unduly impaired. Reclaimed water would be more readily available in seasons of drought when the supply of potable water for nonessential uses may be uncertain. (Ord. 290 § 2, 1989)

13.10.020 Water reclamation policy.
It is the policy of the City that reclaimed water shall be used within the jurisdiction wherever its use is economically justified, financially and technically feasible, and consistent with legal requirements, preservation of public health, safety and welfare, and the environment. (Ord. 290 § 2, 1989)

13.10.030 Definitions.
The following terms are defined for purposes of this chapter:

A. “Agricultural purposes” include the growing of field and nursery crops, raw crops, trees, and vines and the feeding of fowl and livestock.

B. “Artificial lake” means a human-made lake, pond, lagoon, or other body of water that is used wholly or partly for landscape, scenic or noncontact recreational purposes.

C. “Commercial office building” means any building for office or commercial uses with water requirements which include, but are not limited to, landscape irrigation, toilets, urinals, and decorative fountains.

D. “Reclaimed water distribution system” means a piping system intended for the delivery of reclaimed water separate from and in addition to, the potable water distribution system.

E. A “greenbelt area” includes, but is not limited to, golf courses, cemeteries, parks and landscaping.

F. “Industrial process water” means water used by any industrial facility with process water requirements which include, but are not limited to, rinsing, washing, cooling and circulation, or construction.

G. “Off-site facilities” means water facilities from the source of supply to the point of connection with the on-site facilities, normally up to and including the water meter.

H. “On-site facilities” means water facilities under the control of the owner, normally downstream from the water meter.

I. “Potable water” means water which conforms to the Federal, State and local standards for human consumption.

J. “Reclaimed water” means water which, as a result of treatment of wastewater, is suitable for a direct beneficial use or controlled use that would not otherwise occur (see Water Code Section 13050(n)).

K. “Water discharge” means water deposited, released, or discharged into a sewer system from any commercial, industrial, or residential source which contains levels of any substance or substance which may cause substantial harm to any water treatment or reclamation facility or which may prevent use of reclaimed water authorized by law. (Ord. 290 § 2, 1989)

13.10.040 Water reclamation master plan.
A. General. Upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City shall prepare and adopt by resolution, a water reclamation master plan to define, encourage, and develop the use of reclaimed water within its boundaries. The master plan shall be updated not less often than every five years.

B. Contents of the Reclamation Master Plan. The master plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Plants and Facilities. Evaluation of the location and size of present and future reclamation treatment plants, distribution pipelines, pump stations, reservoirs, and other related facilities, including cost estimates and potential financing methods;

2. Reclaimed Water Service Areas. A designation, based on the criteria set forth in this chapter and information derived from PMC 13.10.040(B)(1) and (2), of the areas within the City that can or may in the future use reclaimed water in lieu of potable water. Reclaimed water uses may include, but are not limited to, the irrigation of greenbelt and agricultural areas, filling of artificial lakes, and appropriate industrial and commercial uses;

3. Designate Tributary Areas. For each water reclamation facility identified in the master plan, designate proposed tributary areas. Within such areas, discharges to the sewage system shall be subject to permitting, monitoring and control measures to protect public health, safety and public and private property;

4. Quality of Water to be Reclaimed. For each water reclamation treatment facility, evaluate water quality with respect to the effect on anticipated uses of reclaimed water to be served by each treatment facility. Evaluate sources of waste discharge and sewer inflow that may, directly or cumulatively, substantially contribute to adverse water quality conditions (including but not limited to total dissolved solids, sodium, chloride and boron) in reclaimed water;

5. Tributary Protection Measures. Develop recommended control measures and management practices for each designated tributary area to maintain or improve the quality of reclaimed water. Such control measures may include capital improvements to the sewer collection system and waste discharge restrictions for industrial, commercial and residential discharges;

6. Mandatory Reclaimed Water Use. For each reclaimed water service area, evaluate whether greenbelt irrigation, agricultural irrigation, commercial office buildings, filling of artificial lakes, or industrial processes shall be limited to the use of reclaimed water. As appropriate, mandate construction of reclaimed water distribution systems or other facilities in new and existing developments for current or future reclaimed water use as a condition of any development approval or continued water service, if future reclamation facilities are proposed in the master plan that could adequately serve the development, in accordance with the procedures described in PMC 13.10.050. Identify resources and adopt measures to assist water users in the financing of necessary conversions;

7. Rules and Regulations. Establish by resolution, general rules and regulations governing the use and distribution of reclaimed water;

8. Public Awareness Program. Establish a comprehensive water reclamation public awareness program;

9. Coordination Among Agencies. An examination of the potential for initiating a coordinated effort between the City and other regional agencies to share in the production and utilization of reclaimed water. (Ord. 290 § 2, 1989)

13.10.050 Procedures.
A. Existing Potable Water Service.

1. Preliminary Determination. Based upon the master plan, upon the designation of each reclaimed water service area or the commencement of the design of new reclaimed water facilities, the City shall make preliminary determinations as to which existing potable water customers shall be converted to the use of reclaimed water. Each water customer shall be notified of the basis for a determination that conversion to reclaimed water service will be required, as well as the proposed conditions and schedule for conversion.

2. Notice. The notice of the preliminary determination, including the proposed conditions and time schedule for compliance, and a reclaimed water permit application shall be sent to the water customer by certified mail.

3. Objections – Appeals. The water customer may file a notice of objection with the City within 30 days after of any notice of determination to comply is delivered or mailed to the customer, and may request reconsideration of the determination or modification of the proposed conditions or schedule for conversion. The objection must be in writing and specify the reason for the objection. The preliminary determination shall be final if the customer does not file a timely objection. The City Manager or his designee, shall review the objection with the objector, and shall confirm, modify or abandon the preliminary determination.

B. Development and Water Service Approvals.

1. Conditions. Upon application by a developer, owner or water customer (herein referred to as “applicant”) for a tentative map, subdivision map, land use permit, or other development project as defined by Government Code Section 65928 the City staff shall review the master plan and make a preliminary determination whether the current or proposed use of the subject property is required to be served with reclaimed water or to include facilities designed to accommodate the use of reclaimed water in the future. Based upon such determination, use of reclaimed water and provision of reclaimed water distribution systems or other facilities for the use of reclaimed water, and application for a permit for such use may be required as a condition of approval of any such application, in addition to any other conditions of approval.

2. Alterations and Remodeling. On a case-by-case basis, upon application for a permit for the alteration or remodeling of multifamily, commercial or industrial structures (including, for example, hotels), the City staff shall review the master plan and make a preliminary determination whether the subject property shall be required to be served with reclaimed water or to include facilities designed to accommodate the use of reclaimed water in the future. Based upon such determination, use of reclaimed water and provision of reclaimed water distribution systems or other facilities for the use of reclaimed water, and application for a permit for such use, may be required as a condition of approval of the application.

3. Notice of Determination. A notice of the basis for the preliminary determination, proposed conditions of approval and schedule for compliance shall be provided to the applicant prior to approval of the development application.

C. Reclaimed Water Permit Process. Upon a final determination by the City Manager that a property shall be served with reclaimed water, or adoption of a condition of development approval requiring use or accommodation of the use of reclaimed water, the water customer, owner or applicant shall obtain a reclaimed water permit.

1. Permit Conditions. The permit shall specify the design and operational requirements for the applicant’s water distribution facilities and schedule for compliance, based on the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to PMC 13.10.040(B) and shall require compliance with both the California Department of Health Services Wastewater Reclamation Criteria (see California Code of Administrative Regulations, Title 22), and requirements of the Regional Water Quality Control Board.

2. Plan Approval. Plans for the reclaimed and potable water distribution systems for the parcel shall be reviewed by the City Manager or his designee and a field inspection conducted before the permit is granted.

3. Permit Issuance. Upon approval of plans, the permit shall be issued. Reclaimed water shall not be supplied to a property until inspection by the City Manager or his designee determines that the applicant is in compliance with the permit conditions.

D. Temporary Use of Potable Water. Upon the approval of the City Manager or his designee, potable water may be made available temporarily. Before the applicant receives temporary potable water, a water reclamation permit, as described in PMC 13.10.050(C) must be obtained for new on-site distribution facilities. Prior to commencement of reclaimed water service, an inspection of the on-site facilities will be conducted to verify that the facilities have been maintained and are in compliance with the reclaimed water permit and current requirements for service. Upon verification of compliance, reclaimed water shall be served to the parcel for the intended use. If the facilities are not in compliance, the applicant shall be notified of the corrective actions necessary and shall have at least 30 days to take such actions prior to initiation of enforcement proceedings.

E. Reclaimed Water Rate. The rate charged for reclaimed water shall be established by resolution of the City. (Ord. 290 § 2, 1989)

13.10.070 Sanctions.
A. Public Nuisance. Discharge of wastes or the use of reclaimed water in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any permit issued hereunder is declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the City Manager or his designee. Any person creating such a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. Injunction. Whenever a discharge of wastes or use of reclaimed water is in violation of this chapter or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of nuisance, the City may seek injunctive relief as may be appropriate to enjoin such discharge or use.

C. Permit Revocation. In addition to any other statute or rule authorizing termination of water service, the City Manager or his designee may revoke a permit issued hereunder if a violation of any provision of this chapter is found to exist or if a discharge of wastes of use or reclaimed water causes or threatens to cause a nuisance.

D. Penalty. Any owner and/or operator who violates this chapter shall, for each day of violation, or portion thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000. In addition, water service to the property may be discontinued. (Ord. 290 § 2, 1989)

13.10.080 Validity.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 290 § 2, 1989)

Chapter 13.11
WATER SERVICE
Sections:

13.11.010    Definitions.

13.11.020    Conditions and limitations of service.

13.11.030    Refusal or discontinuance of water service.

13.11.040    Application for service connection.

13.11.050    Bills and payment.

13.11.060    Reestablishment of service and deposits.

13.11.070    Meter testing.

13.11.080    Automatic fire service.

13.11.090    Fire hydrant meters.

13.11.100    Installation of service connections and meters.

13.11.110    New facilities.

13.11.120    Water rates – Set by resolution.

13.11.130    Prohibited acts.

13.11.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Applicant” means an individual or agency applying for City water service.

“City Council” or “Council” means the City Council of the City of Poway.

“Customer” means an individual or agency of record receiving water service from the City of Poway.

“Customer handle” means the point of connection where the City-maintained water system ends and the customer connection begins.

“Fire service” means provision of water to premises for automatic fire protection.

“Main” means distribution pipelines located in streets, highways, public ways, or private rights-of-way that are used to serve the general public.

“Main extension” means extension of distribution pipelines, exclusive of service connections, beyond existing facilities.

“Meter size” means the standard classification by which water meters are identified, according to the size of orifice.

“Parcel” means a fee ownership parcel as shown on the roll of the San Diego County Assessor or a subsequent division of land into a separate parcel or lot as shown on a county-approved division of land map thereof, or for which an unrevoked certificate of compliance has been issued by the City or county. See “lot” as defined in PMC 17.04.440.

“Premises” means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided.

“Residential” means the provision of water for household purposes, including water for sprinkling lawns, gardens, and shrubbery; watering livestock; washing vehicles, and other similar and customary purposes.

“Service connection” means the pipe, valves, and other facilities used by the City to convey water from its distribution mains to the meter.

“Water unit” means 100 cubic feet of water, which is equivalent to approximately 748 gallons of water. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.020 Conditions and limitations of service.
As a condition of connection to the City’s water system, and continued water service, all customers agree to the following conditions and limitations of City water service, for which the City shall incur no liability or damages:

A. No Guarantee of Continual Service. The City is not a guarantor of continual water service in any quantity, or at any pressure for any purpose, including fire protection.

B. Shutdowns and Variations in Water Service. All water service is subject to shutdowns and variations in water service as required for the operation of the system, and resulting from causes within and outside the City’s control.

C. Malfunctioning of Water System. The City shall incur no liability or damages as a result of the failure or malfunctioning of any portion of its water system, or from inadequate water quantity or pressure.

D. Water Pressure. The City shall incur no liability or damages as a result of City water system pressures exceeding the pressure limitations of a customer’s system, and the customer may be required to install and maintain a pressure regulator to protect the customer’s system.

E. Water System Rules, Regulations and Charges. All customers agree to abide by and be subject to all rules and regulations, fees, rates, and charges pertaining to water service that are adopted by the City Council.

F. Responsibility for Maintenance of Customer’s Equipment. The City’s jurisdiction and responsibility ends at the customer handle connected to the meter. All equipment, including the service line, on the customer’s side of the customer handle is the customer’s sole responsibility to furnish, install, and maintain. The City shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by spigots, faucets, valves, pumps, and other equipment that are open when water is turned on at the meter, either when the water is turned on originally, or when turned on after a temporary shutdown. All customers are required, as a condition of receiving water service, to maintain their service line and other equipment in good repair and free from leakage at the customer’s own expense.

G. Recommendations as to Customer Facilities. Recommendations made to a customer by the City or its agents regarding matters such as the customer’s plumbing or appliances, use of water on the customer’s premises, or the location of the customer’s facilities will be made or offered without charge, except as otherwise provided, and shall result in no liability or damages to the City.

H. Ownership of Meters. The City shall retain ownership of all meters installed within the City. Payment by a customer of installation fees, capacity fees, meter charges, connection charges, or any other fees and charges shall not transfer ownership of a meter from the City to a customer.

I. Temporary Suspension and Restoration of Water Service. The City shall have the right to temporarily suspend delivery of water when necessary or convenient for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to its system, or in the case of an emergency, and shall incur no liability or damages for interruption in service. The City shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by spigots, faucets, valves, pumps, and other equipment that are open when water is turned on at the meter, either when the water is turned on originally, or when turned on after a temporary shutdown.

J. Water Quality. When furnishing water for human consumption, the City will endeavor to supply safe and potable water at all times, but shall have no liability or damages resulting from variations in water quality or variations in the chemical composition of the water it furnishes.

K. Access to Premises and Use. The City or its duly authorized agents shall at all reasonable times have the right to enter a customer’s premises for any purpose related to the service of water to a customer. The City shall also have the right to use, without cost or obligation to contribute to the maintenance thereof, any easement of a customer necessary to service or maintain any part of the City’s water system that benefits the customer.

L. Resale of Water. Except by special agreement with the City, no customer shall resell any of the water received from the City, nor shall such water be delivered to premises other than those specified in the application for service.

M. Unsafe Apparatus. The City may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to any premises where apparatus, appliances, or equipment using water is dangerous, unsafe, or not in conformity with any laws or ordinances. The City does not assume liability for inspecting apparatus on the customer’s property. The City reserves the right to inspect the premises if there is reason to believe that unsafe apparatus is in use.

N. Installation of Service Connections and Meters. Only duly authorized employees, contractors, or agents of the City will be permitted to install or remove any service connection, meter, or backflow prevention device.

O. Damage to City’s Property. The customer shall be liable to the City for the cost of repairing any damage to a meter or other equipment or property owned by the City, if the damage is caused by an act of a customer or customer’s tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees, or permittees.

P. Construction of Facilities. All facilities that are a part of the City’s system, including mains and fire hydrants, must be of a design and size and shall be engineered, constructed, and installed in accordance with the City’s standards and requirements.

Q. Notices to Customers. Notices from the City to a customer will normally be given in writing, and either delivered or mailed to the customer’s last known address, except in the case of an emergency. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.030 Refusal or discontinuance of water service.
A. The City may refuse to furnish water service or may discontinue water service to any premises in the following circumstances:

1. A customer’s water usage is detrimental or injurious to other customers or to public health and safety, or results in inadequate service to other customers.

2. A customer has engaged in fraud in obtaining water service, or is engaged in theft of water service.

3. A customer has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the provisions set forth in PMC 13.11.130, and after receiving written notice of the violation and the City’s intention to discontinue service has failed to correct the violation within the time frame set forth in the written notice. In the event of a violation that presents a threat to public health and safety, the City may discontinue water service immediately and without notice.

4. A customer has failed to pay all rates, fees, deposits, and charges and other amounts payable to the City for water service when due.

B. Restoration of Service. The City may charge a fee, as adopted by the City Council from time to time, for restoring water service which has been discontinued because of noncompliance with these rules, or discontinued at the customer’s request. An additional fee may be charged by the City for a request to restore service outside of normal business hours. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.040 Application for service connection.
A. Each applicant for a service connection will be required to sign a form provided by the City.

B. The application shall be accompanied by a payment of all required deposits, fees, and charges then in effect.

C. Changes in Customer’s Equipment or Use of Service. Any customer making a material change in the size, character, or extent of the customer’s equipment or operations related to water service, resulting in an increase in the customer’s use of water or a change in the character of the customer’s water usage, shall immediately give the City notice of the change. The City may require that the customer’s service or meter size be increased at the customer’s expense, if the City deems it necessary due to the customer’s change in equipment or operations.

D. Meter Installation. The City has sole authority to determine the meter size and type installed based upon the amount and character of the customer’s water use. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.050 Bills and payment.
A. Billing Period. Bills for water service and special charges will be rendered monthly or bimonthly.

B. Bills for Less than Billing Cycle. For periods of service of less than a full billing cycle, fixed charges, such as capacity charges, shall be applied on a pro rata basis, and commodity charges shall be charged in full.

C. Payment of Bills.

1. Periodic bills are due and payable by the due date stated on the bill.

2. Closing bills are due and payable immediately upon closing of the account.

3. Mailed payments will not be credited until received by the City at the designated place of payment. If paid by a check that is not honored, payments will not be credited until the check or substitute therefor is honored.

4. When bills are delinquent, the City may demand that the full amount of both delinquent and current charges be paid in full.

5. A delinquent charge and any other applicable charges, as adopted by the City Council, shall be added to the amount of any bill not paid in full within 30 days of the original statement date. A customer’s water service may be discontinued for nonpayment of any delinquency charge.

D. Billing for Service to Multiple Units. Billing for service to multiple units through a single service is the responsibility of the applicant.

E. Customer’s Request for Service Discontinuance.

1. A customer may have water service discontinued by notifying the City at least one day in advance of the desired date of discontinuance except Saturday, Sunday, and holidays, and the customer will be required to pay all water charges accrued until the date of such discontinuance.

2. If notice of discontinuance is not given, the customer will be required to pay for water service until such time that the City has learned that the customer has vacated the premises or otherwise has discontinued service.

F. Payment of Bills – Multiple Service Locations.

1. A customer’s water service may be discontinued for failure to pay for water service previously furnished to the customer, regardless of the location at which the customer received the previous service. The City may refuse to furnish water at any location to such customer until all outstanding bills are paid, plus any applicable penalties and deposits.

2. If a customer receives water service at more than one location and the bill for service at any one location becomes delinquent, water service at all locations may be discontinued. Residential service, however, will not be discontinued for nonpayment of bills for other classes of service, such as commercial/industrial service. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.060 Reestablishment of service and deposits.
A. Reestablishment of Service. To reestablish service after service has been discontinued for nonpayment, a customer will be required to pay all amounts due from the customer, and any applicable deposits, as well as compliance with all terms and conditions of this chapter.

B. Deposits. The City may require a deposit as a condition of receiving water service, in an amount established by the City Manager or City Manager’s designee, in the following circumstances:

1. Metered Service. The amount required to establish credit for metered service, including any minimum, shall be determined by the City Manager or City Manager’s designee. Unless otherwise determined, the deposit amount shall be equal to twice the estimated average of the periodic charges, but not less than $25.00.

2. Temporary service.

3. Restoration of service after discontinuance of service.

4. Meter testing.

C. Unpaid Accounts. Deposits prescribed herein may be applied to unpaid bills for water service when such service has been discontinued. The City may require the customer to deposit a specified amount before providing water service again.

D. Refund or Disposition of Deposits. All deposits, less the amount of any unpaid water bills, will be refunded without interest, upon discontinuance of service. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.070 Meter testing.
A. Customer Request for Meter Testing.

1. A customer may submit a request for the City to test the customer’s meter, by giving not less than one week’s notice in writing of the request.

2. The City may require the customer to deposit an amount to cover the cost of the test.

3. This deposit will be returned to the customer if the meter is found to be registering fast, in excess of American Water Works Association Standards. The customer will be notified, not less than five days in advance, of the time and place of the test.

B. Adjustment of Bills for Meter Error.

1. Fast Meters. When a meter is tested and found to be registering in excess of American Water Works Association Standards, under conditions of normal operation, the City will refund to the customer the full amount of the overcharge based on corrected meter readings for the period that the meter was in use, not to exceed six months.

2. Slow Meters. When a meter used for residential or commercial service is tested and found to be registering slow, according to American Water Works Standards, the City may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings for the period that the meter was in use, not to exceed six months.

3. Nonregistering Meters. The City may bill a customer for water consumed while the customer’s meter was not registering. The bill will include the fixed water capacity fee as well as an estimate of the customer’s consumption. Consumption will be estimated using an average of up to three years of the customer’s consumption during the same billing period, if available.

4. Undersized Meters. The City, in its sole discretion, and at the customer’s sole expense, may increase the size of a customer’s meter, or reduce the flow of water service to the customer, when the City determines that the customer’s meter is of insufficient size to accurately register the customer’s water usage, or to provide adequate water flow for approved residential fire sprinkler systems, as provided in PMC 15.24.070. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.080 Automatic fire service.
A. Purpose. An automatic fire service connection will be furnished for fire protection purposes only, and no other use shall be permitted from such a system. A fire service connection will only be permitted on premises receiving City water service. Connection size will be determined by the City, in accordance with applicable engineering standards.

B. Application. Applicant will be required to submit plans to safety services for approval prior to obtaining a fire service connection.

C. Installation Charges for Work by the City. The applicant will be required to provide a deposit in advance of the estimated cost of installing the service connection. Actual cost of the installation will be charged and the deposit credited to the applicant when installation is completed.

D. Fire Sprinkler Lateral Standards. A fire sprinkler lateral shall be constructed in accordance with the City’s standard specifications and drawings. The gate valve at the main is the point at which the City’s maintenance responsibility ends.

E. Pressure and Supply. The service is subject to the same conditions and limitations applicable to all City water service. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.090 Fire hydrant meters.
A. Installation Charge and Deposits. An applicant for a fire hydrant meter will be required to comply with all of the following conditions:

1. Completion of all applicable forms and agreements.

2. Payment to City for all applicable charges for installing and removing all facilities necessary to furnish such service.

3. Payment of a deposit, in an amount as established by the City Manager or City Manager’s designee, to be held by the City during the entire period such temporary service is used. Refund, without interest, will be the total amount of deposit less charges for meter loss or damage, closing water bill, and/or installation or removal of facilities.

B. Responsibility for Damages. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of any damage or loss to the facilities, meter, meter fittings, or surrounding public improvements as a result of the applicant’s use of a fire hydrant meter.

C. It is unlawful for any person to operate the valve of any fire hydrant without City authorization, and compliance with all of the following requirements: (1) use of a City-issued hydrant meter; (2) use of an appropriate backflow device supplied by the customer; and (3) use of a spanner wrench designed for that purpose. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.100 Installation of service connections and meters.
A. General Rule. Services and meters shall be installed on a main fronting the parcel to be served. In the case of a parcel not fronting an existing main, the service and meter may be installed on an existing main that does not front the parcel if the City Engineer determines that the nonfronting main is the main from which the parcel should ultimately receive regular service; and provided, that all necessary easements have been acquired.

B. Temporary Service. In the case of a parcel not fronting an existing main, where the City Engineer has determined that the main from which the parcel should ultimately receive regular service does not currently exist but could be built in the future, an application for temporary service from an existing main not fronting the parcel may be approved at the discretion of the Director of Development Services.

As a condition of receiving temporary service from a main not fronting the parcel, the owner of the parcel, in addition to payment of all fees and charges applicable to regular service, must execute and acknowledge a recorded agreement providing for:

1. Installation and maintenance of a pipeline and other required facilities from the temporary meter to the owner’s parcel and acquisition of any required easements, all at owner’s expense;

2. Discontinuance of temporary service and application for regular service at an appropriate point closer to the owner’s parcel upon installation of a main that the City Engineer determines is the main from which the parcel should receive regular service;

3. Payment by the owner of the entire cost of relocation and any applicable connection charges, including a pro rata share of the cost of installation of such main and any service area charge, the total of which shall not be less than the City’s then-established connection fee and service area charge to others for such regular service; and

4. Such other matters as the City may reasonably require.

C. Location and Size. Upon receiving an application for any service connection, the City will furnish or authorize installation of a service connection, the size and location of which are within the City’s sole discretion. The service connection will be installed from the main to the curb line or property line of the parcel that abuts on a street or other thoroughfare, or on a City right-of-way.

D. Separate Service Required. All separate parcels requiring City water service shall have separate service.

E. Multiple Units.

1. Number of Services to Separate Premises. Separate premises will be supplied through separate service connections except as otherwise authorized by the City.

2. Service to Multiple Units. Separate houses, buildings, living, or business quarters on the same parcel or adjoining parcels, under single ownership, or management and control, may be served at the option of the City by either of the following methods:

a. Through separate service to each or any unit; provided, that the pipeline system to each service is independent of the others, and it is not interconnected.

b. Through a single service to the entire premises. In the event of the sale or separation of management and control of a portion of property subsequent to application for water service, the portion sold or separated will no longer be considered as premises entitled to water from this service connection.

F. Meters.

1. Water Service Required to Be Metered. All City water service is required to pass through a meter. It shall be unlawful for any person to use City water in any manner in which the water does not pass through a meter, or in circumstances where the meter is not functioning properly due to tampering or alteration.

2. Change in Location of Meters or Service Connections. Meters or service connections relocated for the convenience of the customer will be relocated at the customer’s expense. Meters or service connections relocated to protect the City’s property will be moved at City expense, except in the case of temporary service connections.

3. Changes in Size of Meter.

a. Reductions. The City will approve a reduction in meter size only when the customer’s water demand does not exceed the capacity of the reduced size meter. A reduction in meter size is subject to all applicable fee payments and credits in effect at the time of the reduction.

b. Increases. The City reserves the right and has the sole authority to replace any undersized meter with a larger meter when the customer’s water demand exceeds the capacity of the existing meter, or based on a change in the customer’s type of water use. The City’s determination regarding appropriate meter size shall be based on American Water Works Association standards. Replacement of an undersized meter shall be at the customer’s sole expense. Any increase in meter size shall be subject to full payment of all applicable fees and charges, including City capacity charges and San Diego County Water Authority connections fees, if any. Credit shall be given for any capacity or connection fees and charges previously paid. (Ord. 772 § 4, 2014)

13.11.110 New facilities.
A. General Policy. Except for facilities constructed by the City with the proceeds of bond funds or general funds, it is the policy of the City to require that new facilities be constructed at the expense of property owners or developers requesting service.

B. Extensions of Mains. All water main extensions within the public right-of-way shall be extended fully across the frontage of all parcels to be served. Where the boundary of the property or subdivision shall also be the boundary of the City, the pipeline may be terminated approximately five feet inside the last parcel.

C. Looping of Water Mains. Looping of water mains to eliminate dead-end water mains may be required as a condition of development, when the City Engineer determines that the looping is necessary for the purpose of improving water quality.

D. City Participation – Excess Sizing. Where the City requires construction of a pipeline greater in size than that required for service to the development, either within the development or off site, the City shall participate in the cost thereof in the following manner: The entire cost of such line must be initially provided by the developer, including the cost of survey, engineering, and right-of-way. The City will agree with the developer to refund to the developer, without interest and within five years from the City Council’s acceptance of such line, such amount as may be approved by the City Council. If the City participates in the cost of the line, the applicable connection fees shall be divided proportionately between the City and the installer.

E. Reimbursement Agreement. A property owner or developer constructing water system improvements that benefit other properties may be eligible to enter into a reimbursement agreement pursuant to Chapter 13.24 PMC.

F. Construction Agreement. All facilities shall be constructed under agreements containing such standard and special conditions, including the payment of City expenses and charges, as approved by the City Council.

G. Other Fees and Charges. By constructing facilities, the developer shall not be relieved of the obligation to pay all applicable connection, meter, and service installation, expansion, or other fees or charges approved by the City Council. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

13.11.120 Water rates – Set by resolution.
Bimonthly water service charges and rates for residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional customers shall be established by resolution as may be adopted by the City Council from time to time, to be imposed on the water services provided as set forth in the resolution establishing such charges. (Ord. 784 § 4, 2016)

13.11.130 Prohibited acts.
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to:

1. Make any unauthorized connection with any City water main or lateral for the purpose of obtaining water without authorization from the City.

2. Tamper with a meter so that water may be obtained without passing through the meter, or otherwise use City water in any manner in which the water does not pass through a meter.

3. Tamper with, alter, interfere with, or damage any meter so that it does not register correctly.

4. Break any lock or seal that has been placed over a shutoff valve, or restore water service without authorization from the City following discontinuance of service.

5. Damage or deface any meter or other apparatus or property of the City water system.

6. Place on, about, or around any water meter or hydrant any building material, rubbish, vegetation, or other obstruction so as to prevent free access to the same. For purposes of this section, “free access to a water meter” means the maintenance of two feet of clearance on all sides of the meter, and no obstructions above the meter. For purposes of this section, “free access to a hydrant” means the maintenance of three feet of clearance on all sides of the hydrant, and no obstructions above the hydrant.

7. Place any encroachment, including but not limited to any buildings, walls, fences, improvements, wells, pools, sewage treatment systems or leach fields, trees, shrubs, rubbish, vehicles, or other obstructions, on a City easement used for purposes of the water system or the provision of water service, without written City authorization.

8. Keep any dangerous dog or other animal at large in any enclosure containing a meter box or shutoff valve.

9. Interfere in any manner with any employee of the City in the performance of official duties.

10. Fail or refuse to admit, during reasonable hours, any authorized employee or agent of the City to any premises supplied with City water for a purpose related to the service of water to the premises.

11. Supply water to a person whose water service has been discontinued for nonpayment of bills, or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

12. Open a hydrant or draw water from a hydrant or other water facility owned by the City without City authorization.

13. Obtain water from the City’s water system by theft or fraud.

14. Sale of City water to another person, except pursuant to a written agreement with the City.

B. Penalties.

1. Liability for Damage or Costs. Any damage to property of the City resulting from a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be charged to the person responsible for such damage as a part of the regular water bill. Any cost incurred by the City for removal of any obstructions or encroachments upon City equipment or City easements shall be charged to the person responsible for placement of the obstruction or encroachment.

2. Liability for Water Taken without Payment. In the case of any water taken without payment, it shall be presumed that a minimum of $1,000 worth of water was used. The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee shall have the discretion to increase or decrease the estimate of unauthorized use, based on the available evidence.

3. Discontinuance of Water Service. In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the City may discontinue the water service to the premises of the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the violation.

4. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, as set forth in Chapter 1.08 PMC, and, in the alternative, shall be subject to civil and administrative penalties, as set forth in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC. (Ord. 697 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 13.12
CEMETERIES
Sections:

13.12.010    Purpose.

13.12.020    Definitions.

13.12.030    Cemetery deemed established.

13.12.040    Permit – Nontransferable.

13.12.050    Permit – Application data and maps required.

13.12.060    New applications after denial.

13.12.070    Public cemetery districts – Application for extension.

13.12.080    Application fee.

13.12.090    Notice of hearing.

13.12.100    Application – Investigation and report.

13.12.110    Conditional use permit – City Council action.

13.12.120    Conditional use permit – City Council findings.

13.12.130    Conditional use permit – Annual review.

13.12.010 Purpose.
The City Council may grant a conditional use permit for the establishment or maintenance of any cemetery or extension of the boundaries of any existing cemetery within the City provided that findings can be made that such cemetery in the proposed location shall not jeopardize or adversely affect the health, safety, comfort or welfare of the public. No person shall establish or maintain any cemetery or extend the boundaries of any existing cemetery within the City without having obtained a conditional use permit. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the maintenance, development and operation within their present boundaries of established cemeteries. For the purpose of this chapter, “cemetery” and “pet cemetery” may be used interchangeably. As such, rules and regulations pertaining to “cemeteries” shall also apply to “pet cemeteries.” (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.020 Definitions.
“Cemetery” means a place used for the permanent interment of human remains, or pets, or the cremated remains thereof. “Pet cemetery” means a place used for the permanent interment of small animal remains, as defined by the City Code, or the cremated remains thereof. “Cemetery” or “pet cemetery” may be either a burial park for interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments or a combination of two or more thereof. (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.030 Cemetery deemed established.
A cemetery shall be deemed to be established and/or maintained and/or extended where the interment of one or more human remains or cremated remains is made in or upon any property, whether or not the same has been duly and regularly dedicated to cemetery purposes under the laws of the State; and any person who shall make or cause to be made any interment in or upon any such property who shall knowingly permit the interment of a human remains or cremated remains therein or thereupon shall be deemed to have established and/or maintained and/or extended a cemetery within the meaning of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.040 Permit – Nontransferable.
No conditional use permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be assignable prior to the actual establishment of the cemetery or extension of any existing cemetery as authorized by the permit, nor shall such permit be used by any person other than the applicant in the establishment of such cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery. (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.050 Permit – Application data and maps required.
Any person desiring to establish or maintain a cemetery or extend the boundaries of any existing cemetery shall file an application for a conditional use permit with the Development Services Director as prescribed in the City Code. The application shall include the following additional information:

A. The names, addresses and applicable State licenses of all officers and directors of the corporation or organization which will be in charge of the operation of the cemetery.

B. A map showing the exact location, exterior boundaries and legal description of the property which is proposed to be used for a cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery. Said map shall also show wells existing on site or within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property along with cemetery buildings and burial plots.

C. A proposal for the perpetual care of the facility and proof of financial ability to develop and maintain the facility in such a manner as to prevent the proposed cemetery from becoming a public nuisance. If a perpetual care fund is to be or has been created, the statement shall set forth in details the amount then on hand and the method, scheme or plan of continuing and adding to the same.

D. The Development Services Director may waive requirements of this section or require additional data as deemed necessary to the decision-making process. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.060 New applications after denial.
As prescribed in the City Code, following a denial of a conditional use permit application for the establishment or expansion of a cemetery, no application for the same or substantially the same cemetery at the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial of the use permit. (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.070 Public cemetery districts – Application for extension.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 13.12.050, where a public cemetery district formed pursuant to Part 2 of Division 8 if the California Health and Safety Code proposes to extend an existing cemetery, the application for the permit required by this chapter shall be signed by an officer of the district and shall set forth the following information:

1. The name and business address of the district;

2. A legal description of the land included within the extension;

3. A map showing:

a. The location of the exterior boundaries of the existing cemetery and the boundaries of the proposed extension,

b. The location of all buildings, whether public or private, within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of said extension and the location of all wells within the 300 feet;

4. Such other information as the Director of Development Services may require.

B. Notice of public hearing may be given according to PMC 13.12.090. (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.080 Application fee.
The applicant shall be charged a filing fee established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.090 Notice of hearing.
The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the application for the cemetery. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed by this code for a conditional use permit.

A. A copy of the notice of the cemetery hearing;

B. A vicinity map for the project site. (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.100 Application – Investigation and report.
The Development Services Director shall make an investigation of the application or proposal and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the City Council and to the applicant prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.110 Conditional use permit – City Council action.
The City Council may grant by resolution a conditional use permit as the permit was applied for or in modified form, or the application may be denied. The decision of the City Council is final and effective within 10 calendar days unless a request for a rehearing is filed in accordance with Chapter 2.21 PMC. (Ord. 492 § 4, 1998; Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.120 Conditional use permit – City Council findings.
The City Council shall make the findings required for approval of a conditional use permit by the code before granting or modifying a conditional use permit for the cemetery. (Ord. 346, 1991)

13.12.130 Conditional use permit – Annual review.
Conditional use permits for cemeteries shall be subject to annual review by the Director of Development Services for compliance with the conditions of approval and to address concerns that may have occurred during the past year. If the permit is not in compliance with the conditions of approval or the Development Services Department has received complaints, the required annual review shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council, to consider modification of the use permit. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 346, 1991)

Chapter 13.14
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Sections:

13.14.010    Title.

13.14.020    Purpose and intent.

13.14.030    Definitions.

13.14.040    Policies.

13.14.050    Responsibility.

13.14.060    Open for inspections.

13.14.070    Requirements.

13.14.080    Type of protection required.

13.14.090    Approved backflow prevention devices.

13.14.100    Certification of backflow prevention assemblies.

13.14.110    Penalties and liability for damages.

13.14.120    Consumer protest.

13.14.130    Certification of backflow testers.

13.14.140    Fire protection systems.

13.14.150    Retrofitting fire protection systems with backflow prevention devices.

13.14.160    Maintenance, testing, and seismic failures.

13.14.170    Location of equipment.

13.14.180    Appeal.

13.14.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “cross-connection control ordinance.” (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.020 Purpose and intent.
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Title 17, Chapter V, Section 7583 through Section 7605, inclusive of the California Code of Administrative Regulations entitled, “Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections,” which sets forth rules and regulations governing cross-connections.

B. The City Council declares this chapter is adopted for the following purposes:

1. To protect the public potable water supply of the City of Poway from the possibility of contamination or pollution from a consumer’s internal water system;

2. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between a consumer’s potable water system and that consumer’s nonpotable water system, plumbing fixtures and/or industrial piping systems;

3. To provide for a continuing program of cross-connection control which systematically and effectively prevents the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.030 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this chapter, whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized:

“Administrative authority” means the individual official, board, department, or agency established and authorized by a state, county, city, or other political subdivision created by law to administer and enforce the provisions of a cross-connection control program.

“Air-gap separation” means a physical separation between a water supply pipe and a container to receive the water where the vertical separation is at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, as measured vertically above the flood rim of the receiving container. In no case shall the separation be less than one inch.

“Approved” used in reference to an air-gap, double check valve assembly, reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall mean an approval by the City of Poway Public Works Department.

“Auxiliary water supply” means any unapproved water supply located on the premises of a water user that is not received from the public potable water system. Examples are wells, ponds, lakes, streams, rivers, and untreated water reservoirs.

“Backflow” means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source other than an approved water supply source. Back-siphonage is one cause of backflow; backpressure is the other cause.

“Backflow prevention assembly” means an air-gap or a plumbing device that is intended to prevent the backflow of liquids or gases into the public water system.

“Backpressure” means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration, which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow.

“Back-siphonage” means the flow of water (or other liquids, mixtures, or substances) into the public water distribution system from any source other than its intended source, caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the public water distribution system.

“Certified backflow prevention assembly tester” means a person who is certified by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) or American Backflow Prevention Association (ABPA) and has proven ability to the satisfaction of the City of Poway and the San Diego County Department of Environmental Health (DEH).

“City” means the City of Poway.

“Class 1 fire protection system” means a fire prevention system that is only supplied by a direct connection to the public water system’s water main and contains no pumps or reservoirs, antifreeze or additives of any kind, and where all sprinkler drains discharge to the atmosphere.

“Class 2 fire protection system” means a fire prevention system that is identical to a Class 1 system with the exception that booster pumps may be installed in the service line from the public water system main.

“Class 3 fire protection system” means a fire prevention system that is only supplied by a direct connection to the public water system’s water main and includes on-site storage facilities or pressure tanks.

“Class 4 fire protection system” means a fire prevention system that is identical to a Class 1 or Class 2 system with the exception that there is an auxiliary water supply located on the premises.

“Class 5 fire protection system” means a fire prevention system that is only supplied by a direct connection to the public water system’s main and is also interconnected to an auxiliary water supply.

“Class 6 fire protection system” means a fire prevention system that is only supplied by a direct connection to the public water system’s main and is also interconnected to any unapproved water supply.

“Consumer” means the owner or operator of an on-site water system(s) receiving service from the City of Poway’s public potable water system.

“Contamination” or “contaminant” means an impairment of the quality of the water that creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste, etc.

“Cross-connection” means any unprotected, actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a public or a consumer’s potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable water system any contaminant, used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can occur, are considered to be cross-connections.

“Cross-connection control by containment” means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in any customer system at the water service connection.

“Cross-connection control specialist” means a person who has been certified as a cross-connection control specialist by the AWWA.

“Degree of hazard” means either pollutant (nonhealth) or contaminant (health) hazard and is derived from the evaluation of conditions within the system.

“Director of Public Works” means the Director of Public Works or designee charged with authority to enforce this chapter. The Director of Public Works has sole discretion in relation to the termination of water service as relates to this chapter.

“Double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA)” means a specially designed assembly composed of a line-size approved double check valve assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for only very low rates of flow up to three gallons per minute (GPM) and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a nonhealth hazard (i.e., pollutant). The DCDA is primarily used on fire sprinkler systems.

“Double check valve backflow prevention assembly (DC)” means an assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves that include tightly closing, resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used against a nonhealth hazard (i.e., pollutant).

“Health agency” means the California State Department of Health Services (DHS) or the San Diego County Department of Environmental Health (DEH).

“Metered service connection” means the terminal end of a service connection from the City system (i.e., where the City loses control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer system), being the downstream end of the meter. Service connections include metered water service connections from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the City systems.

“Nonpotable water” means water that is not safe for human consumption.

“Pollution” or “pollutant” means an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree that does not create a hazard to the public health, but that does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use.

“Potable water” means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption.

“Reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly containing two independently acting, approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent, pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and, at the same time, below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. This assembly is used to protect against a nonhealth (pollutant) or a health (contaminant) hazard.

“Reduced-pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly (RPDA)” means a specially designed assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register for only very low rates of flow up to three GPM and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall be used to protect against a nonhealth (pollutant) or a health (contaminant) hazard. The RPDA is primarily used on fire sprinkler systems.

“Service connection” means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system (i.e., where the water purveyor may lose jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to the consumer’s water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the water meter.

“Service protection” means the appropriate type or method of backflow protection at the service connection, commensurate with the degree of hazard of the consumer’s potable water system.

“Site supervisor” means a person designated by a water user who has the responsibility for the avoidance of cross-connections during the installation, operation and maintenance of the water user’s pipelines and related equipment.

“Water purveyor” means the City of Poway as operator of the public water system supplying an approved water supply to the public.

“Water user” means any person authorized by the water purveyor to receive water from the public water system. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.040 Policies.
A. The City of Poway may require an approved backflow prevention device at any metered water service connection to assure that no contaminants or pollutants enter the public water system. The consumer shall install such approved device or devices at the consumer’s own expense. The City shall give a 30-day notice in writing to the affected consumer to install an approved backflow prevention device at each of such consumer’s metered water service connections. If the required backflow device has not been installed within 30 days of the first notice, a second 15-day notice shall be issued. The failure, refusal or inability to install the device shall be grounds for discontinuance of water service to the metered water service connections until the device or devices have been properly installed.

B. The Director of Public Works or designee shall be responsible for maintaining a cross-connection control and backflow prevention program consisting of:

1. Conducting surveys at consumer sites to evaluate any actual or potential hazards that pose a threat to the public water system;

2. Maintaining records of all backflow devices used as metered service protection within the City’s jurisdiction;

3. Requiring annual testing of all backflow prevention devices used as metered service protection;

4. Inspecting all backflow prevention devices used as metered water service protection at the time of installation. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.050 Responsibility.
The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. An approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the City’s water service connection to any customer’s premises or at other locations in the consumer’s water system for the safety of the public water system. The Director of Public Works shall give the consumer written notice to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at each service connection to a premises. The notice shall clearly state that:

A. The customer shall install such approved device or devices at his own expense within the time frame allotted by the City of Poway.

B. The refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices shall constitute grounds for discontinuing service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed. Final authority for discontinuance or restoration of service shall require the approval of the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.060 Open for inspections.
The consumer’s system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this code and State laws and regulations, exist. When such conditions become known, the City shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line or by locking off the meter until the consumer has corrected the conditions. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.070 Requirements.
An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on a consumer’s water service where actual or potential hazards to the public water system exist. Conditions that require backflow prevention include:

A. Premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not, or may not be, of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not an approved water supply by the City of Poway. The public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard;

B. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other substances are handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system. This shall include premises having an auxiliary water supply or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system that are no longer under the control of the City of Poway. The system shall be protected by an approved air-gap or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection;

C. In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or where intricate plumbing and piping arrangements exist, or where entry to all portions of the premises are not readily accessible for inspection purposes so that it is impractical or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection;

D. Structures of three or more stories shall have an approved backflow prevention device at the service connection;

E. Unless the Director of Public Works finds that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service connection to a consumer’s water system serving, but not limited to, the following types of facilities:

1. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;

2. Laboratories;

3. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping stations;

4. Food and beverage processing plants;

5. Chemical plants;

6. Metal plating industries;

7. Petroleum processing or storage plants;

8. Car washes;

9. Churches;

10. Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks;

11. Dental offices;

12. Radiator shops;

13. Commercial laundries;

14. Photographic film processing facilities;

15. Veterinary and animal grooming clinics;

16. Taxidermists;

17. Ready-mix concrete;

18. Sand and gravel plants;

19. Schools and colleges;

20. Water services dedicated for landscape irrigation systems;

21. Fire protection systems;

22. Greenhouses;

23. Water tank trucks or water tanks filled from fire hydrants that do not have a visible air gap;

24. Mobile home parks, apartment complexes;

25. Commercial or industrial users;

26. Other uses as determined by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.080 Type of protection required.
The type of approved backflow prevention device shall depend upon the degree of hazard. The Director of Public Works or designee shall determine which device shall be installed depending upon the facts for each particular situation. In determining the degree of hazard and the type of approved backflow device required, the following criteria shall be used:

A. Health or System Hazards. An approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be used where there is an existing or potential health or system hazard. In cases when the existing or potential health or system hazard is determined by the cross-connection staff to be very remote, the City may allow other protection.

B. Pollution Hazards. A double check valve assembly may be used where there is an actual or potential pollution hazard. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.090 Approved backflow prevention devices.
A. Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter and the cross-connection control program shall be a model and size as approved by the City. Approved backflow prevention devices must conform to manufacturing specifications and laboratory and field performance standards established by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research: List of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies.

B. The Public Works Department staff shall keep a current list of approved backflow prevention devices. The list shall be available at the City of Poway, Public Works Department’s Cross-Connection Control Office.

C. Existing backflow prevention devices may be accepted for continued use unless a higher degree of protection is required. If a device is no longer on the current list of approved devices, continued use of existing backflow prevention devices may be allowed if the device can be properly tested and maintained. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.100 Certification of backflow prevention assemblies.
It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed or repaired to have inspections and operational tests completed annually by a certified tester. In those instances where the City of Poway’s cross-connection control staff deems the hazard to be great enough, staff may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the consumer and shall be performed by a certified tester from the City of Poway’s approved tester list. City staff may witness the tests if it is so desired. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.110 Penalties and liability for damages.
A. After reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the City of Poway shall discontinue water service by locking off or removing the customer’s meter to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by this chapter is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the cross-connection control staff, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises.

B. Water service to any premises where service has been discontinued pursuant to this section shall not be restored or unlocked until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this chapter and to the satisfaction of the cross-connection control staff.

C. The city shall not be held liable to any consumers of the city for any injury, damages, or lost revenues, which may result from termination of such consumer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter.

D. The consumer responsible for back-siphoned pollutants or contaminants through backflow, if contamination of the potable water system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device or a device that has been bypassed, shall be liable for the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system and shall be liable for injury that occurs as a result of the contamination.

E. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within a period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.

F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the penalty provided herein and in PMC 1.08.010, shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City by reason of such violation, whether the violation was caused before or after the notice provided in this section. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.120 Consumer protest.
If the consumer files, with the City of Poway, a written protest of the degree of hazard involved and the commensurate degree of protection required to be provided, the matter shall be referred by the City of Poway to the appropriate health agency. If the protest involves a new meter installation, the City of Poway shall not commence water service until the health agency has delivered its written decision to the City. In the event a device is required for existing services and a protest is filed, water service may be discontinued at the discretion of the City of Poway until a written decision is delivered by the health agency. The written decision of the health agency shall be final. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.130 Certification of backflow testers.
A. All backflow testers must possess a current American Water Works Association (AWWA) and/or American Backflow Prevention Association (ABPA) Backflow Tester certificate.

B. All backflow testers shall maintain current status on the San Diego County Department of Environmental Health (DEH) tester list.

C. All backflow testers shall submit to the Director of Public Works a copy of their current AWWA and/or ABPA and DEH tester certificates, and current gauge calibrations for equipment to be used within the City of Poway.

D. Employees of the City are prohibited from testing privately owned backflow devices in the City of Poway, except as part of their official duties. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.140 Fire protection systems.
A. Prior to the installation of any fire protection system, plans shall be submitted to the City of Poway for review of said plans. Accordingly, a backflow prevention device shall be installed for all new commercial underground water supply systems.

B. The City of Poway will inspect all installations of backflow protection on fire systems before water service is approved.

C. Financial responsibility for the installation, testing, and maintenance shall be the consumer’s.

D. Existing consumers with post indicator valves (PIV’s) shall have the sole responsibility for maintenance and repair of said valves. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.150 Retrofitting fire protection systems with backflow prevention devices.
Upon any modification to existing fire protection systems that are not currently protected by either a reduced-pressure detector backflow prevention assembly (RPDA) or double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) will require the underground water supply system to be retrofitted when any of the following occurs:

A. Any change in the fire protection underground water supply system that would require an upgraded increase in the fire service line;

B. Any renovation work to a structure or structures, involving changes and/or additions to the fire sprinkler system, which require an increase in the minimum approved fire flow requirements from the underground fire service supply line;

C. When a leak is detected in the existing underground backflow swing-check valve, requiring replacement;

D. Any failure of the PIV system, which would require more work than the standard maintenance procedures.

In all cases of a retrofit, the fire protection system shall be hydraulically calculated to meet the minimum fire flow demand of the fire sprinkler system. This determination shall be based on compliance with the National Fire Protection Association’s standard for minimum design and water flow requirements for sprinkler systems. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.160 Maintenance, testing, and seismic failures.
Anytime an underground water supply system for an existing fire protection system fails, including maintenance, testing, and seismic failures, the fire protection system shall be retrofitted with approved backflow prevention devices. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.170 Location of equipment.
A. Fire Department connections and above ground backflow prevention devices shall be installed within 40 feet or less from an approved fire hydrant. Where Fire Department connections are used for water supply, they shall be located so as not to be affected by an exposing fire, as approved by the Fire Marshal.

B. Backflow prevention devices shall be located and screened, as appropriate, to minimize their visual impact. Location and screening shall be noted on the improvement plans and be subject to the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

13.14.180 Appeal.
Any determination of the Director of Public Works authorized by this chapter may be appealed first to the City Manager and then in accordance with Chapter 2.20 PMC. No such appeal shall stay the discontinuance of water service if the Director of Public Works determines that the public health and safety require such discontinuance. (Ord. 597 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 13.15
STREET LIGHTING
Sections:

13.15.010    Purpose and scope.

13.15.020    Definitions.

13.15.030    General provisions.

13.15.040    Exemptions.

13.15.050    Conflicts.

13.15.010 Purpose and scope.
It is the purpose and scope of this chapter to provide street lighting standards to minimize glare, light trespass, and artificial sky glow for the benefit of the citizens of the City, and to promote lighting design that provides for public safety, utility and productivity while conserving energy and resources by:

A. Using outdoor light fixtures with good optical control to distribute the light in the most effective and efficient manner;

B. Using the minimum amount of light to meet the lighting criteria;

C. Using shielded outdoor light fixtures;

D. Using light emitting diode (LED), or other equivalent energy efficient outdoor light fixtures, with a correlated color temperature (CCT) of 3,000 Kelvin (K) or less; and

E. Energizing outdoor light fixtures only when necessary, by means of photocell devices from dusk to dawn. (Ord. 825 § 3, 2019)

13.15.020 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

“Correlated color temperature” or “CCT” means the color temperature measured in Kelvins (K) that describes the overall color tone of a white light source.

“Glare” means difficulty seeing in the presence of bright light such as direct or reflected artificial lights.

“Kelvin” means the unit of measure of the color temperature of light sources.

“Lamp” means a device that produces light.

“LED” means light emitting diode, which is a semiconductor device that converts electricity into light.

“Light trespass” means light falling across property boundaries, onto property not containing the originating light source.

“Lumen” means a quantitative unit measuring the actual amount of visible light produced by a lamp.

“Outdoor light fixture” means an artificial lighting assembly (including lamp, housing, reflectors, lenses and shields) which is permanently installed outdoors including, but not limited to, lights for roadways, walkways, parking lots, open canopies, product display areas, landscape and architectural accents, security, recreational facilities, advertising and decorative effects.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, venture, corporation or entity, the singular of which becomes plural.

“Photocell device” means a clock device which automatically activates and deactivates outdoor light fixtures or circuits.

“Shielding” means a combination of techniques or methods of construction, mounting and focusing which causes all light emitted from an outdoor light fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the lowest light-emitting point of the fixture (zero up-light rating).

“Sky glow” means visible light in the sky resulting from light that is reflected and/or refracted by water vapor, dust and other gas molecules in the atmosphere.

“Watt” means the unit of measure of the electrical power consumption of a lamp (not the light output). (Ord. 825 § 3, 2019)

13.15.030 General provisions.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; and those in the plural number include the singular.

B. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.

C. Outdoor light fixtures for street lighting and safety lighting at intersections installed after the effective date of this chapter and thereafter maintained shall comply with the following:

1. Only LED, or other equivalent energy efficient outdoor light fixtures, with a CCT of 2,700 Kelvin or less and up to 70 watts shall be utilized, except where otherwise noted in this chapter. Along arterials and collector streets as defined in the Roadway Classifications of the General Plan Transportation Element, only LED, or other equivalent energy efficient outdoor light fixtures, with a CCT of 3,000 Kelvin or less and up to 115 watts shall be utilized. Street lights within rural residential areas shall be limited except where essential for safety and security purposes and where street lights already exist.

2. All outdoor light fixtures shall be equipped with photocell devices so that such lighting is turned on before dusk and off at dawn as much as practical.

3. In order to preserve the night sky, the types, locations and controlling devices of outdoor light fixtures shall minimize glare, upward light and artificial sky glow and light pollution and light trespass (spill-over) onto adjacent properties.

4. All outdoor light fixtures shall be installed in conformity with this chapter, all other applicable provisions of the Poway Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the National Electrical Codes, the California Energy Code and the California Green Building Code. All outdoor light fixtures shall be field inspected and approved prior to requesting energizing or acceptance.

D. Additional standards for street lighting installed on public rights-of-way and private roads are found in the City of Poway Supplemental Engineering Standards. (Ord. 825 § 3, 2019)

13.15.040 Exemptions.
A. All outdoor light fixtures existing and legally installed prior to the effective date of this chapter are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

B. Temporary uses and holiday lighting not exceeding 45 consecutive days during any one-year period are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

C. All shielded outdoor light fixtures and other types of lighting producing 4,050 lumens or less are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 825 § 3, 2019)

13.15.050 Conflicts.
Where any provision of the statutes, codes or laws of the United States of America or the State of California conflict with any provision of this chapter, the most restrictive shall apply unless otherwise required by law. (Ord. 825 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 13.16
MUNICIPAL SOLAR UTILITY
Sections:

13.16.010    Created.

13.16.020    Direction and control.

13.16.030    City Manager duties – City Council approval.

13.16.010 Created.
A Municipal Solar Utility is created for purposes of satisfying requirements contained in Section 17052.5 or Section 23601 of the California Revenue and Tax Code. (Ord. 76 § 1, 1982)

13.16.020 Direction and control.
The Municipal Solar Utility shall be under the direction and control of the City Manager. (Ord. 76 § 2, 1982)

13.16.030 City Manager duties – City Council approval.
The City Manager shall present for Council approval, rules and regulations governing the activities of the Municipal Solar Utility including a program whose primary activity will be issuing permits to qualified solar leasing businesses, and establishing permittee, and/or consumer protection criteria. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by Council resolution. (Ord. 76 § 3, 1982)

Chapter 13.20
AIRPORTS
Sections:

Article I. Airports – General Provisions

13.20.010    Existing airports exempt.

13.20.020    Nuisance.

Article II. Airports – Zoned Areas – Permits

13.20.030    License – Required.

13.20.040    Application and fee for license – Fee.

Article III. Airport Rules and Regulations – General Provisions

13.20.050    Applicability.

13.20.060    Definitions.

13.20.070    Construction.

13.20.080    Applicability of previous rules.

13.20.090    Unlawful acts – Sanctions.

13.20.100    Nonassumption of liability.

Article IV. General Rules and Regulations

13.20.110    Restricted areas.

13.20.120    Conduct of business.

13.20.130    Vehicles for hire.

13.20.140    Commercial photography.

13.20.150    Advertisements.

13.20.160    Soliciting.

13.20.170    Use of roads and walks.

13.20.180    Animals.

Article V. Aircraft Operation

13.20.190    Operation of aircraft.

13.20.200    Rates and charges.

13.20.210    Aircraft takeoffs and landings.

13.20.220    Restriction of movement.

13.20.230    Aerobatics prohibited.

13.20.240    Aircraft storage and repairs – Area.

13.20.250    Securing of unattended aircraft.

13.20.260    Safe handling of aircraft.

13.20.270    Taxiing.

13.20.280    Night flying.

13.20.290    Starting and running engine – Location.

13.20.300    Running of aircraft engines.

13.20.310    Running of engine in hangar.

13.20.320    Plant quarantine inspection.

13.20.330    Damage to airport property.

13.20.340    Disposition of disabled aircraft.

13.20.350    Accident reports.

13.20.360    Present hours of operation.

Article VI. Noise Abatement

13.20.370    Noise abatement procedures.

13.20.380    Training flight restrictions.

13.20.390    Permanently based aircraft.

Article VII. Motor Vehicle Regulations

13.20.400    General.

13.20.410    Restricted areas.

13.20.420    Speed.

13.20.430    Parking.

13.20.440    Common carriers.

13.20.450    Accident reports.

Article VIII. Other Regulations

13.20.460    Conformance to other regulations.

Article I. Airports – General Provisions

13.20.010 Existing airports exempt.
This chapter shall not apply to any airport or airstrip in actual use and operation on August 30, 1945, and in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal and State governments. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.101)

13.20.020 Nuisance.
Any building, structure, runway, hangar or airstrip set up, erected, built or maintained and/or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall and the same is unlawful and a public nuisance, and any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit as required by the terms of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a nuisance has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration or repair of any building, structure, runway, hangar or airstrip set up, erected, built, maintained, or used contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The City Attorney shall, upon order of the City Council, immediately commence necessary proceedings for the abatement, removal or injunction of any such nuisance in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.102)

Article II. Airports – Zoned Areas – Permits

13.20.030 License – Required.
No land located within any precise section of land use master plan of the City shall be used for an airport or airstrip or for the landing or takeoff of any aircraft except in compliance with the zoning regulations covering said land and unless a license therefor has been issued by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.301)

13.20.040 Application and fee for license – Fee.
An application for a license required by this chapter shall be made to the Director of Public Works on forms provided by him for that purpose. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time and by a sketch of the proposed flight pattern together with evidence of tentative approval of such flight pattern from the Civil Aeronautics Authority or its successors where approval is required or permitted by law. (Ord. 683 § 57, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.302)

Article III. Airport Rules and Regulations – General Provisions

13.20.050 Applicability.
This article applies to each and every person and to each and every activity or operation of any kind whatsoever on, in or about each and every City airport, except to the extent superseded by agreement or other written document executed by a duly authorized representative of the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.401)

13.20.060 Definitions.
The following words have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless otherwise apparent from the context:

A. “Airport” means each and all of the airports in the City.

B. “Airport Manager” means the City Airport Director, the manager of any City airport or their duly authorized representatives.

C. “Person” means any individual, estate, political body, or any business, financial, social, recreational or athletic association of any form whatsoever, and includes any member, trustee, agent, employee, officer, receiver, assignee or other representative of any of these. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.402)

13.20.070 Construction.
This chapter shall be construed so as to promote the objectives thereof and to protect and further the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.403)

13.20.080 Applicability of previous rules.
The provisions of this chapter supersede and replace all previous airport rules and regulations; provided, that to the extent that such provisions are unchanged from such previous rules and regulations, they shall be deemed a continuation thereof. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.405)

13.20.090 Unlawful acts – Sanctions.
A. Noncompliance with or violation of this chapter is forbidden. Any person operating or handling any aircraft, operating any vehicle, equipment or apparatus, or using the airport or any of its facilities in violation of this chapter, or any person who refuses to comply with this chapter after being duly ordered to do so, or any person who enters or remains upon an airport without complying with each and every section and provision of this chapter is in violation of this chapter.

B. A person who is in violation of this chapter does not have and is acting without the permission of the City to remain on or to conduct any activity on an airport. Any person who is in violation of this chapter shall be promptly ejected and removed from the airport, upon the order of the City’s Director of Public Services, by the Airport Manager, or by a law enforcement officer acting pursuant to the request of the Airport Manager; provided, however, that if the Airport Manager deems it necessary for the immediate protection of the public health, safety, or welfare, or for the protection of property, or for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of any person lawfully utilizing the airport facilities, he may eject and remove, or request an appropriate law enforcement officer to eject and remove, any person who is in violation of this chapter without first obtaining the order of the City’s Director of Public Services to do so.

C. Any person who is so ejected and removed from the airport may be deprived of and refused the future use of the airport and of the airport facilities for such time as the City Council may determine and order, and until such time as such person may accomplish to the Council’s satisfaction such remedial actions as said Council may order, notwithstanding any rights such person may otherwise have by virtue of any lease, permit or other written document.

D. The foregoing penalties are cumulative and supplemental to any penalties cognizable at law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.406)

13.20.100 Nonassumption of liability.
The City, and its agents, officers and employees, assume no liability or responsibility, and shall not be liable or responsible other than as required by law, for any loss, damage, destruction, injury or death to any person or persons or to any property by reason of any accident, incident, occurrence or mishap of any nature whatsoever or from any cause whatsoever. Any person entering an airport, or using or seeking or preparing to use an airport or any airport facility, does so at his own risk. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.407)

Article IV. General Rules and Regulations

13.20.110 Restricted areas.
No person shall enter any area which is posted with signs reading “restricted,” “closed to the public,” or the like, except:

A. Persons assigned to duty in such area;

B. Persons authorized by the Airport Manager;

C. Passengers, under appropriate supervision, entering such areas for the purpose of embarkation or debarkation. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.411)

13.20.120 Conduct of business.
No person shall use the airport or any part thereof, or any airport facilities, for revenue-producing or commercial activities without first securing an appropriate permit, lease or other such document from the City and, after having obtained such document, without complying fully and completely with all of the terms and conditions thereof including the payment of rates and charges. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.412)

13.20.130 Vehicles for hire.
No person shall operate any vehicles for hire on the airport unless the provisions of PMC 13.20.120 have been complied with. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.413)

13.20.140 Commercial photography.
No person shall take still, motion or sound pictures or photographs for commercial purposes without the written permission of the Airport Manager. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.414)

13.20.150 Advertisements.
No person shall post, distribute, circulate or display any signs, posters, advertisements, circulars, or any other such printed, painted or written materials without first obtaining the approval of the Airport Manager. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.415)

13.20.160 Soliciting.
No person shall solicit funds, goods, donations or pledges on the airport without first securing the written permission of the Airport Manager. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.416)

13.20.170 Use of roads and walks.
No person shall travel on the airport property other than on the roads, walks, and places appropriate to the type of travel, nor shall any person use said roads, walks, or other places in such a manner so as to hinder or obstruct the proper usage thereof by others. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.417)

13.20.180 Animals.
No person shall enter the terminal building or landing area of the airport with a dog or other animal, except a seeing-eye dog, unless such dogs or other animals are restrained by a leash and kept under complete control. Dogs and other animals are permitted in other areas of the airport if they are restrained by a leash or otherwise confined so as to be under the complete control of the person accompanying such animal. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.418)

Article V. Aircraft Operation

13.20.190 Operation of aircraft.
No person shall navigate, land, takeoff or fly any aircraft, or service, maintain or repair any aircraft, or conduct any aircraft operations or activities on, from or about the airport other than in conformity with current Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Air Regulations (FAR), and Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) rules and regulations and with applicable laws of the State. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.421)

13.20.200 Rates and charges.
Aircraft and business operations on the airport shall be subject to Schedule of Rates and Charges and Use Control Policy for City Airports, as adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.422)

13.20.210 Aircraft takeoffs and landings.
All takeoffs and landings at airports without control towers, or when control towers are inoperative, shall be made at safe distances from other aircraft, and from all buildings, automobile parking areas and similar areas and obstructions. Aircraft shall clear all highways and roads on or adjacent to the airport by a vertical distance of no less than 50 feet. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.423)

13.20.220 Restriction of movement.
The Airport Manager may delay or restrict any ground movement or other operation or activity on the airport, and may refuse departure of aircraft from parking areas on the airport, for any reason the Airport Manager deems necessary in the public interest or to protect public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.424)

13.20.230 Aerobatics prohibited.
No aircraft shall be flown within the airport traffic area in any aerobatic maneuver or maneuvers other than those required in normal and routing operation unless specifically approved by the City Airport Director. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.425)

13.20.240 Aircraft storage and repairs – Area.
No aircraft shall be stored or repaired in any area or space other than those areas and spaces designated for such purposes by the Airport Manager. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.426)

13.20.250 Securing of unattended aircraft.
Securing of unattended aircraft shall be the responsibility of the pilot of the aircraft. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.427)

13.20.260 Safe handling of aircraft.
The pilot of moving aircraft, or of an aircraft preparing or waiting to move, shall take all due care to avoid, and shall assure himself that there is no danger of a collision with any other aircraft, whether moving or stationary, or with any building or obstruction. Aircraft shall at all times be taxied, landed or taken off at reasonable speeds and while under the full control of the pilot. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.428)

13.20.270 Taxiing.
Aircraft shall not be taxied into or out of hangars. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.429)

13.20.280 Night flying.
No person shall land at, taxi on or take off from an unlighted runway after dusk or before dawn, except in the event of an emergency. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.430)

13.20.290 Starting and running engine – Location.
Aircraft engines shall be started and warmed up only in those places designated for such purposes by the Airport Manager. Aircraft shall be so placed and oriented while an engine is running that no hangar, building or person is in the path of the propeller slipstream, and so that no dust cloud or other hazard to aircraft is created. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.431)

13.20.300 Running of aircraft engines.
No aircraft engine shall be started or run unless a licensed pilot or mechanic is attending the controls. Blocks equipped with ropes, or other suitable equipment for blocking an aircraft, shall always be placed in front of the main landing wheels prior to starting an engine of the aircraft unless the aircraft is equipped with adequate locking brakes. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.432)

13.20.310 Running of engine in hangar.
No aircraft engine shall be started or run in a hangar at any time. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.433)

13.20.320 Plant quarantine inspection.
A. Federal and California plant quarantine laws, as may be currently in effect, shall be enforced. Any person bringing plants, fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, cotton bolls, raw cotton, cottonseed, or unprocessed plant products from any state or territory, including Hawaii, or from any foreign country, shall report to the Airport Manager who will arrange for inspection by the proper plant quarantine officials.

B. All aircraft carrying such plants or plant products, including aircraft having come directly from Hawaii, which are not certified as inspected and released by the United States Department of Agriculture, shall remain unloaded of such plants and plant products until inspected or otherwise cleared by the proper authorities. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.434)

13.20.330 Damage to airport property.
Any and all airport property damaged, injured or destroyed, by accident or otherwise, shall immediately be paid for by the person or persons responsible for such damage, injury or destruction; provided, that the Director of Public Services may, in his discretion, authorize deferred payment. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.435)

13.20.340 Disposition of disabled aircraft.
The owner, pilot or operator of any aircraft which becomes wrecked or disabled at an airport, shall be responsible for the prompt removal of the wrecked or disabled aircraft, and parts thereof, as directed by the Airport Manager. In the event the owner, pilot or operator fails to comply with such directions, the wrecked or disabled aircraft, and parts thereof, may be removed by the Airport Manager at the expense of the owner, pilot or operator. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.436)

13.20.350 Accident reports.
Persons involved in or witnessing an aircraft accident on the airport shall report such accident to the Airport Manager’s office or to the nearest guard as soon as it is reasonably possible to do so. Such persons shall make written reports as requested by the Airport Manager. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.437)

13.20.360 Present hours of operation.
Hours of operation effective as of March 13, 1979, shall remain in effect unless changed by the City Council. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.438)

Article VI. Noise Abatement

13.20.370 Noise abatement procedures.
All persons operating aircraft from City airports shall comply with all noise abatement procedures, traffic patterns and policies as may be established by the City and acceptable to the FAA. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.441)

13.20.380 Training flight restrictions.
Only those aircraft that on takeoff or landing cause an effective perceived noise level (EPNL) not greater than 90 decibels (dB) at a sideline location of 450 meters (1,500 feet) from the extended centerline of the runway shall be permitted to conduct training flights at the City airports.

A. For purposes of this article, the sideline effective perceived noise level shall be that measured or estimated as provided in Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circulars 36-1B, dated December 5, 1977, and 36-2A, dated February 6, 1978, which circulars, including all subsequent revisions, amendments and reissues thereof, are incorporated by reference by this section.

B. For the purposes of this article, “training flight” means any instrument or visual approach to the airport conducted for the purpose of student instruction, pilot proficiency training, or pilot evaluation check rides, whether or not a landing touchdown is accomplished. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.442)

13.20.390 Permanently based aircraft.
Only those aircraft that on takeoff or landing cause an effective perceived noise level (EPNL) not greater than 90 decibels (dB) at a sideline location of 450 meters (1,500 feet) from the extended centerline of the runway shall be permitted to establish permanent base of operations at the City airports after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

A. For purposes of this article, the sideline effective perceived noise level shall be that measured or estimated as provided in Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circulars 36-1B, dated December 5, 1977, and 36-2A, dated February 6, 1978, which circulars, including all subsequent revisions, amendments and reissues thereof, are incorporated by reference by this section.

B. A “permanent base of operations” for an aircraft is established at an airport whenever that airport serves as the base of activities for flight operations, maintenance and/or storage for any period exceeding 21 days in a calendar year. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.443)

Article VII. Motor Vehicle Regulations

13.20.400 General.
Motor vehicles shall be operated on the airport in strict compliance with the applicable provisions of the California Motor Vehicle Code, the Poway Municipal Code, and with these rules and regulations. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.451)

13.20.410 Restricted areas.
No motorized equipment or vehicles shall be operated on the aircraft aprons of the field or on the taxiway and aircraft landing area, except by persons assigned to duty in those areas or by persons so authorized by the Airport Manager. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.452)

13.20.420 Speed.
Motor vehicles shall be operated in strict compliance with the speed limits prescribed by the Airport Manager and indicated by posted traffic signs. In no event shall any motor vehicle, except emergency vehicles in an emergency situation, exceed a speed of 25 miles per hour. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.453)

13.20.430 Parking.
Vehicles shall be parked on the airport in the manner and at the locations indicated by posted traffic signs. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.454)

13.20.440 Common carriers.
No bus, truck, taxi or other common carrier or vehicle for hire shall load or unload passengers or personal property at any place on the airport other than that place or those places designated by the Airport Manager. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.455)

13.20.450 Accident reports.
Persons involved in or witnessing a motor vehicle accident on the airport shall report such accident to the Airport Manager’s office or to the nearest guard as soon as it is reasonably possible to do so. Such persons shall make written reports as requested by the Airport Manager. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.456)

Article VIII. Other Regulations

13.20.460 Conformance to other regulations.
A. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all activities on City airports shall conform to Federal, State, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, policies or other publications applicable to aircraft operations, land use, construction, safety, or any other activities conducted on a City airport.

B. Such regulations shall include, but are not limited to, Federal Aviation Administration Regulations, Noise Standards, Zoning Ordinances, Building Codes, Motor Vehicle Codes, Uniform Fire Codes, and Air Pollution Control District Rules. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 85.461)

Chapter 13.24
REIMBURSEMENT FOR PERMANENT IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

13.24.010    Policy.

13.24.020    Definitions.

13.24.030    Application requirements.

13.24.040    Form and content of agreement.

13.24.050    Notice and hearing.

13.24.060    Decision of City Council.

13.24.070    Payment for reimbursement.

13.24.080    Administrative cost.

13.24.090    Information.

13.24.100    Recordation of agreement.

13.24.010 Policy.
The City Council finds and determines that where property owner(s) desire or are required to extend or develop permanent improvements that benefit other properties not participating in the cost of the improvements, the owner(s) may be eligible to enter into a reimbursement agreement as provided in this chapter. This chapter shall not be applicable to mandatory reimbursement for improvements of supplemental size, capacity, number or length as required by Government Code Section 66486. (Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A. “Administrative cost” means expenses and services provided by the City in the management of the reimbursement agreements.

B. “Agreement” means an agreement to reimburse property owner(s) for development or extension of permanent improvements that benefit other properties.

C. “Benefit area” means the area of benefit approved by the City Engineer that would be assessed for the cost of the permanent improvement.

D. “City” means the City of Poway.

E. “Council” means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Poway.

F. “Engineering report” means the reimbursement report prepared by a State-licensed Civil Engineer outlining the benefited area and proposed reimbursement payments.

G. “Estimated construction cost” means the estimated cost of construction as outlined in the engineering report and approved by the City Engineer.

H. “Public improvements” means City drainage, sewer and water systems and public and private streets constructed to City standards.

I. “Reimbursement payment” means the payment to the property owner(s) who paid for the initial construction of the permanent improvement.

J. “Trust fund” means an account established for the deposit of the reimbursement funds during the life of the reimbursement agreement. (Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.030 Application requirements.
The owner(s) shall provide to the City Engineer a completed reimbursement agreement, which shall be submitted to the City Engineer prior to the acceptance of the improvements by the City. The owner(s) shall also provide a deposit to cover the estimated City administrative costs to review, process and approve the agreement. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2008; Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.040 Form and content of agreement.
The form and content of the reimbursement agreement shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and City Attorney. The agreement must be prepared with the assistance of a State of California licensed Civil Engineer and contain the following:

A. The legal description of all benefiting properties including the owner’s property;

B. A detailed plat drawn at an engineering scale on legal-size paper showing the precise locations of all improvements and complete dimensions (including frontage) of all benefiting property;

C. A reimbursement schedule to include a list of all benefiting properties with current Tax Assessor’s parcel number, owner’s name, property’s street address, acreage of benefiting parcels and a benefit charge. The amount of the benefit charge assigned to each benefiting parcel shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The benefit charge assigned to each parcel shall bear a reasonable relationship to the benefit conferred upon that parcel by the improvements and shall bear interest at the rate of five percent per annum, compounded annually;

D. A detailed estimated cost of the design and construction of the permanent improvement;

E. Terms, conditions and covenants of reimbursement and a trust agreement consistent with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.050 Notice and hearing.
Upon receipt of the agreement proposed by the owner(s), the same shall be referred to the City Engineer, together with a preliminary estimate of the total cost of such improvements. Upon receipt of the application, the City Engineer will review and recommend approval, disapproval or modification thereof. The proposed area of benefit shall include all parcels of land, or parts thereof, within the City, which may be conveniently served by the proposed improvement extension or development. Not less than 10 days prior to the hearing the City Clerk shall notify the owner, or owners, of the land within the benefited area, of a public hearing to be conducted by the City Council of the City of Poway on the question of the feasibility and the necessity for the construction of the subject improvements, and the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the reimbursement agreement. The property owner shall provide address labels for all affected properties and shall pay all fees necessary for notice of the hearing at which the repayment agreement is considered. (Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.060 Decision of City Council.
After the hearing provided for in PMC 13.24.050, the City Council shall determine in its sole judgment and discretion whether or not the construction of the improvements would be in the best interest of the City and whether the proposed reimbursement agreement shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied. In any case the City Council will have the final determination as to the amount to be reimbursed through each agreement and the allocation thereof amongst the benefiting parcels. (Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.070 Payment for reimbursement.
The approved agreement shall provide that the City of Poway shall agree, for a period of 15 years from the date of the agreement, to reimburse to the applicant the following sums:

A. The amount received by the City as a benefit charge, if any, which is collected by the City from owners of benefiting parcels for the privilege of using such improvements, less the administrative cost set forth in PMC 13.24.080. The benefit charge for a parcel shall be collected by the City as a condition of approval of any development of the benefited parcel; provided, that imposition of such conditions shall be reasonably related to such development.

B. The benefit charge for each parcel of land within the benefited area will be determined based upon the engineer’s report prepared by the applicant engineer using standard assessment district formulas, as that report may be approved by the City Council.

C. The City Council retains the right to determine, in its sole discretion, both the total cost of the permanent improvement as well as the fixing of the benefit charge for each parcel.

D. The applicant shall be entitled to receive the reimbursement provided in this section for the period of time specified in this section, or until all payments as specified in the reimbursement agreement have been repaid to the applicant, whichever occurs first. Following full reimbursement to the applicant as provided in this section, or upon automatic termination of the agreement at the end of 15 years from its date, the applicant shall be entitled to no further reimbursements arising out of benefit charges which might be charged by the City, and all payments thereafter accruing shall be and become the property of the City.

E. All reimbursement funds shall be deposited to a trust fund in a local institutional depository. The right of the applicant to payments therefrom shall be personal and shall not run with or be assignable with the lands owned by the applicant.

F. Payments shall be made at such times as are convenient to the City, but in no event less often than annually if the City has received any benefit charges.

G. Payment to the applicant shall include the interest collected from a benefited owner assessed against the benefit charge at a rate of five percent compounded per year. (Ord. 441, 1995; Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.080 Administrative cost.
An administrative charge of five percent shall be assessed on all reimbursements to cover administrative costs incurred by the City. (Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.090 Information.
The property owner(s) applying for reimbursement shall be solely responsible for all information needed to process the reimbursement agreement. Any errors or inaccuracies may constitute grounds for the denial of the owner’s application. (Ord. 158, 1985)

13.24.100 Recordation of agreement.
The agreement will be recorded with the County Recorder following full execution of the agreement by all parties. (Ord. 158, 1985)

Chapter 13.25
STORMWATER PROGRAM CHARGES
(Repealed by Ord. 731)

Title 14
(Reserved)
Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION1
Chapters:

15.02    Uniform Administrative Code

15.03    Hierarchy of Codes

15.04    Building Code

15.05    Repealed

15.06    Requirements for Right-of-Way Dedication and Improvements

15.07    Reimbursement Procedures for Certain Previously Constructed Roadways and Facilities

15.08    Electrical Code

15.10    Residential Code

15.12    Plumbing Code

15.16    Mechanical Code

15.18    Energy Code

15.19    Historical Building Code

15.20    Moving and Storage of Buildings

15.21    Existing Building Code

15.22    Green Building Code

15.23    Referenced Standards Code

15.24    Fire Code

15.26    Expedited Processing for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Energy Systems

15.28    Mobile Home Inspection Code

15.30    Contractors and Bidders

15.32    Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

1
Code reviser’s note: Section 12 of Ordinance 728 provides: “When the requirements of the Poway Municipal Code conflict with the requirements of any other part of the California Building Standards Code, Title 24, the most restrictive requirements shall prevail.”


Chapter 15.02
UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Sections:

15.02.010    Adoption of Uniform Administrative Code.

15.02.020    Deletions, revisions and additions to Uniform Administrative Code.

15.02.030    Section 102.2 amended.

15.02.040    Section 102.6 amended.

15.02.050    Section 202.11 added.

15.02.060    Section 204.1 amended.

15.02.070    Section 206 added.

15.02.080    Section 301.1 amended.

15.02.090    Section 304 amended.

15.02.100    Section 305.2.1 added.

15.02.110    Section 305.5 amended.

15.02.120    Section 309.3 amended.

15.02.130    Tables No. 3-A through No. 3-H deleted.

15.02.010 Adoption of Uniform Administrative Code.
There is adopted as the City’s administrative code for the purpose of prescribing administrative and enforcement provisions for certain technical codes the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, promulgated and published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, including such provisions as are hereinafter added, deleted, or amended. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2 (B), 2000)

15.02.020 Deletions, revisions and additions to Uniform Administrative Code.
Deletions, revisions and additions to the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, shall be as set forth in PMC 15.02.030 through 15.02.130. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.030 Section 102.2 amended.
Section 102.2 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of the fourth paragraph:

The installation of wood shingle or shake roofing material shall be prohibited. All roof coverings shall be fire retardant with a minimum of a Class A rating.

EXCEPTION: The installation of wood shingle or shake roofing material for re-roofing or repair which does not exceed 25 percent of the project roof area within any 12 month period shall be allowed when the material has a minimum Class B rating.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.040 Section 102.6 amended.
Section 102.6 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding the following:

Moving of apartment houses and dwellings. For clarification purposes, the applicable subsections of Health and Safety Code Section 17958.9 are repeated:

17958.9 Local ordinances or regulations governing the moving of apartment houses and dwellings shall, after July 1, 1978, permit the retention of existing materials and methods of construction so long as the apartment house or dwelling complies with the building standards for foundation applicable to new construction, and does not become or continue to be a substandard building.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.050 Section 202.11 added.
Section 202.11 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is added to read as follows:

202.11 Permit History Survey. Upon receipt of a written request from the owner of a parcel of property for a Permit History Survey, and the payment of the fee specified in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council, the Building Official may review City records and provide a report listing those building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits that have been issued for that specific parcel of property.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.060 Section 204.1 amended.
Section 204.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows:

204.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations relating to California building codes (Title 15 of the PMC), the City Council shall serve as the Appeals Board and Hearing Officer as described in Chapter 2.20 of the City of Poway Municipal Code. Any action deemed to be a nuisance by the Development Services Director or designee in accordance with PMC Section 17.54.020 or Chapter 8.80 is not considered an order, decision or determination relating to building codes. The City Council may, by resolution, form and appoint three or more individuals to an Appeals Board to function as the Appeals Board and Hearing Officer under this Section.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.070 Section 206 added.
Section 206 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is added to read as follows:

Sec. 206 Public Nuisance. Any building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished, equipped, used, occupied, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this code shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney may commence necessary proceedings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment of any such public nuisance in the manner provided by law in accordance with Chapter 1.08, 1.10, 8.72 and 15.32 of the City of Poway Municipal Code. Any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit as required by Chapter 3 of this code shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a public nuisance has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, conversion or demolition, equipment, use, occupation, or maintenance of a building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished, used, occupied, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this code or the technical codes.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.080 Section 301.1 amended.
Section 301.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding the following:

Permits shall not be issued for construction on a site where the City Engineer determines that a grading permit or public improvements are required until the City Engineer or his/her representative notifies the Building Official in writing that the grading or public improvements work has been satisfactorily completed to allow building permits to be issued. Permits shall not be issued if the City Engineer determines that flooding or geologic conditions at the site may endanger the public safety or welfare.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.090 Section 304 amended.
Section 304 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows:

SECTION 304 – FEES

304.1 General. Fees shall be assessed as set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council.

304.2 Permit Fees. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council.

The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of these codes shall be made by the Building Official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and other permanent equipment. The permit fees for those projects subject to State energy code compliance and/or State disabled access regulation compliance shall be as set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council.

304.3 Plan Review Fees. When submittal documents are required by Section 302.2, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee shown in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council. The plan review fees for electrical, mechanical and plumbing work shall be equal to 25 percent of the total permit fee set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council. The plan review fees for State energy code compliance and/or State disabled access regulation compliance shall be as set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council. The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 304.2 and are in addition to the permit fees.

When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 302.4.2, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council.

304.4 Expiration of Plan Review. Applications for which no permit is issued within one year following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee.

304.5 Investigation Fees: Work without a Permit.

304.5.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

304.5.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum permit fee set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt an applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

304.6 Fee Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid has been withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

304.7 Permit History Survey Fee. The fee for conducting a permit history survey of an existing structure or facility shall be the fee as set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council.

304.8 Demolition Permit Fee. The fee for a permit to demolish a building shall be as set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council.

304.9 Fee Exceptions. The Government of the United States of America, the State of California, local school districts proposing work exempt from building permits, the County of San Diego, and the City of Poway shall not be required to pay any fees for filing an application for a building permit pursuant to this code unless City plan review and inspection services are requested. If so requested, the fee schedules adopted in a resolution by the City Council shall apply.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.100 Section 305.2.1 added.
Section 305.2.1 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is added to read as follows:

305.2.1 Circuit Cards. A complete schedule of circuits, showing the number and arrangement of outlets on each circuit, shall be posted at the service equipment location prior to requesting inspection of rough electrical wiring. Circuit cards furnished by the Building Official shall be used for this purpose. In lieu of a circuit card, an approved wiring plan may be used.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.110 Section 305.5 amended.
Section 305.5 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding a new No. 5 under Required Building Inspections and renumbering the original No. 5 to read number 6 as follows:

5. Intermediate roofing inspection. An intermediate roofing inspection to be made when the roof covering is approximately 50% installed to verify fastening and underlayment requirements of the roof covering assembly.

6. Final inspection. To be made after finish grading and the building is completed and ready for occupancy.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.120 Section 309.3 amended.
Section 309.3 of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows:

309.3 Certificate Issued. After final inspection where the Building Official has inspected the building or structure and has found no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws which are enforced by the Building Division, the Building Official shall indicate approval on the Inspection Record Card, and the signed Inspection Record Card shall serve as the Certificate of Occupancy.

(Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

15.02.130 Tables No. 3-A through No. 3-H deleted.
Tables No. 3-A, No. 3-B, No. 3-C, No. 3-D, No. 3-E, No. 3-F, No. 3-G and No. 3-H of the Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition, are deleted. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 526 § 2(B), 2000)

Chapter 15.03
HIERARCHY OF CODES
Sections:

15.03.010    Conflicts.

15.03.010 Conflicts.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the PMC, in case of conflict among titles of the PMC and codes enumerated and adopted by reference therein, the first named title or code below shall govern over those following:

A. PMC Title 17 (Zoning);

B. PMC Title 13 (Public Services);

C. PMC Title 8 (Health and Safety);

D. PMC Title 15 (Buildings and Construction);

E. To the maximum extent permissible by law, all State and other uniform codes incorporated by reference in this title. (Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

Chapter 15.04
BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.04.010    Adoption.

15.04.020    Findings.

15.04.030    Deletions, revisions and additions to the 2016 California Building Code.

15.04.050    Table 1505.1 amended.

15.04.060    Appendices C, H and I adopted.

15.04.010 Adoption.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Building Code, for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings and structures, the 2016 California Building Code, Part 2, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California State Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq., which is based on the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, including those appendix chapters adopted by this chapter. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter and Chapter 15.02 PMC, all erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures within the City of Poway shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Building Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission, which is based on the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, and the adopted appendix chapters, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478. (Ord. 793 § 4, 2016)

15.04.020 Findings.
The City of Poway has many large brush-covered hillsides. The City is subject to frequent Santa Ana conditions consisting of dry gusting winds, which create extreme fire dangers. The City Council specifically finds that these geographic and topographic conditions necessitate greater fire protection than that provided by the 2016 California Building Code. Therefore, this chapter alters the International Building Code, 2016 Edition, to require more fire retardant roof coverings. (Ord. 793 § 4, 2016)

15.04.030 Deletions, revisions and additions to the 2016 California Building Code.
Deletions, revisions and additions to the 2016 California Building Code shall be as set forth in PMC 15.04.050 through 15.04.060. (Ord. 793 § 4, 2016)

15.04.050 Table 1505.1 amended.
Table 1505.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

TABLE 1505.1

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

(Ord. 793 § 4, 2016)

15.04.060 Appendices C, H and I adopted.
Appendix Chapters C, H and I of the 2016 California Building Code are adopted. (Ord. 793 § 4, 2016)

Chapter 15.05
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE
(Repealed by Ord. 804)

 

Chapter 15.06
REQUIREMENTS FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS*
Sections:

15.06.010    Public right-of-way – Dedication required.

15.06.020    Encroachment upon public right-of-way.

15.06.030    Construction of public improvements.

15.06.040    Waiver of immediate construction of public improvements and payment of fees-in-lieu.

15.06.050    Drainage fees, park fees and traffic mitigation fees.

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 238, 301 and 306.

15.06.010 Public right-of-way – Dedication required.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or altered, and no property shall hereafter be improved for parking purposes, and no building permit shall be issued therefor, unless one-half of the street, which is located on the same side of the centerline of the street as such lot, has dedicated right-of-way for the full width of the lot along all street frontages so as to meet the circulation element and/or Municipal Code street standards for such street as found in Circulation Element Policies 2.a and 2.b and PMC Title 12. In addition to required dedication for street purposes, additional dedication for storm drain, sewer, water, or other utility purposes may also be required in connection with building permits where such dedication is necessary to prevent the flooding of adjacent or nearby properties or to permit connection to or extension of necessary utilities.

B. In the event construction of full frontage improvements is not immediately required, the person shall then be required to make an irrevocable offer to dedicate property executed by all parties having an interest in the property, including beneficiaries and trustees of deeds of trust, as shown by a current preliminary title report prepared by a title company approved by the Director of Development Services/City Engineer and City Attorney. Such offer of dedication shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and the Director of Development Services/City Engineer, and shall continue in effect until the City Council accepts or rejects such offer. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 358 § 2, 1992)

15.06.020 Encroachment upon public right-of-way.
No building, structure or parking lot shall be erected, enlarged or altered, if it does, or would encroach upon any public easement or right-of-way, unless an encroachment permit is first obtained from the Director of Development Services/City Engineer. The Director of Development Services/City Engineer may grant an encroachment permit if he determines that the encroachment will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 358 § 2, 1992)

15.06.030 Construction of public improvements.
A. Any person, owner, lessee or agent constructing or causing to be constructed any parking lot or commercial, residential or manufacturing building, or buildings, or building addition or alteration on any legal parcel within the City, shall provide for the construction or installation to City standards, of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street trees and street drainage structures unless such improvements already exist along all street frontages adjoining the lot on which the building or parking lot is to be constructed, enlarged or altered.

B. Upon receipt of notification by the Director of Development Services/City Engineer, the Building Official shall deny issuance of a building permit, or deny approval for occupancy or deny final approval and acceptance for public utility connections to any such building or parking lot until required full frontage improvements exist to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The improvements shall be immediately constructed unless deferral of their construction is approved by the Director of Development Services/City Engineer and is guaranteed by an executed secured agreement and/or cash deposit with the City in a sum approved by the Director of Development Services/City Engineer based upon one and one-half times the estimated cost of construction using the latest adopted Poway unit cost estimate figures.

C. The construction guarantee agreement shall be executed and become effective on the date of the deposit of cash and shall expire upon the date of completion to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services/City Engineer of all improvements required to be made. Upon completion of the improvements and their acceptance by the City, the cash deposit shall be returned to the owner. The City is authorized in the event of any default, to use any or all of the deposit money to cause all of the required work to be done or completed, and for payment of all costs and expenses thereof. Any money remaining shall be refunded to the owner of record of the property.

D. The provisions of this section and any further sections requiring the construction of public improvements shall not apply to the following types of construction:

1. Construction of an addition to and/or reconstruction of a single-family home which results in less than an additional 750 square feet of habitable space;

2. Construction of garages, carports, storage buildings, patio covers, swimming pools, spas, and similar uninhabitable structures, accessory to a single-family residence;

3. Remodeling, alterations or additions to other residential and all nonresidential buildings at less than 10,000 square feet or 25 percent of the existing square footage whichever is more restrictive; and

4. Exception to permits and inspections as currently contained in Section 301 of the Uniform Administrative Code. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 358 § 2, 1992)

15.06.040 Waiver of immediate construction of public improvements and payment of fees-in-lieu.
A. The Director of Development Services/City Engineer may waive the immediate construction of public improvements and require the payment of fees-in-lieu equal to the estimated cost of the required public improvements using the latest adopted Poway unit cost figures if one or more of the following conditions exist:

1. Capital improvement plans (CIP) exist with either the City and/or Redevelopment Agency to construct the required public improvements whereby the public improvements would be more efficiently constructed as part of a larger, comprehensive project; and

2. The Director of Development Services/City Engineer determines that it would not be in the best interest of the City and/or the property owner to construct the public or private improvements because an unsafe condition may be created or undue long-term maintenance costs may occur.

B. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, every attempt should be made to immediately construct the required public improvements adjacent to roadways included as arterial highways on the City general plan circulation plan. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 358 § 2, 1992)

15.06.050 Drainage fees, park fees and traffic mitigation fees.
A. No building permit may be issued for a parcel unless the appropriate drainage, park and traffic mitigation fees have been secured or paid. If none have been paid, the application for the permit shall be accompanied by payment of the current fees. In the case of residential development, the fees may be deferred by posting of a security satisfactory to the City Attorney.

B. The provision of this section shall not apply to any of the following types of construction:

1. The construction to and/or reconstruction of a single-family home which results in less than an additional 750 square feet of habitable space;

2. Construction of a new, an addition to, and/or reconstruction of a single-family house that has at some time in the past paid a similar fee for traffic mitigation, park, or drainage;

3. Construction of garages, carports, storage buildings, patio covers, swimming pools, spas and similar uninhabitable structures, accessory to a single-family residence;

4. Remodeling, alterations or additions to other residential and all nonresidential buildings at less than 10,000 square feet or 25 percent of the existing square footage whichever is more restrictive; and

5. Exception to permits and inspections as currently contained in Section 301 of the Uniform Administrative Code.

C. Security required by this chapter shall be in that form authorized by the Subdivision Map Act.

D. Fees deferred by posting of security must be paid prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 358 § 2, 1992)

Chapter 15.07
REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURES FOR CERTAIN PREVIOUSLY CONSTRUCTED ROADWAYS AND FACILITIES
Sections:

15.07.010    Policy.

15.07.020    Improvements subject to reimbursement.

15.07.030    Preparation of reimbursement plan.

15.07.040    Notice of hearing.

15.07.050    Conduct of hearing.

15.07.060    Decision of City Council.

15.07.070    Recording of resolution and payment.

15.07.080    Waiver of payment in full.

15.07.090    Severability.

15.07.010 Policy.
The City Council does hereby find and determine that where the City of Poway or the Poway Redevelopment Agency has constructed or caused to be constructed at its cost and expense street improvements to any arterial roadway identified on the comprehensive plan of the City of Poway or to any water, sewer, or flood control facilities which benefit properties, abutting such improvements, which have not participated in the cost of acquiring the right-of-way and installing such improvements, the owners of such properties shall reimburse such public agency in accordance with the terms of this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to reimbursement as required by Government Code Section 66484. (Ord. 202, 1986)

15.07.020 Improvements subject to reimbursement.
“Improvements subject to reimbursement” means any or all of the following types of improvements constructed or caused to be constructed at the expense of the City of Poway Redevelopment Agency which benefit properties abutting such improvements which have not participated in the cost of installing such improvements.

A. Street improvements to any arterial roadway identified as such in the comprehensive plan of the City of Poway, including but not limited to curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving, traffic signals, street lights, and any underground water, sewer or other utilities within the right-of-way of such arterial.

B. Water, sewer and flood control facilities, including but not limited to pipes, channels and bridges abutting any property which abuts an arterial roadway.

C. Public right-of-way and easements acquired for the installation of such improvements. (Ord. 202, 1986)

15.07.030 Preparation of reimbursement plan.
Prior to the completion of improvements subject to reimbursement, the Director of Public Services shall prepare a reimbursement plan which shall contain the following:

A. A legal description of all benefiting properties including the owner’s property;

B. A detailed plat drawn at an engineering scale on legal size paper showing the precise locations of all improvements and complete dimensions (including frontage) of all benefiting property;

C. A reimbursement schedule to include a list of all benefiting properties with current Tax Assessor’s parcel number, owner’s name, property’s street address, acreage of benefiting parcels and a benefit charge. The amount of the benefit charge assigned to each benefiting parcel shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The benefit charge assigned to each parcel shall bear a reasonable relationship to the benefit conferred upon that parcel by the improvements and shall bear interest at the rate of five percent per year, compounded annually;

D. A report identifying the burden which the development of each property in accordance with its zoning and general plan designation will impose upon the public facilities to be improved and the extent to which the development of such property will contribute to the need, for such improvements;

E. A detailed estimated cost of the design and construction of the permanent construction;

F. A detailed description of the method of benefit charge allocation. (Ord. 202, 1986)

15.07.040 Notice of hearing.
Upon completion of the reimbursement plan as drafted by the Director of Public Services, review of the plan shall be set for public hearing before the City Council. Notice of the hearing shall be provided by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and to all persons whose names appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the County as owning benefiting properties as follows:

A. The City Clerk shall set the time and place of the public hearing.

B. Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing.

C. The hearing may be continued at the discretion of the City Council. (Ord. 202, 1986)

15.07.050 Conduct of hearing.
The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council to consider the proposed benefit charge, the benefit conferred upon each property by the improvements, the burden which the development of each property in accordance with its zoning and general plan designation will impose upon the public facilities to be improved and the extent to which the development of such property will contribute to the need for such improvements, impose the fairness of the method of benefit charge allocation, and the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the reimbursement plan. The hearing may be conducted before or after actual completion of the improvements, as the Council may determine. (Ord. 202, 1986)

15.07.060 Decision of City Council.
At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall adopt a resolution approving, conditionally approving or denying the reimbursement plan. The resolution shall attach as an exhibit thereto a copy of the reimbursement plan as adopted by the Council and shall set forth the method of benefit charge allocation as approved by the Council. (Ord. 202, 1986)

15.07.070 Recording of resolution and payment.
The resolution of the City Council shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of San Diego County. The benefit charge shall become a lien upon the property against which it is allocated and shall be payable not later than upon issuance of certificate of occupancy as a condition of approval of development review for the property, or any portion thereof, to the order of the public agency to be reimbursed, to be deposited in the appropriate street development, water, sewer or drainage fund according to the nature of the improvements for which the payment is made. (Ord. 202, 1986)

15.07.080 Waiver of payment in full.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the Poway Redevelopment Agency may waive payment in full of the benefit charge upon finding that such waiver would promote the prompt implementation of, and would not otherwise be inconsistent with, the redevelopment plan. (Ord. 202, 1986)

15.07.090 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The City Council of the City of Poway hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, clause and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases are declared invalid or unconstitutional, and would have passed and adopted the same even though any parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases that may be held invalid had been omitted therefrom. (Ord. 202, 1986)

Chapter 15.08
ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:

15.08.010    Adoption of the California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.08.010 Adoption of the California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Electrical Code, for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical systems and permit requirements and inspection thereof, the 2016 California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code which is based on the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter and Chapter 15.02 PMC, all installation, alteration or repair of electrical systems within the City of Poway shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Electrical Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission, which is based on the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Battery March Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269. (Ord. 794 § 4, 2016)

Chapter 15.10
RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sections:

15.10.010    Adoption of the California Residential Code, Part 2.5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.10.020    Findings.

15.10.030    Deletions, revisions and additions.

15.10.050    Section R902.1.3 amended.

15.10.060    Appendix H adopted.

15.10.010 Adoption of the California Residential Code, Part 2.5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Residential Code, for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway for the construction, alteration or repair of use and occupancy, location and maintenance of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane and permit requirements and inspection thereof, the 2016 California Residential Code, Part 2.5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code published by the California Building Standards Commission, which is based on the International Residential Code published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478. (Ord. 795 § 4, 2016)

15.10.020 Findings.
The City of Poway has many large brush-covered hillsides. The City is subject to frequent Santa Ana conditions consisting of dry gusting winds, which create extreme fire dangers. The City Council specifically finds that these geographic and topographic conditions necessitate greater fire protection than that provided by the 2016 California Residential Code. Therefore, this chapter alters the California Residential Code to require more fire retardant roof coverings. (Ord. 795 § 4, 2016)

15.10.030 Deletions, revisions and additions.
Deletions, revisions and additions to the 2016 California Residential Code shall be as set forth in PMC 15.10.050 through 15.10.060. (Ord. 795 § 4, 2016)

15.10.050 Section R902.1.3 amended.
Section R902.1.3 of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R902.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.

(Ord. 795 § 4, 2016)

15.10.060 Appendix H adopted.
Appendix H of the 2016 California Residential Code is adopted. (Ord. 795 § 4, 2016)

Chapter 15.12
PLUMBING CODE
Sections:

15.12.010    Adoption of the California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.12.020    Appendices G and I adopted.

15.12.010 Adoption of the California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Plumbing Code, for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway for the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all plumbing, gas or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment in or on any building or structure or outdoors on any premises or property, the 2016 California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq., which is based on the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter and Chapter 15.02 PMC, all construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all plumbing, gas or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment within the City of Poway shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Plumbing Code published by the California Building Standards Commission, which is based on the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 20001 Walnut Drive South, Walnut, California, 91789-2825. (Ord. 796 § 4, 2016)

15.12.020 Appendices G and I adopted.
Appendices G and I of the California Plumbing Code are adopted. (Ord. 796 § 4, 2016)

Chapter 15.16
MECHANICAL CODE
Sections:

15.16.010    Adoption of the California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.16.010 Adoption of the California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Mechanical Code, for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway for the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances, the 2016 California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq., which is based on the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter and Chapter 15.02 PMC, all erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances shall be in conformance with 2016 California Mechanical Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto. (Ord. 797 § 4, 2016)

Chapter 15.18
ENERGY CODE
Sections:

15.18.010    Adoption of the California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.18.010 Adoption of the California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Energy Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway for the conservation of energy the 2016 California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq. and the California Energy Code, 2016 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter and Chapter 15.02 PMC, all construction of buildings where energy will be utilized shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Energy Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, including the California Energy Code, 2016 Edition, published by the California Energy Commission. (Ord. 798 § 4, 2016)

Chapter 15.19
HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.19.010    Adoption of the 2016 California Historical Building Code, Part 8, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.19.010 Adoption of the 2016 California Historical Building Code, Part 8, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Historical Building Code, for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway to provide alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of designated historic buildings, the 2016 California Historical Building Code, Part 8, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq. (authorized by Health and Safety Code Sections 18950 through 18961). (Ord. 799 § 3, 2016)

Chapter 15.20
MOVING AND STORAGE OF BUILDINGS
Sections:

Article I. Moving Buildings

15.20.010    Permits – Required.

15.20.020    Permits – To move on City highway required.

Article II. Storage of Buildings

15.20.030    Approval of site required.

15.20.040    Requirements for approval.

15.20.050    Issuance of permit – Bond required.

Article III. Public Housing Structures

15.20.060    Permit required to sell or deliver public housing.

15.20.070    Bond.

15.20.080    Bond form.

15.20.090    Cash in lieu of bond.

15.20.100    Storage of structures – Bond.

Article IV. Removal of Structures – Penalty

15.20.110    Removal of structures from temporary storage.

15.20.120    Nuisance.

15.20.130    Violation – Penalty.

Article I. Moving Buildings

15.20.010 Permits – Required.
No person shall move any building or structure which is to be placed, stored or temporarily located upon any property within the City until there has been first obtained a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 15.04 PMC authorizing the moving and placement of said building or structure on property within the City or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter authorizing the moving of such building or structure to a storage yard or temporary location approved by the Planning Commission or City Council pursuant to the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.101)

15.20.020 Permits – To move on City highway required.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to modify the requirements of Chapters 12.04 through 12.32 PMC requiring the issuance of a permit to move buildings and structures over or along City highways. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.102)

Article II. Storage of Buildings

15.20.030 Approval of site required.
No building or structure shall be stored on any property or placed temporarily on any property in the City unless such property has been approved by the City Council as a site for such storage or temporary location pursuant to PMC 15.20.040 or has been approved by the City Planning Commission or City Council as a site for such storage or temporary location pursuant to the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.201)

15.20.040 Requirements for approval.
A. Application for approval of a site for use as a storage yard or temporary location shall be made to the City Council. Before approving a site for use as a storage yard or temporary location the City Council shall determine:

1. That the storage of unused and unoccupied structures upon such site will not create a fire hazard;

2. That the character of the area or neighborhood within which the site is located is such that the storage of unused and unoccupied structures on said site will not constitute an attractive nuisance to children in the area;

3. That the storage of unused and unoccupied structures on the site will not create such a breeding place for vermin as would be injurious to the public health;

4. That the storage of unused and unoccupied structures on the site will not be dangerous to public morals by creating a shelter for criminal or immoral acts.

B. In approving a site for use as a storage yard or temporary location, the City Council may impose such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to ensure that the use of the property will not create any of the hazards to health, safety or welfare referred to above in subsections (A)(1) through (4) of this section. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.202)

15.20.050 Issuance of permit – Bond required.
A. Upon approval by the City Council pursuant to PMC 15.20.040 or upon approval of the Planning Commission or City Council pursuant to the zoning ordinance of a site for use as a storage yard or temporary location for moved buildings or structures, the Building Inspector may issue a permit authorizing the moving to such storage yard or temporary location of one or more buildings or structures; provided, that there is filed with the Building Inspector a bond in the sum of $5,000 for each such storage yard or temporary location.

B. The bond shall be executed by the person, firm, partnership or corporation applying for the permit pursuant to this section and by a surety company authorized to do business in the State, shall be joint and several as to liability, shall inure to the benefit of the City, and shall be conditioned upon the removal from said storage year or temporary location within a period of one year from the date of issuance of said permit of all such buildings and structures so moved on to said storage yard or temporary location.

C. The bond shall be filed with the said Building Inspector prior to the time the permit is issued.

D. No such building or structure moved onto such storage yard or temporary location shall be used or occupied at such storage yard or temporary location. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.203)

Article III. Public Housing Structures

15.20.060 Permit required to sell or deliver public housing.
No person shall sell, offer to sell, deliver or offer to deliver within the City any residential structure or structures heretofore a part of or used with any public housing project if such structure or structures do not meet the minimum requirements of this chapter and the ordinances of the City unless and until such person shall first have applied for and been granted a permit by the Building Inspector to engage in such an operation or operations. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.301)

15.20.070 Bond.
Before a permit is issued the applicant shall first have filed with the Building Inspector a surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the State, in a form approved by the City Attorney and in the minimum amount of $1,000 for each single-family dwelling or single-family unit in a multiple-family dwelling to be sold, offered for sale, delivered or offered to be delivered within the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.302)

15.20.080 Bond form.
The bond required by PMC 15.20.070 shall be joint and several as to liability, shall inure to the benefit of any person or his successors or assigns to whom any such structure is sold, offered for sale, delivered or offered to be delivered, and to the City, and the bond shall be conditioned upon the completion within 90 days following the sale or delivery of such a structure of all work necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the minimum standards required by this chapter and the ordinances of the City and shall provide that, for failure to do so, the City or its authorized agents or contractor may enter upon the premises where any such structure shall be as the result of such sale or delivery, make and complete such work, and recover the cost thereof from the principal and/or surety on such bond. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.303)

15.20.090 Cash in lieu of bond.
Such person may deposit, in lieu of a surety bond, $1,000 cash or a cashier’s or certified check in the amount of $1,000. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.304)

15.20.100 Storage of structures – Bond.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 15.20.060, in the event that more than one residential structure, but not to exceed 200 in the aggregate, is to be removed by the same person from their original location to a storage yard or temporary location for the purpose of sale only, a single permit for such removal to each storage yard or temporary location may be granted by the Building Inspector provided said storage yard or temporary location is first approved by the City Council as provided in PMC 15.20.040; and, provided further, that there is filed with the Building Inspector a bond in the sum of $5,000 for each such storage yard or temporary location.

B. The bond shall be executed by the person applying for the permit and by a surety company authorized to do business in the State, shall be joint and several as to liability, shall inure to the benefit of the City and shall be conditioned upon the removal from said storage yard or temporary location pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and within a period of one year from the date of issuance of such permit of all such structures so moved onto said storage yard or temporary location.

C. The bond shall be filed with said Building Inspector prior to the time the permit is issued.

D. No such structure moved onto such storage yard or temporary location shall be used or occupied at such storage yard or temporary location. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.305)

Article IV. Removal of Structures – Penalty

15.20.110 Removal of structures from temporary storage.
On October 1, 1959, or upon the date of expiration of the term of any permit of removal and temporary storage of residential structures on a storage yard or temporary location issued pursuant to this chapter, whichever is the later, the permittee shall forthwith remove all such structures from such yard or location. Any person who acquires ownership or right to possession either of the land upon which residential structures are temporarily stored pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter or of the residential structures themselves which are temporarily stored pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be equally responsible with the permittee for the removal of such structures from such land following the expiration of the term of any such permit. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.401)

15.20.120 Nuisance.
A. Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, maintained or temporarily stored contrary to the provisions of this chapter is declared unlawful and a public nuisance, and any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit as required by the terms of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a nuisance has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, alteration, maintenance or temporary storage of any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, maintained or temporarily stored contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

B. The City Attorney shall, upon order of the City Council, immediately commence necessary proceedings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law.

C. All of the remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 403)

15.20.130 Violation – Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, including any person who as permittee of a permit for removal and temporary storage of residential structures on a storage yard or temporary location, fails to remove such structures from such yard or location upon the expiration of the term of such permit, shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 54.402)

Chapter 15.21
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.21.010    Adoption of the 2016 California Existing Building Code, Part 10, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.21.010 Adoption of the 2016 California Existing Building Code, Part 10, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Existing Building Code, for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway to provide alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of existing buildings, the 2016 California Existing Building Code, Part 10, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq. (Ord. 800 § 3, 2016)

Chapter 15.22
GREEN BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.22.010    Adoption of the California Green Building Standards Code, Part 11, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.22.010 Adoption of the California Green Building Standards Code, Part 11, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Green Building Standards Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Poway for the enhancement of the design and construction of buildings through the use of building concepts having a reduced negative impact or positive environmental impact and encourage sustainable construction practices the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, Part 11, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq., and the California Green Building Standards Code. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter and Chapter 15.02 PMC, all construction of buildings shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, including the California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition, published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 801 § 4, 2016)

Chapter 15.23
REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

15.23.010    Adoption of the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code, Part 12, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.23.010 Adoption of the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code, Part 12, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
The California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted by reference without change to this title. (Ord. 802 § 3, 2016)

Chapter 15.24
FIRE CODE
Sections:

15.24.010    Adoption of California Fire Code.

15.24.020    Administration.

15.24.025    Appeals.

15.24.030    Definitions.

15.24.040    General precautions against fire.

15.24.050    Fire service features.

15.24.060    Building services and systems.

15.24.070    Fire sprinkler systems.

15.24.090    Flammable finishes.

15.24.100    Fire safety during construction.

15.24.110    Wildland-urban interface fire area.

15.24.120    Fireworks display.

15.24.130    Flammable and combustible liquids.

15.24.140    Liquefied petroleum gases.

15.24.170    Chapter 80 Referenced Standards.

15.24.180    Appendix B, fire-flow requirements for buildings.

15.24.190    Conflict.

15.24.010 Adoption of California Fire Code.
The City of Poway adopts by reference the 2016 California Fire Code, excluding Section 103, and including Appendix Chapter 4 and Appendices B, F and I, as published by the International Code Council, except those portions that are deleted, modified, or amended by this chapter. One copy of the above-mentioned code has been and is now filed in the office of the City Clerk or the Fire Code Official, City of Poway, and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. From the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Poway. (Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.020 Administration.
Section 102.13 is added to read:

102.13 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances, Resolutions or Motions. All former ordinances, resolutions, motions, or parts thereof that are conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or of the Code or standards hereby adopted are repealed.

Section 104.12 is added to read:

104.12 Cost Recovery. The purpose of this section is to establish authority to obtain reimbursement from responsible individuals for the expenses of any emergency response and/or enforcement action by the City of Poway to protect the public from criminal or negligent activities, and from fire or hazardous substances.

Section 104.12.1 is added to read:

104.12.1 Reimbursement. In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 13000 et seq., an individual who acts negligently or in violation of the law and thereby requires the jurisdiction to provide an emergency response to a danger posed by a fire or hazardous substance shall be liable for reimbursement to the agency for the costs incurred. In accordance with Government Code Sections 53150 through 53158, any individual who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, and whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle, boat or vessel, or civil aircraft caused by that influence, proximately causes any incident and thereby requires the agency to provide an emergency response, shall reimburse the agency for the cost incurred.

Section 105.3.9 is added to read:

105.3.9 Expense Recovery. The fire code official may impose a fee for recovery of expenses incurred to enforce the fire prevention provisions of this code. Such expense recovery fees shall be established by a resolution of the City Council.

Section 105.6.6.1 is added to read:

105.6.6.1 Christmas Tree Lots. An operational permit is required to operate a Christmas tree lot with or without flameproofing services.

Section 105.6.20.1 is added to read:

105.6.20.1 Green Waste Recycling, Mulching, Composting Operations and Storage. An operational permit is required for green waste recycling, mulching, composting operations and storage.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.025 Appeals.
Section 108 is modified to read:

108.1 Appeals Procedure Established. Whenever the fire code official has denied a permit or other entitlement, or when it is alleged that a mistake has been made in the interpretation or application of the code, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire code official to the City Manager by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within 30 days of the decision. If the appeal is denied by the City Manager, the City Manager’s decision may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within 30 days of the City Manager’s decision and paying of the appeal fee set forth in the City's Master Fee Schedule for administrative appeals.

Section 109.4 is modified to read:

109.4 Violation Penalties. It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Code or standards hereby adopted by reference as a part of this Code, or to fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant to this Code, or to violate any permit or condition of approval issued pursuant to this Code. It is further unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any lawful order issued pursuant to this Code by the City Attorney or by a court of competent jurisdiction. A violation of any provision of this Code, or failure to comply with orders or conditions issued pursuant to this Code, shall constitute a misdemeanor or (in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney) an infraction, in any event as set forth in Chapter 1.08 PMC. In addition to any criminal penalties any violation may also be enforced by civil action, and shall be subject to civil and administrative penalties, as set forth in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC

Section 111.4 is modified to read:

111.4 Failure to Comply. It is unlawful for any person to continue any work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work expressly identified in the stop-work order as necessary to correct a violation or unsafe condition.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.030 Definitions.
The following definitions are added to Section 202:

Aerated Static Pile. A composting process that uses an air distribution system to either blow or draw air through the pile. Little or no pile agitation or turning is performed.

Chipping and Grinding. An activity that mechanically reduces the size of organic matter.

Composting Operations. An operation that is conducted for the purpose of producing compost and shall be by means of one or a combination of the following processes used to produce a compost product: static pile, windrow pile, or aerated static pile.

Combustible Vegetation. Material that in its natural state will readily ignite, burn and transmit fire from native or landscape plants to any structure or other vegetation. Combustible vegetation includes dry grass, brush, weeds, litter or other flammable vegetation that creates a fire hazard.

Dead-End Road. A road that has only one point of vehicular ingress/egress, including cul-de-sacs and looped roads.

Defensible Space. An area either natural or man-made, where material capable of allowing a fire to spread unchecked has been treated, cleared or modified to slow the rate and intensity of an advancing wildfire and to create an area for fire suppression operations to occur. Distance measurements for defensible space shall be measured on a horizontal plane.

Fire Department. Any regularly organized fire department regularly charged with the responsibility of providing fire protection to the jurisdiction.

Fire Authority Having Jurisdiction (FAHJ). The designated entity providing enforcement of fire regulations as they relate to planning, construction, and development. This entity for the City of Poway also provides fire suppression and other emergency services.

Fire Hazard. Anything that increases or could cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fire; or anything or act, which could obstruct, delay, hinder, or interfere with the operations of the fire department; or egress of occupants in the event of fire.

Fire Protection Plan (FPP). The FPP is a document prepared for a specific project or development proposed in the wildland-urban interface fire area that describes ways to minimize and mitigate potential loss from wildfire exposure, with the purpose of reducing impact on the community’s fire protection delivery system.

Fuel Break. An area, strategically located for fighting anticipated fires, where the native vegetation has been permanently modified or replaced so that fires burning into it can be more easily controlled. Fuel breaks divide fire-prone areas into smaller areas for easier fire control and to provide access for fire fighting.

Fuel Modification Zone. A strip of land where combustible vegetation has been thinned or modified or both and partially or totally replaced with approved fire-resistant and/or irrigated plants to provide an acceptable level of risk from vegetation fires. Fuel modification reduces the radiant and convective heat on a structure and provides valuable defensible space for firefighters to make an effective stand against an approaching fire front.

Green Waste. Organic material that includes, but is not limited to, yard trimmings, plant waste, manure, untreated wood wastes, paper products, and natural fiber products.

Hazardous Fire Area. Any geographic area mapped by the State or designated by a local jurisdiction as a moderate, high or very high fire hazard area or which the FAHJ has determined is a hazardous fire area, because the type and condition of vegetation, topography, weather and structure density increase the probability that the area will be susceptible to a wildfire.

High-Rise Building.

1. “Existing high-rise structure” means a high-rise structure, the construction of which is commenced or completed prior to July 1, 1974.

2. “High-rise structure” means every building of any type of construction or occupancy having floors used for human occupancy located more than 55 feet above the lowest floor level having building access (see California Building Code, Section 403.1.2), except buildings used as hospitals as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 1250.

3. “New high-rise structure” means a high-rise structure, the construction of which is commenced on or after July 1, 1974.

Hogged Materials. Mill waste consisting mainly of hogged bark but may include a mixture of bark, chips, dust, or other by-products from trees and vegetation.

Mulching. the process by which mixed green waste is mechanically reduced in size for the purpose of making compost.

Open Space Easement. Any right or interest in perpetuity or for a term for years in open-space land, as that term is defined in Government Code section 51051, acquired by the County, a city or a nonprofit organization where the instrument granting the right or interest imposes restriction on use of the land, to preserve the land for public use or enjoyment of the natural or scenic character of the land.

Open Space Preserve. Open-space land, as that term is defined in Government Code section 65560(b), for the preservation of natural resources, managed production of resources, outdoor recreation, public health and safety, buffer for a military installation or the protection of cultural resources.

Response Time. The elapsed time from the fire department’s receipt of the first alarm to when the first fire unit arrives at the scene.

Slope. The variation of terrain from the horizontal; the number of feet, rise or fall per 100 feet, measured horizontally, expressed as a percentage.

Static Pile. A composting process that is similar to the aerated static pile except that the air source may or may not be controlled.

Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some manner.

Travel Time. The estimated time it would take for a responding agency to travel from the fire station to the furthest structure in a proposed development project, determined by measuring the safest, most direct, appropriate, and reliable route with consideration given to safe operation speeds for heavy fire apparatus.

Tree Crown. The primary and secondary branches growing out from the main stem, together with twigs and foliage.

Windrow Composting Process. The process in which compostable material is placed in elongated piles. The piles or windrows are aerated and/or mechanically turned on a periodic basis.

Wood Chips. Chips of various species of wood produced or used in chipping and grinding operations.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.040 General precautions against fire.
Section 304.1.4 is added to read:

304.1.4 Outdoor Carnivals and Fairs. Outdoor carnivals and fairs shall only be conducted on grounds free of combustible vegetation or trimmed to the satisfaction of the FAHJ.

Section 305.6 is added to read:

305.6 Rockets, Model Aircraft and Similar Devices. Rockets, model airplanes, gliders, balloons, sky lanterns, floating luminaries or similar devices powered with an engine, propellant, open flame, or other feature liable to start or cause a fire shall not be projected into or across hazardous fire areas without prior approval of the fire code official.

Section 307.5 is modified to read:

307.5 Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and the use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended by an adult until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.

Section 320 is added to read:

SECTION 320

STORAGE OF FIREWOOD

320.1 General. Firewood shall not be stored in unenclosed space beneath a building or structure, on a deck or under eaves, a canopy or other projection or overhang. When required by the fire code official, firewood or other combustible material stored in the defensible space surrounding a structure shall be located at least 30 feet from any structure and separated from the crown of any trees by a minimum of 15 feet, measured horizontally. Firewood and combustible materials not for use on the premises shall be stored so as to not pose a fire hazard.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.050 Fire service features.
Section 503.1.2 is modified to read:

503.1.2 Additional Access. The fire code official may require one or more secondary means of access to a project, development or area where he or she deems that such access is necessary for emergency operations and/or evacuation. The maximum length of a dead-end road, including all dead end roads accessed from that dead-end road, shall not exceed the following cumulative lengths, regardless of the number of parcels served:

Parcels zoned for less than 1 acre

800 feet

Parcels zoned for 1 acre to 4.99 acres

1,320 feet

Parcels zoned for 5 acres to 19.99 acres

2,640 feet

Parcels zoned for 20 acres or larger

5,280 feet

These requirements may be modified when, in the opinion of the fire code official, conditions warrant. All lengths shall be measured from the edge of the roadway surface at the intersection where the road begins to the end of the road surface at its farthest point. Where a dead-end road crosses areas of differing zoned parcel sizes that require different length limits, the shortest allowable length shall apply. Secondary access must be remote from the primary access and must meet all provisions of this section.

Section 503.2.1 is modified to read:

503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed, improved width of not less than 20 feet, except single-family residential driveways serving no more than two improved parcels containing dwelling units shall have a minimum of 16 feet of unobstructed improved width. In most cases, the City of Poway construction standards for streets (Chapter 12.20 PMC) will be more restrictive. The more restrictive standard shall apply. Vertical overhead clearance shall be a minimum of 13 feet 6 inches.

Exceptions:

1. Upon approval by the fire code official, vertical clearances or width may be reduced provided such reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical clearance.

2. Fire access roadways, gated entrances with card readers, guard stations, or center medians, which have separated lanes of one-way traffic shall be not less than 12 feet wide per lane.

Section 503.2.3 is modified to read:

503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus not less than 75,000 pounds unless authorized by the FAHJ, and shall be provided with an approved paved surface so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. When deemed necessary in the opinion of the fire code official, a paved driving surface shall mean asphalt or concrete surface.

Section 503.2.4 is modified to read:

503.2.4 Turning Radius. The turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be a minimum of 28 feet as measured to the inside edge of the improvement width or as approved by the fire code official.

Section 503.2.5 is modified to read:

503.2.5 Dead Ends. All dead-end fire access roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with approved provisions that allow emergency apparatus to turn around. A cul-de-sac shall be provided in residential areas where the access roadway serves more than two structures. The minimum, unobstructed paved radius width for a cul-de-sac shall be 38 feet in residential areas. The Fire Chief shall establish a policy identifying acceptable turnarounds for various project types.

Section 503.2.7 is modified to read:

503.2.7 Grade. The gradient for a fire apparatus access roadway shall not exceed 20 percent. Grades exceeding 15 percent (incline or decline) shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete (PCC), with a deep broom finish perpendicular to the direction of travel, or equivalent, to enhance traction. The fire code official may require additional mitigation measures where he or she deems appropriate.

Section 503.2.8 is modified to read:

503.2.8 Angles of Approach and Departure. The angle of departure and the angle of approach of a fire access roadway shall not exceed seven degrees (12 percent) or as approved by the fire code official.

Section 503.3.1 is added to read:

503.3.1 Marking of Fire Apparatus Access Roads. When required, approved signs or other approved notices shall be provided and maintained for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads and prohibit the obstruction thereof or both. All new public roads, all private roads within major subdivisions, and all private road easements serving four or more parcels shall be named. Road name signs shall comply with City of Poway Supplemental Engineering Standards, Street Sign Specifications. The fire code official may require the posting of a fire access roadway where parking has obstructed or could obstruct the required width.

Section 503.6.1 is added to read:

503.6.1 Security Gates. All gates or other structures or devices that could obstruct fire access roadways or otherwise hinder emergency operations are prohibited unless they meet the standards approved by the fire code official and receive Specific Plan approval. All automatic gates across fire access roadways and driveways shall be equipped with approved, emergency, key-operated switches overriding all command functions and opening the gate(s). Gates accessing more than four residences or residential lots, or gates accessing hazardous institutional, educational or assembly occupancy group structures shall also be equipped with approved emergency traffic control-activating strobe light sensor(s), or other devices approved by the fire code official, which will activate the gate on the approach of emergency apparatus with a battery backup or manual-mechanical disconnect in case of power failure. In the event of a power failure, the gate shall be automatically transferred to a fail-safe mode allowing the gate to be manually pushed open without the use of special knowledge or equipment. All automatic gates must meet fire department policies deemed necessary by the fire code official for rapid, reliable access. Automatic gates serving more than one dwelling or residential lot that are in existence at the time of adoption of this ordinance are required to install an approved emergency key-operated switch or other mechanism approved by the fire code official at an approved location which overrides all command functions and opens the gate(s). Property owners must comply with this requirement within 90 days of written notice to comply. Where this section requires an approved key-operated switch, it shall be dual keyed or dual switches shall be provided to facilitate access by law enforcement personnel.

Section 505.1 is modified to read:

505.1 Address Numbers. Approved numbers and/or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings and at appropriate additional locations as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or roadway fronting the property from either direction of approach. Said numbers shall contrast with their background, and shall meet the following minimum standards as to size: four inches for single-family dwellings; six inches for multifamily dwellings; between six inches (minimum) and 18 inches (maximum) for commercial buildings; and between 18 inches (minimum) and 24 inches (maximum) for industrial buildings. Additional numbers shall be required where deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal, e.g. rear access doors, building corners, and entrances to commercial centers. The fire code official may establish different minimum sizes for numbers for various categories of projects. When required by the fire code official, roof numbers shall be installed meeting current fire department standards.

Section 505.3 is added to read:

505.3 Easement Address Signs. All easements which are not named differently from the roadway from which they originate, shall have an address sign installed and maintained, listing all street numbers occurring on that easement located where the easement intersects the named roadway. The minimum size of the numbers on that sign shall be four inches in height with a minimum stroke of 3/8 inch and shall contrast with the background.

Section 505.4 is added to read:

505.4 Map/Directory. A lighted directory map, meeting current fire department standards, shall be installed at each driveway entrance to multiple unit residential projects and mobile home parks, where the number of units in such project exceeds 15.

Section 506.1 is modified to read:

506.1 Key Boxes. When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life saving or firefighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire code official and shall contain keys to gain necessary access.

Section 506.2.1 is added to read:

506.2.1 Emergency Key Access. All central station-monitored fire detection systems and fire sprinkler systems shall have an approved emergency key access box on site in an approved location. The owner or occupant shall provide and maintain current keys for the structure(s) for fire department placement in the box and shall notify the fire department in writing when the building is re-keyed.

Section 507.2.2 is modified to read:

507.2.2 Water Storage Tanks. Water storage tanks, when permitted by the fire code official, shall comply with Table No. 507.2.2 and installed in accordance with NFPA 22.

TABLE NO. 507.2.2 

Building

Square Feet

Gallons Per Minute Water Flow

Capacity

Gallons

Duration

Minutes

Up to 3,600

250

10,000

40

3,601 to 7,700

15,000

60

7,701 and above

333

20,000

60

When the exposure distance is 100 feet or less from an adjacent property or the severity of the potential fire risk has been determined to exist, an increase in water storage may be required by the fire code official.

1. Tank elevation shall be equal to or higher than the fire department connection on the premises. Regardless of domestic use, all tanks shall be equipped with a device that will ensure that the tank contains the designated amount of water for fire flow duration as determined by the Fire Department. Tank size may be increased to serve multiple structures on a single parcel.

2. The supply outlet shall be at least four inches in diameter from the base of the tank to the point of outlet at the fire department connection. The fire department connection shall be at least one 4-inch National Standard Thread (male), reduced to one 2-1/2-inch National Standard Thread (male). Additional outlets may be required.

3. Tanks that are supplied by municipal water, when permitted by the fire code official, shall have a capacity of 10,000 gallons provided that the sole use of these tanks is for fire protection purposes.

4. Location of fire department outlet shall be determined on the plot plan when submitted to the fire department. Consideration will be given to factors such as topography, elevations, and distance from structures, driveway access, and prevailing winds.

5.  The outlet shall be located along an access roadway and shall not be closer than 50 feet or further than 150 feet from the structure.

6. All exposed tank supply pipes shall be of an alloy or other material listed for above-ground use. Adequate support shall be provided.

7. Water storage tanks shall be constructed from materials approved by the fire code official and installed per manufacturer recommendations.

8. The fire code official may require any necessary information be submitted on a plot plan for approval.

9. Vessels previously used for products other than water shall not be permitted.

Section 507.3 is modified to read:

507.3 Fire Flow Requirements. Fire flows shall be based on Appendix B. Consideration should be given to increasing the gallons per minute set forth in Appendix B to protect structures of extremely large square footage and for such reasons as poor access roads, grade and canyon rims, hazardous brush, and response times greater than five minutes by a recognized fire department or fire suppression company. In hazardous fire areas, the main capacity for new subdivisions shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. If fire flow increases are not feasible, the fire code official may require alternative design standards such as alternative types of construction providing a higher level of fire resistance, fuel break requirements which could include required irrigation, modified access road requirements, specified setback distances for building sites addressing canyon rim developments and hazardous brush areas, and other requirements authorized by this Code and as specified by the fire code official.

Section 507.5.7 is added to read:

507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Spacing. Fire hydrant spacing shall be reasonably maintained and not minimized when location is determined by placement of a new structure. The fire code official shall approve the distance between fire hydrants, and fire hydrant locations.

Section 507.5.8 is added to read:

507.5.8 Fire Hydrant Systems – Construction. The fire code official may require a fire hydrant to have any combination of 4-inch and 2-1/2-inch outlets with National Standard Threads.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.060 Building services and systems.
Section 603.8.1 is modified to read:

603.8.1 Residential Incinerators. Residential incinerators shall be prohibited.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.070 Fire sprinkler systems.
Section 901.4.7 is added to read:

901.4.7 Fire Department Connections. Fire hose threads used in connection with fire-extinguishing systems shall be National Standard Thread or as approved by the FAHJ. The location of fire department hose connections and control valves shall be approved by the fire code official.

Section 903.2 is modified to read:

903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this section. For the purpose of fire-sprinkler systems, buildings separated by less than ten feet from adjacent buildings shall be considered as one building. Fire barriers, partitions, and walls, regardless of rating, shall not be considered as creating separate buildings for purposes of determining fire sprinkler requirements. Mezzanines shall be included in the total square footage calculation.

Exceptions:

1. Agricultural buildings constructed of wood or metal frames over which fabric or similar material is stretched which are specifically used as green houses are exempt from fire sprinkler requirements unless they are physically connected to other structures.

2. Group U occupancies not greater than 749 square feet, when the building is 10 feet or more from an adjacent structure or property line.

All occupancies within the City of Poway:

New Occupancies (Except Residential)

New Occupancies – Residential

Additions – All Occupancies (Except Residential)

Additions – Residential located in the City’s very high fire hazard area

All buildings greater than 5,000 sq. ft.

Required per California Residential Code

Additions of more than 25% of the square footage of an existing building, which results in a structure of 5,000 square feet or more, shall be required to be protected throughout the entire structure with a sprinkler system consistent with this section.

Residences may be required to install a Sprinkler system when the proposed addition is more than 749 square feet which results in a structure of 3,600 square feet or more when structurally feasible.

 

 

 

Residences may be required to install a sprinkler system when the proposed addition is more than 749 square feet which results in an increase in square footage of more than 50 percent when structurally feasible and when a special hazard such as a substandard water supply or a substandard access exists. Standards for water supply and access are defined by Section 15.24.050 of the Poway Municipal Code.

When sprinklers are required under this section, the structure shall be required to be protected throughout the entire structure with a sprinkler system consistent with this section.

Section 903.2.1 is added to read:

903.2.1 System Design. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided with the following design features:

1. For new buildings less than 750 square feet in size located in both the City’s water service area and very high fire hazard severity area that require a NFPA 13D life safety sprinkler system, water meters shall be a minimum of 3/4 inch, and the water service line shall be a minimum of 3/4 inch.

2. For new buildings greater than 749 square feet in size located in the City’s water service area that require a NFPA 13D life safety sprinkler system, water meters shall be a minimum one-inch, and the water service line shall be a minimum of one-inch.

3. For residential additions located in the City’s water service area that require a NFPA 13D life safety sprinkler system, water meters shall be a minimum one-inch, and the water service line shall be a minimum of one-inch.

4. For commercial and industrial occupancies commonly referred to as “spec buildings” wherein no specific end use is identified at the time of plan check, the sprinkler system shall provide a density of .45 gallons per minute per square foot for a 3,000-square-foot design area.

Section 903.4, Exception 1, is modified to read:

Exception 1 – Automatic sprinkler systems with less than 100 fire sprinklers protecting one- and two-family dwellings.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.090 Flammable finishes.
Section 2404.3.3.2 is added to read:

2404.3.3.2 Spraying Space. Spray operations of flammable finishes are prohibited outside if the spray area exceeds nine square feet and/or produces vapors that could reach any source of ignition.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.100 Fire safety during construction.
Section 3318 is added to read:

Section 3318

Fuel Modification Zones

3318.1 Fuel modification zone during construction. Any person doing construction of any kind which requires a building permit and includes installation of a fuel modification zone, shall remove all flammable vegetation within the approved fuel modification zone prior to the arrival of combustible material on the site and shall maintain during the duration of the project until all elements of approved fuel modification zones are installed and approved.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.110 Wildland-urban interface fire area.
Section 4903 is added to read:

SECTION 4903

FIRE PROTECTION PLAN

4903.1 When Required. The Development Services Department or the FAHJ may require an applicant for a parcel map, subdivision map, minor development review application, development review, specific plan or major use permit for any property located in a wildland-urban interface fire area to submit a Fire Protection Plan (FPP) as part of the approval process.

4903.2 Content. The FPP shall consider location, topography, geology, aspect, combustible vegetation (fuel types), climatic conditions and fire history. The plan shall address the following in terms of compliance with applicable codes and regulations, including but not limited to: water supply, vehicular and emergency apparatus access, travel time to nearest serving fire station, structural ignitability, structure setback, ignition-resistive building features, fire protection systems and equipment, impacts to existing emergency services, defensible space and vegetation management. The plan shall recommend measures to reduce the ignitability of structures throughout the area being addressed.

Section 4907.2 is added to read:

4907.2 General Fire Setbacks. Buildings and structures located within a wildland-urban interface fire area shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from property lines and biological open space easements unless the Poway Municipal Code requires a greater minimum. When the property line abuts a roadway the setback shall be measured from the farthest roadway edge.

Exception: When the fire code official determines the hazard from a wildland fire is not significant or when the terrain, parcel size or other constraints on the parcel make the required setback infeasible, this setback may be reduced to less than 30 feet when additional measures are employed to the satisfaction of the fire code official.

Section 4907.3 is added to read:

4907.3 Structure Setback from Slope. Single-story structures shall be set back a minimum 15 feet horizontally from top of slope to the farthest projection from a roof. A single-story structure shall be less than 12 feet above grade. A two-story structure shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet horizontally from top of slope to the farthest projection from a roof. Structures greater than two stories may require a greater setback when the slope is greater than 2 to 1.

Exceptions:

1. Structures constructed with a noncombustible exterior wall adjacent to the slope, no openings adjacent to the slope, no combustible attachments to the exterior wall adjacent to the slope, and no roof eaves adjacent to the slope.

2. There exists no open wildland fuel area directly adjacent or juxtaposed to the structure, and, the slope is directly adjacent to developed parcels with fuel management principles in place.

3. The fire code official determines the hazard to be minimal.

Section 4907.4 is added to read:

4907.4 Fuel Modification. A person owning, leasing, controlling, operating or maintaining a building or structure in or adjoining a hazardous fire area, and a person owning, leasing or controlling land adjacent to a building or structure in or adjoining a hazardous fire area shall maintain an effective fuel modification zone by removing, clearing or modifying combustible vegetation and other flammable materials from areas within 100 feet from each building or structure, or as determined by the fire code official. The fuel modification zone shall be maintained according to applicable defensible space and vegetation management policies, the Wildfire Defensible Space Program and the Landscape and Irrigation Design Manual.

Exceptions:

1. Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants used as ground cover, provided that they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.

2. With the approval of the fire code official, the width of the fuel modification zone may be reduced where ignition-resistant construction or other mitigation measures are implemented.



Figure 4907.4 Measurements of Fuel Modification Distance

Section 4907.4.1 is added to read:

4907.4.1 Fuel Modification of Combustible Vegetation from Sides of Roadways. The FAHJ may require a property owner to modify combustible vegetation in the area within 20 feet from each side of the driveway or a public or private road adjacent to the property to establish a fuel modification zone. The FAHJ has the right to enter private property to insure the fuel modification zone requirements are met.

Exception: The FAHJ may reduce the width of the fuel modification zone if it will not impair access.

Section 4907.4.2 is added to read:

4907.4.2 Community Fuel Modification. The FAHJ may require a developer, as a condition of issuing a certificate of occupancy, to establish one or more fuel modification zones to protect a new community by reducing the fuel loads adjacent to a community and structures within it.

Section 4907.4.2.1 is added to read:

4907.4.2.1 Land Ownership. Once a fuel modification zone has been established under section 4907.4.2, the land on which the zone is located shall be under the control of an association or other common ownership established in perpetuity, for the benefit of the community to be protected.

Section 4907.5 is added to read:

4907.5 Maintenance of Defensible Space. Any person owning, leasing, controlling, operating or maintaining a building or structure required to establish a fuel modification zone shall maintain the defensible space. The FAHJ may enter the property to determine if the person responsible is complying with this section. The FAHJ may issue an order to the person responsible for maintaining the defensible space directing the person to modify or remove non-fire resistant vegetation from defensible space areas, remove leaves, needles and other dead vegetative material from the roof of a building or structure, maintain trees as required or to take other action the FAHJ determines is necessary to comply.

Section 4907.5.1 is added to read:

4907.5.1 Trees. Horizontal clearance from tree crowns to structures shall be pruned to maintain a minimum of ten feet for fire resistive trees and 30 feet for non-fire resistive trees. Tree crowns within the defensible space shall be pruned to remove limbs located less than six feet above the ground surface adjacent to the trees. Portions of tree crowns that extend within ten feet of the outlet of a chimney shall be pruned to maintain a minimum horizontal clearance of ten feet. Dead wood and litter shall be regularly removed from trees. Ornamental trees shall be limited to groupings of two to three trees with canopies for each grouping separated horizontally as described in Table 4907.5.1.

TABLE 4907.5.1

DISTANCE BETWEEN TREE CANOPIES

Distances Between Edge of Mature Tree Canopies

Zone A

No more than three trees per cluster; minimum distance between clusters or individual non-clustered trees is 20 feet

Zone B

No less than 2x the diameter of the species’ mature canopy.

Section 4907.5.2 is added to read:

4907.5.2 Orchards, Groves, or Vineyards. All orchards, groves, and vineyards shall be kept in a healthy state and maintained as described below. A ten-foot firebreak shall be cleared between the perimeter of the orchard trees or row of grape vines and native vegetation or ornamental landscaping. Orchards shall be kept clean of dead and/or downed trees. Orchards and vineyards shall be free of combustible debris including, but not limited to, dead branches and dead foliage. All dead grasses between rows of trees or vines shall be removed.

Section 4907.5.3 is added to read:

4907.5.3 Eucalyptus Forests and Oak Woodlands. All forests and woodlands shall be kept in a healthy state and maintained as described below. The forest or woodlands shall be free of all dead, dying, or diseased trees (excluding tree stumps no higher than six inches above the ground). Dead, dying, or diseased trees shall include insect-infested trees and trees that are no longer living, in the last stages of growth, or infected by a pathogen of any type. If combustible vegetation is located underneath the drip line of a tree, the lowest branch shall be at least three times as high as the understory brush or grasses, or 10 feet, whichever is greater. Firewood shall be neatly stacked and shall have a minimum of 30 feet of clearance (no vegetation) around the entire firewood storage area. Debris and trimmings produced by the removal process shall be removed from the site, or if left, shall be converted into mulch by a chipping machine and evenly dispersed to a maximum depth of six inches.

Section 4907.6 is added to read:

4907.6 Landscape Plans. Landscape plans are required for new residential custom homes, production tract homes, multi-family residential, and commercial buildings. Landscape plans shall be submitted and approved by the Development Services Department and the fire code official prior to the issuance of a building permit. Landscape plan submittals shall follow the submittal requirements found in the Landscape and Irrigation Design Manual and shall, at a minimum, include a readable scale, the delineation of 100-foot fuel modification zones, the existing vegetation, all irrigated areas, a plant legend with both botanical and common names, and identification of all plant material symbols. The fire code official may expand or reduce the distance of the fuel modification zones based on project location, surrounding vegetation, and topography.

Section 4907.6.1 is added to read:

4907.6.1 Landscape Requirements. All plant materials used shall be from the list of suggested fire-resistive plant species identified in the Landscape and Irrigation Design Manual. The addition of plant material to the approved list will be at the discretion of the Development Services Department and fire code official.

Section 4907.6.2 is added to read:

4907.6.2 Landscape Installation. All landscaping shall be installed prior to final inspection for issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.120 Fireworks display.
Section 5608.1 is modified to read:

5608.1 General. Outdoor fireworks displays, use of pyrotechnics before a proximate audience and pyrotechnic special effects in motion picture, television, theatrical and group entertainment productions shall comply with California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Chapter 6 and Poway Municipal Code. The Director of Safety Services is the Issuing Officer for any fireworks permit required by this Chapter. The Director of Safety Services may delegate the duties of Issuing Officer at his or her discretion.

Section 5608.1.1 is modified to read:

5608.1.1 Scope. The possession, manufacture, sale, storage, use and display of fireworks are prohibited in the City of Poway except as provided in the Poway Municipal Code.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.130 Flammable and combustible liquids.
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is modified to read:

5704.2.9.6.1 Location Where Above-Ground Storage Tanks are Prohibited. The limits referred to in Sections 5704.2.9.6.1 and 5706.2.4.4 of the 2013 California Fire Code and the 2012 International Fire Code in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above-ground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as the jurisdictional limits of the City of Poway (see exceptions at Section 5704.2.9.6.1).

Exceptions:

1. With the Chief’s approval, Class I and II liquids may be stored above-ground outside of buildings in specially designed, approved, and listed containers which have features incorporated into their design which mitigates concerns for exposure to heat, ignition sources, and mechanical damage. Containers must be installed and used in accordance with their listing, and provisions must be made for leak and spill containment. The Chief may disapprove the installation of such containers when in his or her opinion, their use presents a risk to life or property. Storage in such tanks on any site shall not exceed 550 gallons for Class I or 1,100 gallons of Class II liquids. In no case shall such storage be permitted within 100 feet of any residential or institutional setting. Venting shall meet Fire Code and Air Pollution Control District standards, “No Smoking” signs shall be provided, and the tank shall be marked accordingly.

2. Crankcase draining may be stored in specially constructed above-ground storage tanks, approved by the Chief with a maximum capacity of 550 gallons. Such tanks may be located within a building when the Chief deems appropriate, and the container must be a specially designed, approved, and listed container which has features incorporated into its design which mitigate concerns for exposure to heat, ignition sources, and mechanical damage. Containers must be installed and used in accordance with their listing, and provisions must be made for leak and spill containment. In no case shall such storage be permitted in residential or institutional property.

3. With the Chief’s approval, temporary storage of a maximum of 10,000 gallons of Class II liquids may be permitted for a period not to exceed 90 days at remote construction sites and earth-moving projects consistent with Sections 5704 and 5706.

The following criteria shall be applied in areas within the South Poway Business Park, which are designated commercial, light industrial, or industrial park. With the Chief’s approval, Class I and II liquids may be stored above-ground outside of buildings in specially designed, approved, and listed containers which have features incorporated into their design which mitigate concerns for exposure to heat (two-hour fire resistance), ignition sources, and mechanical damage. Containers must be installed and used in accordance with their listing, and provisions must be made for leak and spill containment. Storage in such tanks on any site shall not exceed 5,000 gallons for Class I or 10,000 gallons for Class II liquids. The Chief may disapprove the installation of such containers when, in the Chief’s opinion, their use presents a risk to life or property. In no case shall such storage be permitted on residential or institutional property. A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Department following the approval of submitted plans prior to installation. Tanks shall be required to be secured by fencing and to have appropriate signage. The City’s Development Services Director shall determine methods of visually screening these tanks. In no case shall such installation be permitted within 50 feet of any building or property line which can be built upon, including the opposite side of a public way, unless an alternative design method for such installation is approved by the Fire Department and by any other appropriate City of Poway departments deem necessary, including the City’s Development Services Department. Temporary above-ground tanks for storage of Class I liquids of a maximum capacity of 550 gallons or Class II tanks with a maximum capacity of 10,000 gallons may be installed for a maximum of 90 days under specific restrictions and safeguards, on remote, isolated, secured construction sites, earth-moving projects, gravel pits, or borrow pits when approved by the Chief.

Section 5705.2.4 is added to read:

5705.2.4 Transferring Class I, II or III liquids. Class I or II liquids or Class III liquids that are heated up to or above their flash points shall be transferred by one of the following methods:

1. From safety cans complying with UL 30.

2. Through an approved closed piping system.

3. From containers or tanks by an approved pump taking suction through an opening in the top of the container or tank.

4. Approved engineered liquid transfer system.

Exception: Liquids in containers not exceeding a 5.3-gallon (20 L) capacity.

Section 5706.2.4.4 is modified to read:

5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited in residential areas is hereby established as jurisdiction limits of the City of Poway.

Section 5706.2.5.2.1 is added to read:

5706.2.5.2.1 Limitations on tanks for gravity discharge. Gravity dispensing of Class I or II liquids or Class III liquids that are heated up to or above their flash points is prohibited. Dispensing devices for flammable and combustible liquids shall be of an approved type. Approved pumps taking suction from the top of the tank shall be used. Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be dispensed by a device that operates through pressure within a storage tank. Air or oxygen shall not be used to pressurize an aboveground tank.

Section 5706.2.8.2 is added to read:

5706.2.8.2. Tank vehicle as a substitute for permanent tank prohibited. The use of a tank vehicle in a stationary manner as a substitute for an approved above-ground or below-ground fuel tank is prohibited.

Section 5806.2 is modified to read:

5806.2 Limitations. The geographic limit in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited is hereby established as jurisdiction limits of the City of Poway.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.140 Liquefied petroleum gases.
Section 6104.2 is modified to read:

6104.2 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits. The geographic limits in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited for the protection of heavily populated and congested areas is hereby established as jurisdiction limits of the City of Poway except for areas specifically zoned by the City for such uses.

Section 6107.5 is added to read:

6107.5 Securing Tanks to Ground (Liquefied Petroleum Gases). Tanks shall be secured to prevent the tank from rolling or moving when required by the FAHJ.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.170 Chapter 80 Referenced Standards.
The following referenced standard of the California Fire Code is modified to read:

NFPA 13D is modified to read:

Section 7.1.5 is added to read:

7.1.5 Pressure-regulating valve. When available system water pressure exceeds 150 psi, a listed/approved pressure-regulating valve shall be installed at the system riser. Such valves shall be adjusted to restrict the outlet pressure to a maximum of 150 psig at any flow or no flow. When such valves are installed submittal documents must include manufacturer information sheets along with charts showing the dimensions (size) and flow characteristics inlet and outlet pressures at various flows for the type of valve being installed, and the valve shall be included in the design calculations.

Exception: At the discretion of the FAHJ the contractor may install a listed/approved pressure relief valve, piped to the system main drain, set to relieve the pressure at 175 psig, provided the available supply pressure does not exceed 175 psig.

Section 7.2.5 is modified to read:

7.2.5 Inspector Test. Each sprinkler system shall have a 1/2” or larger test connection with a threaded keyless valve. The valve shall be remote to the riser, located on the building exterior about five 5 feet above final grade and shall be remote from the riser. It shall be labeled with a permanent plate with minimum 1/4” lettering, contrasting with background, and stating: “INSPECTOR TEST”. (Pre-assembled riser assemblies with a built-in Drain/Test valve shall not be accepted for inspector test valve unless approved by the FAHJ.)

Exception: Automatic fire sprinkler systems for manufactured homes installed at the factory may have the inspectors test valve located at the location as designed at the factory.

Section 7.3.3 is added to read:

7.3.3 Pressure gauge. A listed 300 psi pressure gauge shall be permanently installed at the riser.

Section 7.6 is modified to read:

7.6 Alarms. A water flow switch shall be provided and located on the sprinkler riser above the check valve and main drain and shall actuate an audible fire alarm signal bell. The water flow switch shall be a retarding type with a delay between 15-60 seconds before activation of the signal bell. Alarm bell shall have a minimum diameter of 8 inches and be mounted on the exterior in the vicinity of the master bedroom. The alarm bell shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms with intervening doors closed.

Section 8.3.4 is modified to read:

8.3.4. Sprinklers may be omitted from carports and open attached porches when less than 4 feet in depth. However, attached garages shall be protected with intermediate temperature rated sprinklers with not more than 150 sq. ft. head spacing. Sprinkler heads in garages shall be protected against mechanical damage by approved guards, unless recessed heads are provided. Garage doors may be disregarded in the layout of the fire sprinkler system.

Section 8.3.5.1.1 is modified to read:

8.3.5.1.1. Where the fuel-fired equipment is above all of the occupied areas of the dwelling unit, at least one quick-response intermediate temperature sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment.

Section 10.2.4.1 is added to read:

10.2.4.1 3-Head Calculation. When design conditions exceed the allowances of Section 10.2, a 3 sprinkler head calculation may be required by the FAHJ.

Section 10.2.5 is added to read:

10.2.5 Pressure Cushion. The system shall be designed 10% below available water source pressure during peak usage.

Section 11.2.1.1 is modified to read:

11.2.1.1 Hydrostatic Tests. Where a fire department connection is not provided, the system shall be hydrostatically tested at 200 psi. Manufactured or mobile homes shall be tested at 100 psi or as specified on the manufacturer’s nameplate.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.180 Appendix B, fire-flow requirements for buildings.
Section B103.3 is modified to read:

B103.3 Areas Without Water Supply Systems. For information regarding water supplies for firefighting purposes in rural areas and suburban areas in which adequate and reliable water supplies do not exist, the fire code official is authorized to utilize provisions in NFPA 1142 or the standard published by the Insurance Services Office document entitled Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow.

(Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

15.24.190 Conflict.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Wherever a conflict exists in this chapter, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. (Ord. 804 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.26
EXPEDITED PROCESSING FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY SYSTEMS
Sections:

15.26.010    Definitions.

15.26.020    Applicability.

15.26.030    Solar energy photovoltaic system requirements.

15.26.040    Streamlining the permit process for small residential solar photovoltaic systems.

15.26.050    Permit review and inspection requirements.

15.26.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Association,” when used as a noun, means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

“Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following: electronic mail (i.e., “e-mail”), the City’s website operated through the Internet, or facsimile.

“Small residential rooftop solar photovoltaic energy system” means all of the following:

1. A solar energy photovoltaic system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

2. A solar photovoltaic energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

3. A solar photovoltaic energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

4. A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by PMC Title 17.

“Solar photovoltaic energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the California Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. (Ord. 777 § 1, 2015)

15.26.020 Applicability.
A. This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar photovoltaic energy systems in the City of Poway.

B. Small residential rooftop solar photovoltaic energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop photovoltaic energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 777 § 1, 2015)

15.26.030 Solar energy photovoltaic system requirements.
A. All solar energy photovoltaic systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state, federal government, and the City of Poway.

B. Solar energy photovoltaic systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C. Solar energy photovoltaic systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 777 § 1, 2015)

15.26.040 Streamlining the permit process for small residential solar photovoltaic systems.
A. All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar photovoltaic energy system application shall be made available to the public on the City of Poway website.

B. Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy photovoltaic system permit applicants.

C. An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

D. The Building Division of the Development Services Department shall maintain a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar photovoltaic energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. (Ord. 777 § 1, 2015)

15.26.050 Permit review and inspection requirements.
A. The Building Division of the Development Services Department shall issue a building permit in a timely manner after receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, as well as all applicable local, state and federal requirements for health and safety. Applications that include an electrical meter upgrade will require approval by the local electric utility provider before the permit can be issued.

B. Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

C. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

D. No approval of any association is required for the issuance of a permit for a solar photovoltaic energy permit.

E. If an application is deemed incomplete or requires corrections to be addressed, a written or emailed correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. If the Building Official finds that the installation of a solar photovoltaic energy system will have a specific, adverse, impact upon the public health or safety, the decision shall be in writing, and may be appealed to the City Council as provided in Chapter 2.20 PMC. In reviewing any application for a permit the City Council may not deny the application unless it adopts a resolution containing findings based upon substantial evidence that the proposed installation will have a specific, adverse, impact upon the public health or safety, and the City Council further finds that there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse, impact.

F. One consolidated building inspection shall be required for small residential rooftop solar photovoltaic energy systems, which shall be done in a timely manner. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, re-inspections are required. (Ord. 777 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 15.28
MOBILE HOME INSPECTION CODE
Sections:

15.28.010    Adoption of a portion of Division 1, Chapter 2, of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.

15.28.020    Deletions.

15.28.030    Application.

15.28.040    Violation – Penalties.

15.28.050    References.

15.28.010 Adoption of a portion of Division 1, Chapter 2, of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted as the City mobile home code for the purpose of regulating the construction, use, maintenance, and occupancy of mobile homes in the City, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, as revised and effective January 1, 1994. (Ord. 446 § 1 (Exh. A), 1995)

15.28.020 Deletions.
Sections 1008 to 1024, inclusive, and Sections 2200 to 2860 of Division 1, Chapter 2, of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, as revised and effective January 1, 1994, are deleted. (Ord. 446 § 1 (Exh. A), 1995)

15.28.030 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all mobile homes located in the City which are not otherwise subject to Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, of the California Code of Regulations because such mobile homes are located in a publicly owned park, or for any other reason whatsoever. (Ord. 446 § 1 (Exh. A), 1995)

15.28.040 Violation – Penalties.
The penalties for any violation of provision of Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, of the California Code of Regulations adopted by PMC 15.28.010 shall be those penalties set forth in PMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 446 § 1 (Exh. A), 1995)

15.28.050 References.
References in the adopted provisions of Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, of the California Code of Regulations to the department, enforcement agency, or any director, administrator, inspector, or other employee thereof shall refer to the City

Building Department and its Director, Administrator, Inspector, or employee. (Ord. 446 § 1 (Exh. A), 1995)

Chapter 15.30
CONTRACTORS AND BIDDERS
Sections:

15.30.010    Prequalification.

15.30.020    Debarment.

15.30.010 Prequalification.
A. The Contract Administrator, with the approval of the Director of Development Services, may establish in the contracting procedure for a contract or contracts requiring competitive bidding a process for prequalification of potential bidders or subcontractors, or both bidders and subcontractors. The prequalification process may be established for a single project or for multiple projects, which are to be subject to bid within a one year period after prequalification. The prequalification process may be established and implemented as part of the process of another city or other public agency; provided, that notice is given in connection therewith that the process will also establish the prequalification rating for the City of Poway and for the Poway Redevelopment Agency. The prequalification process established shall comply with the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 20101 as implemented by the requirements of this section. To the extent that the Department of Industrial Relations has developed model guidelines for rating bidders, standardized questionnaires, financial statements, and other prequalification documents, such model documents, as modified to apply to the contract or contracts, may be used by the Contract Administrator. As used in this section, the terms “applicant” and “applicants” include prospective bidders and subcontractors for contracts to be performed for the City or Redevelopment Agency. For the purposes of this section, the term “Contract Administrator” means the director of the department with primary responsibility for the project, or a contract implementing the project, and the Contract Administrator of the other city or public agency responsible for the prequalification process.

B. The prequalification process shall include a notice inviting the submission of prequalification information, or a notice inviting technical proposals, or both.

C. The notice inviting prequalification information shall invite each applicant to submit information, financial statements, and responses to a standardized questionnaire under oath that will permit the Contract Administrator to determine pursuant to the established guidelines for rating bidders, that a prospective bidder is responsible to perform a proposed contract or that a prospective subcontractor is responsible to perform specified kinds of work. Bidding shall be restricted to bidders determined by the Contract Administrator’s application of the rating guidelines to be responsible.

D. If the prequalification process includes a technical proposal, the notice inviting technical proposals shall invite each applicant to submit a technical proposal, the responsiveness of which to the specifications shall be determined by the Contract Administrator in advance of receipt of bids. Bidding shall be restricted to bidders determined by the Contract Administrator to have furnished a technical proposal that is responsive to the specifications. A notice inviting technical proposals shall not be included in the contract documents unless the Contract Administrator determines all of the following:

1. There are not sufficiently definite or complete specifications or purchase descriptions available to permit free competition without engineering evaluation and discussion of the technical aspects of the procurement;

2. Criteria does exist for evaluating technical proposals, such as design, manufacturing, testing, and performance requirements, and special requirements for operational suitability and ease of maintenance; and

3. It is expected that more than one technically qualified source will be available, both initially and after technical evaluation.

E. Based upon the notice inviting prequalification information or notice inviting technical proposals, the Contract Administrator shall determine the responsibility of applicants in advance of receipt of bids, and that bidding shall be restricted to bidders determined by the Contract Administrator to be responsible, or that the performance of subcontracts shall be restricted to subcontractors determined by the Contract Administrator to be responsible. In determining responsibility, the Contract Administrator may consider those factors set forth in the prequalification documents developed by the Department of Industrial Relations and, to the extent permitted by law, the following:

1. An applicant’s experience in the design, construction, fabrication, assembly, or manufacture of works or materials similar to what will be called for under the contract documents;

2. The experience of others with the applicant in the construction, fabrication, assembly, or operation of similar works or materials designed, constructed, fabricated, or assembled by the applicant;

3. The physical plant, facilities, and equipment the applicant proposes to employ in the performance of a proposed contract or subcontract;

4. The experience and expertise of an applicant’s responsibility in managing personnel, key staff members, and other employees who would be assigned to the work if the applicant were awarded the contract or subcontract;

5. As to prospective bidders, the extent to which any part of the contract is to be performed by subcontractors or suppliers;

6. The financial capability, to procure appropriate insurance and bonding, and resources of the applicant to perform the proposed contract or subcontract;

7. Any other factor bearing on the responsibility of an applicant that is specified in the notice inviting prequalification information.

F. As a condition to submitting a bid or performing a specified portion of the proposed contract, an applicant shall comply with any and all conditions precedent determined by the Contract Administrator to be necessary to enable the applicant to submit a bid.

G. The Contract Administrator may determine that an applicant is responsible to perform more than one contract for which notices inviting bids are to be posted and advertised after the date of the Contract Administrator’s determination. In the event of such prior determination, the Contract Administrator may, at any time thereafter, determine that an applicant is no longer responsible, or advertise and post additional notices inviting prequalification information, and determine that additional applicants are responsible to perform contracts subsequent to the contract for which prequalification information is initially requested.

H. In the event any applicant is determined by the Contract Administrator not to be responsible, or no longer responsible after previously having been determined to be responsible, or a prospective bidder’s proposal is determined by the Contract Administrator not to be technically responsive to the contract documents, or the Contract Administrator determines that a bidder or an applicant has failed to comply with a condition precedent, the Contract Administrator shall state the determination and the basis thereof in writing. Upon request of the prospective bidder, the Contract Administrator shall deliver a copy of such determination, the basis thereof, and any supporting evidence to the prospective bidder. The bidder or applicant may request review of the Contract Administrator’s decision, by filing with the City Manager a written request for review not later than 5:00 p.m. of the fifth business day following delivery of the decision. At a minimum the review shall comply with the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 20101(d). A Hearing Committee shall conduct a hearing and shall make a decision whether to approve or reverse the determination of the Contract Administrator. The review procedure shall provide the bidder or applicant not less than five business days’ notice of the time and date of the hearing; provide the bidder or applicant the opportunity to present oral and/or documentary evidence rebutting the determination and reasons of the Contract Administrator; and permit the bidder or applicant to be represented by an attorney or other designated representative. The hearing shall not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses applicable to judicial proceedings. Any relevant evidence, including hearsay, may be received if it is the sort of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The submission of documentary evidence shall be encouraged. The Hearing Committee shall have the power to limit oral testimony. The determination of the Hearing Committee shall be made in writing, shall include findings of fact which support the determination, and shall be served personally upon the bidder or applicant, or by registered or certified mail. The Hearing Committee’s determination shall be final.

In the alternative to the above, if the Contract Administrator is administering the prequalification process on behalf of another city or public agency who is the principal or lead agency for the process, the Contract Administrator shall comply with the requirements of that agency and the bidder’s or applicant’s remedies shall be those made available by that agency.

I. Records of the names of prequalification applicants are public records subject to disclosure under the Public Records Act. All other prequalification records submitted by an applicant shall not be open to public inspection in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 20101(a). (Ord. 589 § 1, 2003)

15.30.020 Debarment.
A. Debarment is an administrative sanction to be imposed only in the public interest or for the City’s or Redevelopment Agency’s protection, and not for purposes of punishment. Debarment is designed to protect the agency by ensuring full and open competition by granting awards only to responsible contractors. This section establishes debarment and the procedure for imposition of debarment.

B. Unless from the context a different interpretation is plainly indicated, the definitions contained in this subsection govern the interpretation of this section. The definitions shall apply regardless of whether the term is capitalized.

1. “Affiliate” means business entities, organizations, or individuals that either directly or indirectly, control one another or have the power to control one another, or are controlled by a third party, or are subject to control by a third party.

2. “Affiliates” include chief executive officers and members of boards of directors or their equivalents.

3. “Bidder” means any individual, organization, legal entity, company or affiliate submitting a bid or proposal in response to a solicitation or other request by the agency for bids or proposals.

4. “Claim” includes any request or demand for money or damages submitted or made, pursuant to a contract, statute, or law, to the agency, or an officer, employee or agent of the agency.

5. “Contractor” means any individual or other legal entity that either (i) directly or indirectly, for example, through an affiliate, submits offers for, or is awarded, or reasonably may be expected to submit offers for, or be awarded, an agency contract for works, supplies or services; or (ii) conducts business or reasonably may be expected to conduct business with the authority as an agent or representative of another contractor. Contractor includes bidder.

6. “Debarment” means action taken by the City Council to exclude a contractor from contracting with the agency for a reasonable, specified period.

7. “Person” includes a natural person, corporation, firm, association, organization, partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company, business, trust or affiliate.

C. In addition to all other remedies permitted by law, upon a finding of grounds as set forth in this section, the City Council may declare by resolution that a contractor is ineligible to bid on, submit a proposal for, or be awarded a service, procurement, public works, or other contract with the City or Redevelopment Agency for a period not to exceed three years for any of the following reasons:

1. Two or more claims of computational or other error in bid submission within a two-year period;

2. Unjustified failure or refusal to timely provide or properly execute contract documents;

3. Unsatisfactory performance of contract;

4. Two or more occasions within a two-year period of failure to submit bond or insurance documents acceptable to the agency in the time periods required;

5. Unjustified refusal to properly perform or complete contract work or warranty performance;

6. Unjustified failure to honor or observe contractual obligations or legal requirements pertaining to the contract;

7. Conviction under a state or federal statute or municipal ordinance for fraud, bribery, theft, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or of any other similar crime;

8. Any offense or action which indicates a lack of business integrity and which could directly affect the reliability and credibility of performance of the contractor on future contracts with the City or Redevelopment Agency;

9. Submission of a false or fraudulent claim;

10. Any debarment of the contractor by another governmental agency on grounds justifying debarment under this section, during the period of such debarment;

D. The City Council may permanently debar any contractor that has been permanently debarred by another governmental agency.

E. The administrative procedure for debarment is as follows:

1. Proceedings may be commenced upon the issuance by the City Manager of a Notice of Intent to Debar stating the grounds and factual basis for proposed debarment.

2. The Notice of Intent to Debar shall be given in the manner specified by State law for the service of process. The contractor shall have 10 days following service of the notice to file with the City Manager a written request for an administrative hearing on the proposed debarment. If no such request is timely filed, the Notice of Intent to Debar shall be deemed a final order for debarment. Such final order shall not be subject to appeal. The final order of debarment shall be submitted by the City Manager to the City Council in the form of a resolution for adoption without a hearing.

3. Upon receipt of a timely request for an administrative hearing, the City Manager shall set the time and date for the administrative hearing by the Hearing Committee. The contractor shall be given not less than 30 days written notice of the time and date set for the hearing. Such notice may be given in the manner specified by State law for the service of process.

4. In proceedings under this section, an individual contractor may appear in person, or be represented by an agent with written authorization; a contractor that is not an individual person may be represented by an authorized officer, employee, member, or agent. The City Manager may also designate a representative. In addition, any party may be represented by a member in good standing with the State Bar of California.

5. No later than 5:00 p.m., six days prior to the date set for hearing, the contractor and the City Manager shall file with the City Clerk a list of all witnesses to be presented by such party and three copies of each written or graphic item such party intends to offer into evidence during the hearing, and shall exchange one copy of such list and written or graphic items. The written recommendation of the City Manager described in subsection (E)(1) of this section shall be admitted into evidence and copies of the recommendation need not be filed or exchanged as provided in this subsection. Any contract, document incorporated by reference into a contract, notice inviting bids, request for proposals, bid, or response to request for proposals referenced in the written recommendation of the City Manager shall be admitted into evidence and copies of such documents need not be filed or exchanged as provided in this subsection. Only the contractor, the City Manager, the designated representative of the contractor or of the City Manager, or a person whose name appears on a witness list filed with the City Clerk shall be permitted to present oral evidence. Only those documents and graphic items filed with the City Clerk, or otherwise required by this subsection to be admitted, shall be considered for admission into evidence.

6. Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or affirmation. The hearing shall not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses applicable to judicial proceedings. Subject to the limitation of subsection (E)(5) of this section, any relevant evidence, including hearsay, shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs; provided, however, that a determination of debarment shall not be based solely on hearsay evidence. The presiding Hearing Committee may set reasonable limitations on the time for presentation of evidence.

7. Continuances or extensions of time may be granted by the Hearing Committee for good cause or upon agreement of the contractor and the City Manager.

8. The order of the hearing shall be as set forth in this subsection unless the contractor and City Manager agree to some other order, with the consent of the Hearing Committee. First, the City Manager and contractor shall each have an opportunity to make a brief opening statement. Second, the City Manager shall present the grounds and evidence for debarment. Third, the contractor may present evidence in explanation or rebuttal. Fourth, the City Manager may present evidence in rebuttal. Fifth, the contractor may present evidence in rebuttal. Sixth, the contractor may make a closing argument. Seventh, the City Manager may make a closing argument. During the presentation of evidence each party may cross-examine the witnesses for the other party, subject to reasonable limitation imposed by the presiding Hearing Committee, including a limitation to cross-examination conducted through the presiding Hearing Committee. The Hearing Committee may also ask questions of any witness during the presentation of evidence. Arguments of representatives of the contractor or the City Manager shall not be considered.

9. The Hearing Committee shall announce its final decision in writing, and shall direct the City Manager to prepare a resolution containing the decision and findings of the Hearing Committee for the City Council to adopt as its decision. The Hearing Committee shall approve the proposed resolution prior to its submittal to the City Council. The Hearing Committee may direct the preparation of a proposed decision and proposed findings prior to announcing its final decision. The City Council shall adopt the resolution without a hearing if there is no appeal of the decision.

10. The contractor or the City Manager may appeal an adverse decision to the City Council by filing a written appeal stating with particularity the exceptions to the decision, or the findings of the Hearing Committee. The written appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 10 days following the final decision of the Hearing Committee. Within 10 days following the submission of the written appeal, the City Manager may file a response with the City Clerk. The City Council shall consider the appeal based upon the written appeal and any written statement of the contractor in support thereof, the written response of the City Manager, and the record of the proceedings before the Hearing Committee. The City Council, by resolution, may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Hearing Committee.

F. Effect of Debarment. Debarment prohibits the awarding of contracts to, and the execution of contracts with a debarred contractor. Debarment constitutes debarment of all divisions or other organizational elements of the contractor, unless the debarment decision is limited by its terms to specific divisions, organizational elements, or commodities. City officers, employees and agents shall not solicit offers from, or award contracts to, debarred contractors. Debarred contractors are also excluded from conducting business with the City or Agency as agents or representatives of other contractors. The City may extend the debarment decision to include any affiliate of the contractor if the affiliate is both specifically named and given written notice of the proposed debarment and an opportunity to respond.

G. List of Debarred Contractors. The City Manager shall compile and maintain a current, consolidated list of all debarred contractors. The list shall indicate the names and addresses of all debarred contractors, the ground(s) for debarment, and the termination date for each listing. After the opening of bids or receipt of proposals, the contracting officer shall review the list of debarred contractors. Bids received from any listed contractor in response to an invitation for bids shall be recorded as received, and then rejected by reason of debarment. Proposals, quotations, or offers received from any listed contractor shall not be evaluated for award or included in the competitive process during the period the contractor is on the list. Immediately prior to award of a contract, the City Manager shall again review the debarred contractors list to ensure that no award is made to a listed contractor.

H. Continuation of Existing Contracts. Debarment shall be deemed a material breach of any other contract between the City or Agency and the contractor, and any existing contracts between the City or Agency and the contractor shall be terminated immediately upon debarment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the City may continue contracts in existence at the time the contractor is debarred, upon a determination by the City Council, after receiving advice from the City Manager and City Attorney as to the effects of termination of an existing agreement.

I. Effect of Debarment by Another Governmental Agency. A contractor lawfully debarred by another governmental agency shall be deemed automatically debarred by the City and Redevelopment Agency, and shall be added to the list of debarred contractors for the balance of the term of its debarment by such other agency. (Ord. 589 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 15.32
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Sections:

15.32.010    Adoption of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.

15.32.020    Deletions, revisions and additions.

15.32.030    Section 201 amended.

15.32.040    Section 202 amended.

15.32.050    Section 204 amended.

15.32.060    Section 205 is deleted.

15.32.070    Chapter 4 amended.

15.32.080    Chapter 5 amended.

15.32.090    Chapter 6 deleted.

15.32.100    Chapter 7 amended.

15.32.110    Section 801 amended.

15.32.010 Adoption of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, promulgated and published by the International Code Council, including such provisions as are hereinafter added, deleted or amended. (Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.020 Deletions, revisions and additions.
The deletions, revisions and additions set forth in Sections 201, 202, 204, 205 and 801 and Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 are made to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. (Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.030 Section 201 amended.
Section 201 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

Sec. 201.

(a) Administration. The Director of Development Services or his/her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code.

The Director of Development Services shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as he or she may deem necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.

(b) Inspections. The health officer, the fire marshal, the building official and the Director of Development Services or their designees are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this code.

“Authorized representative” shall include the officers and their designees named in Section 201(b) and their authorized inspection personnel.

(Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.040 Section 202 amended.
Section 202 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

Sec. 202. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the Director of Development Services to be dangerous as defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and may be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 401 of this code.

(Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.050 Section 204 amended.
Section 204 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

Sec. 204. All buildings or structures within the scope of the code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by an Authorized Representative in accordance with and in the manner provided by this code and Sections 110 and 1704 of the 2016 California Building Code.

(Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.060 Section 205 is deleted.
Section 205 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is deleted from the code. (Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.070 Chapter 4 amended.
Chapter 4 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

CHAPTER 4

NOTICES AND ORDERS OF DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES

General.

Sec. 401.

(a) Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the Director of Development Services has inspected or cause to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, the Director may commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building.

(b) Notice and Order. The Director of Development Services shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. If readily available, the notice and order shall contain:

1. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located.

2. A statement that the Director of Development Services has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 302 of this code.

3. A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the Director of Development Services.

(i) If the Director of Development Services has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and completed within such time as the Director of Development Services shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.

(ii) If the Director of Development Services has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the Director of Development Services to be reasonable.

(iii) If the Director of Development Services has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the Director of Development Services shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be secured therefor within 60 days from the date of the order, and that the demolition be completed within such time as the Director of Development Services shall determine is reasonable.

4. Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified, the Director of Development Services:

(i) will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and

(ii) may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner.

5. Statements advising.

(i) that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the Director of Development Services to the Hearing Officer in accordance with Chapter 2.20, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this code and filed with the city clerk within 10 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and

(ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.

(c) Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served by mail upon the record owner or posted on the property.

(d) Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either by mailing a copy of such notice and order by first class mail, postage prepaid, to each such person at his or her address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the Director of Development Services. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the Director of Development Services, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.

Recordation of Notice and Order.

Sec. 402. If compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the Director of Development Services may file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying (i) that the building is a dangerous building and (ii) that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the certificate, the Director of Development Services shall file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying that the building has been demolished or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate.

Repair, Vacation and Demolition.

1. In addition to any other remedy authorized by law, any building declared a dangerous building under this code shall be made to comply with one of the following.

(i) The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair.

(ii) The building shall be demolished; or

(iii) If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against entry.

2. If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.

Notice to Vacate.

Sec. 404. (a) Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 401(c), be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be substantially the following form.

DO NOT ENTER

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

Director of Development Services, the City of Poway

(b) Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the Director of Development Services shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued by him or her under Subsection (b) of Section 401, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under an active permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.

(Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.080 Chapter 5 amended.
Chapter 5 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

CHAPTER 5

APPEAL

General.

Section 501 Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under Section 401(c) may appeal any notice and order or any action of the Director of Development Services under this code in accordance with Chapter 2.20 of the Poway Municipal Code.

Effect of Failure to Appeal.

Section 502. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 501 shall constitute a waiver of that person’s right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order, or any portion thereof.

Staying Order Under Appeal.

Section 503. Except for vacation orders made pursuant to Section 403, enforcement of any notice and order of the Director of Development Services issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed, unless the Director of Development Services determines that good cause exists to proceed with enforcement.

(Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.090 Chapter 6 deleted.
Chapter 6 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is deleted from the code. (Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.100 Chapter 7 amended.
Chapter 7 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

Chapter 7

ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDER OF THE DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES

Compliance.

(a) Sec. 701 General. After any order of the Director of Development Services made pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(b) Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the Director of Development Services made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the Director of Development Services may (i) cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection (a) of this section or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance.

(c) Failure to Commence Work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this code becomes effective.

1. The Director of Development Services may cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:

DANGEROUS BUILDING

DO NOT OCCUPY

It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

Director of Development Services, the City of Poway

2. No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the Director of Development Services have been completed and a Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.

3. The Director of Development Services may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this code. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.

Extension of Time to Perform Work.

Sec. 702. Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and an agreement by such person that he or she will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the Director of Development Services or designee may, in the discretion of the Director, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the Director of Development Services determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property.

Interference with Repair or Demolition Work Prohibited.

Sec. 703. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor, or authorized representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this code; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this code, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this code, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this code.

(Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

15.32.110 Section 801 amended.
Section 801 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

(a) Sec. 80 Procedure. When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to Section 701(c)(3) of this code, the work shall be accomplished by personnel of this jurisdiction or by private contract under the direction of the Director of Development Services. Plans and specifications therefor may be prepared by the Director of Development Services, or his/her representative, or he/she may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as he/she may deem reasonably necessary. If any part of the work is to be accomplished by private contract, standard contractual procedures shall be followed.

(b) Costs. The cost of such work may be made a special assessment or lien against the property involved or may be made a personal obligation of the responsible person(s), whichever the legislative body of this jurisdiction shall determine is appropriate.

(Ord. 827 § 3 (Exh. 1), 2019)

Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER LAND USE REGULATIONS
Chapters:

Division I. Subdivisions

16.02    General Provisions

16.04    Definitions

16.06    Administration

16.08    Maps Required

16.10    Tentative Map Processing

16.11    Vesting Tentative Maps

16.12    Final Maps

16.14    Boundary Adjustments

16.16    Dedications and Reservations

16.18    Improvements

16.20    Agreements and Securities

16.22    Merger

Division II. Dedications of Land or Payment of Fees

16.38    Parkland Dedication Procedure

Division III. Excavation and Grading

16.40    General Provisions

16.41    Definitions

16.42    Permits Required

16.43    Permits – Administrative Review

16.44    Permits – Limitations, Conditions and Responsibilities

16.46    Fees and Securities

16.48    Application Requirements

16.50    Design Standards Performance Requirements

16.52    Grading Inspection

16.54    Surface Mining and Reclamation

16.56    Repealed

Division IV. Drainage and Watercourses

16.58    General Provisions

16.60    Definitions

16.62    Permits – Applications

16.64    Permits – Conditions and Bonds

16.68    Repealed

16.72    Drainage Fees

Division V. Floodplain Management

16.80    Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives

16.82    Definitions

16.84    General Provisions

16.86    Administration

16.88    Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

16.90    Variance Procedures

16.92    Repealed

Division VI. Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan

16.100    General Provisions

16.101    Definitions

16.102    Administration

16.103    City of Poway Local SUSMP

16.104    Providing Proof of Ongoing BMP Maintenance

16.105    Waiver of Structural Treatment BMP Requirements

Chapter 16.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.02.010    Title and statutory authority.

16.02.020    Purpose.

16.02.030    Conformity to general plan, specific plan and zoning ordinance.

16.02.040    Applicability of division.

16.02.010 Title and statutory authority.
This division is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410, et seq., of the State Government Code, and may be cited as “the subdivision ordinance of the City of Poway.” (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.101)

16.02.020 Purpose.
A. It is the purpose of this division to regulate and control the division of land within the City and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey of subdivisions, the form and content of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official Subdivision Map Act, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the Development Services Department, the Public Works Department, the City Engineer and City Council regarding such subdivisions and maps.

B. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this division are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation, protection, and proper use of land and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities and services. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.102)

16.02.030 Conformity to general plan, specific plan and zoning ordinance.
No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is not in conformity with the general plan, any of its elements, and any specific plan, community plan, or planned community of the City or specifically authorized by the precise zoning ordinance or development code of the City. The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan and its elements shall determine the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities and public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.103)

16.02.040 Applicability of division.
The regulations set forth in this division shall apply to subdivisions or parts thereof within the City and to the preparation of subdivision maps thereof and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Each such subdivision and each part thereof lying within the City shall be made and each such map shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for and required in this division. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.104)

Chapter 16.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

16.04.010    Adjustment plat.

16.04.020    Approval.

16.04.030    Boundary adjustment.

16.04.040    Certificate of compliance.

16.04.050    Condominium.

16.04.060    Conversion.

16.04.070    Design.

16.04.080    Development code.

16.04.090    Environmental Impact Report (EIR).

16.04.100    Filing of project.

16.04.110    Final map.

16.04.120    General plan.

16.04.130    Improvement.

16.04.140    Legal lot.

16.04.150    Map Act.

16.04.160    Merger.

16.04.170    Parcel map.

16.04.180    Received and accepted.

16.04.190    Remainder.

16.04.200    Subdivider.

16.04.210    Subdivision.

16.04.220    Subdivision improvement standard.

16.04.230    Subdivision Map Act.

16.04.240    Tentative map.

16.04.241    Vesting tentative map.

16.04.250    Zoning ordinance or zoning code.

16.04.010 Adjustment plat.
“Adjustment plat” means a plat prepared pursuant to Chapter 16.14 PMC and certified by the City Engineer as having been approved pursuant to this division and filed in the office of the City Engineer. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.020 Approval.
“Approval” means a project shall be approved or deemed approved when said project has met all requirements of environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code, Section 21000 et seq.), the Subdivision Map Act, public notice and review requirements, and local ordinances, resolutions and policy. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.030 Boundary adjustment.
“Boundary adjustment” means a minor shift or rotation or alteration of existing lot lines or property lines between four or fewer existing adjoining legal lots where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, where a greater number of lots than originally existed is not created; provided, that the boundary adjustment is approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.040 Certificate of compliance.
“Certificate of compliance” means a document describing a unit or contiguous units of property and stating that the property complies with applicable provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and City ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.050 Condominium.
“Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office, or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.060 Conversion.
“Conversion” means the process or procedure for changing the type of ownership, estate, or interests in real property, and/or the improvements thereon to that of a condominium, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or a stock cooperative as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.070 Design.
“Design” means:

A. Street alignments, grades and widths;

B. Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof;

C. Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

D. Fire roads and fire breaks;

E. Lot size and configuration;

F. Traffic access;

G. Grading;

H. Land to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes; and

I. Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the general plan or any adopted specific plan. (From the definition contained in the State Subdivision Map Act.) (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.080 Development code.
“Development code” means the zoning ordinance of the City. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.090 Environmental Impact Report (EIR).
“Environmental Impact Report (EIR)” means a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects and considerations pertaining to a project as specified in Sections 21100 and 21100.1 of the Public Resources Code, and may mean either a draft or a final EIR. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.100 Filing of project.
A project shall be considered filed when it is received and accepted as complete. A project is accepted as complete, for purposes of Government Code Sections 65943, 65950 and 66452.2, and Public Resources Code Sections 21080.2 and 21151.5, when the Director of Development Services determines that the applicant has submitted sufficient information to permit the City to make a determination as required by Public Resources Code Section 21080.1 and that said determination has been made. The project shall be submitted to the City Council for approval within 50 days of a finding that a negative declaration is adequate and within 45 days of certification of the Environmental Impact Report. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.110 Final map.
“Final map” means both:

A. A map showing a subdivision of land creating five or more lots or parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this division and the Subdivision Map Act, and designed and prepared to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. (Also referred to as a final subdivision map);

B. A map showing a division of land of four or fewer parcels, or a division of land as described in subdivisions (a), (b), (c) or (d) of Government Code Section 66426, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this division and the Subdivision Map Act, and designed and prepared to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. (Also referred to as a final parcel map.) (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.120 General plan.
“General plan” means the general plan of the City, its elements and any amendments thereto. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.130 Improvement.
“Improvement” means such street work, storm drainage, utilities and landscaping to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements, as are necessary for the general use or the lot or parcel owners in the subdivision or land division and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof; or to such other specific improvements or type of improvements, the installation of which either by the subdivider, by public agencies by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the City or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the general plan, its elements, or any adopted specific plan, community plan, or planned community improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Poway’s Standard Specifications and Details and/or, when applicable, with standards as adopted by local utility companies and approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.140 Legal lot.
“Legal lot” means:

A. A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of land with a number or letter designation on a subdivision map or parcel map recorded in the office of the County Recorder and created in conformance with the State Subdivision Map Act;

B. A parcel of real property shown on a recorded record of survey map, lot division plat, or other official map filed in the office of the County Recorder or County Engineer, when such map or plat was filed as the result of and was made a condition of a lot division approved by the County under the authority of prior or existing County ordinances;

C. Any parcel of real property which existed as a separate parcel on or before that date;

D. A parcel of real property described in a recorded certificate of compliance, approved and filed by the County of the City in accordance with the State Subdivision Map Act and County or City code. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.150 Map Act.
“Map Act” means the Subdivision Map Act of the State. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.160 Merger.
“Merger” means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.170 Parcel map.
“Parcel map” means a map showing the division of land of four or fewer parcels, or a division of land as described in subdivisions (a), (b), (c) or (d) of Government Code Section 66426, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this division and the Subdivision Map Act, and designed and prepared to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.180 Received and accepted.
For “received and accepted,” see “filing of project.” (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.190 Remainder.
“Remainder” means that portion of an existing parcel which is not included as part of the subdivided land. The remainder shall be designated as such and shown on the final map by deed reference to existing record boundaries of such remainder if the remainder has a gross area of five acres or more. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.200 Subdivider.
“Subdivider” means any person, firm, corporation, or other entity as defined in the State Subdivision Map Act (as set out in Government Code Section 66423). (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.210 Subdivision.
“Subdivision” means the division of land as defined in the State Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.220 Subdivision improvement standard.
“Subdivision improvement standard” means standard details, drawings, specifications, criteria, and other standards for the design and improvement of subdivisions, approved by the City Engineer and adopted by resolution of the City Council, which govern the layout, design, geometrics, and details of any improvements to be constructed pursuant to this division and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.230 Subdivision Map Act.
“Subdivision Map Act” means that which is set forth in Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.240 Tentative map.
“Tentative map” means a map prepared for the purpose of showing the proposed design and improvement of any subdivision or division of land and the existing conditions in and around it, submitted to the City precedent to obtaining official City Council approval of the proposed subdivision or division of land and precedent to the preparation and filing of a final map. A tentative map means both:

A. A tentative map for a subdivision of land creating five or more lots or parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, also referred to as a tentative subdivision map;

B. A tentative map for the division of land into four or less parcels, or a division of land as described in subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of Government Code Section 66426, also referred to as a tentative parcel map. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

16.04.241 Vesting tentative map.
“Vesting tentative map” means a “tentative map” for a residential subdivision, as defined in this division, that shall be printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in accordance with Chapter 16.11 PMC and thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.11 PMC. (Ord. 181 § 3, 1985)

16.04.250 Zoning ordinance or zoning code.
For “zoning ordinance” or “zoning code,” see “development code.” (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.105)

Chapter 16.06
ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

16.06.010    Responsibilities and authority – Generally.

16.06.020    City Attorney.

16.06.030    City Council.

16.06.040    City Clerk.

16.06.050    Director of Development Services.

16.06.060    City Engineer.

16.06.010 Responsibilities and authority – Generally.
The City officers, departments and bodies set out in PMC 16.06.020 through 16.06.060 shall have the responsibilities and authorities listed in this chapter. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.106)

16.06.020 City Attorney.
The City Attorney shall be responsible for the review and approval as to form and legality of subdivision agreements, performance agreements, improvement securities, deeds, conveyances and other documents related to subdivisions of land. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.106)

16.06.030 City Council.
The Council of the City shall have jurisdiction and authority for the approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative subdivision maps, tentative parcel maps, improvement agreements, securities, the acceptance, conditional acceptance, or rejection of lands, easements, and improvements dedicated or offered for dedication to the City in conjunction with subdivisions and parcel maps, and the approval of final subdivision maps and final parcel maps. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.106)

16.06.040 City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall be responsible for the acceptance, conditional acceptance, or rejection on behalf of the City Council for dedications or offers of dedication and for other deeds and conveyances to the City made by final map or final parcel map, or by separate instrument and for the execution of a certificate to that effect on the final maps or on the instrument. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.106)

16.06.050 Director of Development Services.
The Director of Development Services or his designees shall be responsible for:

A. The acceptance for filing and processing of tentative maps and parcel maps, and for the collection of all required fees and deposits therefor;

B. The review of all tentative maps for general layout and aesthetics;

C. The investigation of proposed maps for conformity to the general plan and its elements, specific plans, community plans, planned communities, zoning ordinances and development codes, and for reporting his findings and making recommendations for approval, conditional approval, or denial of the tentative maps to the City Council; and

D. The review of projects pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.106)

16.06.060 City Engineer.
The City Engineer or his designees shall be responsible for:

A. The establishment and updating of subdivision improvement standards;

B. The review of tentative maps for conformance with adopted subdivision improvement standards, and for reporting his findings and making recommendations as to subdivision improvements and design to the City Council;

C. The processing of all final maps, final parcel maps, reversion to acreage maps, amended maps, boundary adjustments, mergers, and certificates of compliance;

D. The processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans and grading plans;

E. The inspection and approval of subdivision grading and improvements;

F. Certification that final maps are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map;

G. The approval, conditional approval, or denial of boundary adjustments, mergers, and certificates of compliance. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.106)

Chapter 16.08
MAPS REQUIRED
Sections:

16.08.010    Generally.

16.08.020    Division of land – Five or more parcels.

16.08.030    Division of land – Four or fewer parcels.

16.08.040    Preliminary plan.

16.08.050    Tentative maps – Application, form and contents.

16.08.010 Generally.
The necessity for tentative, final and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.201)

16.08.020 Division of land – Five or more parcels.
A. A tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land when determined by the Director of Development Services that such land may be divided into five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the State Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where:

1. The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or

2. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or

3. The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or

4. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

B. A parcel map shall be required for these subdivisions described in subsections (A)(1) through (4) of this section. For the purposes of this chapter “approved access” means access to a public street or highway by means of an existing or proposed driveway, by means of a recorded private access easement, reservation, or private street, or by the fact that the parcel abuts and has frontage on the public street or highway; provided, that vehicular access rights to said street or highway have not been waived by the owner. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.202)

16.08.030 Division of land – Four or fewer parcels.
A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land which create four or fewer parcels except for:

A. Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, which are created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing); or

B. Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map; or

C. Boundary adjustments between four or fewer existing adjoining legal lots, provided no additional or fewer parcels are created. A plat map, in form as required by the City Engineer, shall be required for boundary adjustments; or

D. A final parcel map shall not be required when its requirement has been waived in accordance with Chapter 16.14 PMC; or

E. A final map shall not be required for the merger of contiguous parcels under the same ownership, provided a suitable instrument evidencing such merger is prepared and recorded in accordance with PMC 16.22.050. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.203)

16.08.040 Preliminary plan.
A. Prior to the filing of a project for subdivision of land, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plan, with plans and data related to the design, layout, grading, existing noise levels, and other details and features pertinent to the proposed development, as required by the Director of Development Services, to the Development Services Department.

B. The Development Services Department shall advise the subdivider in writing, of any comments and desired changes to the proposed plan it deems appropriate as a result of its preliminary review.

C. Upon receipt of the Development Services Department comments, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a tentative map pursuant to the provisions of this division.

D. A preliminary plan and Development Services review shall not apply to condominium conversions unless required by the Director of Development Services.

E. The Director of Development Services may waive the requirement for a preliminary plan if he determines that the type of subdivision is such as not to necessitate compliance with that requirement. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.204)

16.08.050 Tentative maps – Application, form and contents.
A. All tentative maps submitted to the City shall be accompanied with an application form to be signed by the subdivider or applicant, in a form as specified by the Director of Development Services, and a reasonable processing fee, as set by City Council resolution.

B. All tentative maps for five or more lots, tentative parcel maps for four parcels or fewer, boundary adjustment plats, reversion to acreage tentative maps, merger maps, and other maps submitted for consideration shall be in the form and quantity and shall contain and be accompanied with all the information, data, reports, examination and processing fees and deposits, and other particulars as required by the Subdivision Map Act and the City Council, expressed by resolution.

C. The tentative map shall be considered as accepted for filing and processing only when such map accompanies and conforms to, those requirements established by the ordinance codified in this division and the City Council by resolution, and when all such accompanying data and reports have been submitted to the office of and to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.205)

Chapter 16.10
TENTATIVE MAP PROCESSING
Sections:

16.10.010    Review of tentative maps.

16.10.020    Notice of public hearing.

16.10.030    City Council action.

16.10.040    Tentative map approval or conditional approval.

16.10.050    Tentative map denial.

16.10.060    Rehearing.

16.10.070    Length of tentative map approval.

16.10.080    Tentative map extension.

16.10.090    Effect of moratoriums or lawsuits.

16.10.100    Amendments to approved tentative map.

16.10.010 Review of tentative maps.
A. Upon acceptance of a tentative map for filing, the Development Services Department shall forward copies of the map to affected or interested public agencies, bodies or groups, and to other City departments for review and comment, which may, in turn, forward their findings, comments and recommendations to the Development Services Department.

B. Within 10 days of the filing of a tentative map, the Development Services Department shall send a notice of filing of the tentative map to the governing board of any affected school district.

C. Such notice shall also contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units or lots, density, and other information which would be relevant to the school district.

D. Such governing board may review the notice and may send a written report thereon to the Director of Development Services or the City Council.

E. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the school district and shall make such recommendations as the governing board of the district deems appropriate.

F. In the event the district fails to respond within a 20-day period from receipt of notice of the tentative map, such failure shall be considered acceptance of the proposed subdivision by the school district.

G. All comments and recommendations received from such agencies, groups, bodies and the school district shall be compiled into a written report by the Director of Development Services, which together with his own comments and recommendations, shall thereafter be forwarded to the City Clerk for consideration by the City Council. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.301)

16.10.020 Notice of public hearing.
A. Upon receipt of a complete application, and completion of the report and recommendations for the tentative subdivision or parcel map by the Director of Development Services, the City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing. At least 10 calendar days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall cause notice to be given of the time, date and place of said hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved. Such notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the City.

B. In addition to notice by publication, the City shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 500 feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed subdivision or parcel map. In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by Government Code Section 66451.3.

C. In the event that the proposed subdivision or parcel map approved has been requested by a person other than the property owner as such property owner is shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the City shall also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. In addition, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the Development Services Department. Such a request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of such calendar year. The City may impose a reasonable fee, as established by City Council resolution from time to time, on persons requesting such notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of such mailing. All such notices by mail or delivery, as required in this chapter, shall be accomplished by the City Clerk.

D. Failure to receive notice as set out in this chapter shall not affect the validity of any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in this division.

E. A copy of the report and recommendations to the City Council for the tentative map prepared by the Director of Development Services shall be served on the subdivider and on each tenant of the subject property in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, at least seven calendar days prior to any public hearing or action on said tentative map by the City Council. Reasonable fees, as established by City Council resolution from time to time, may be collected from the subdivider for this purpose. (Ord. 683 § 60, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.302)

16.10.030 City Council action.
A. Upon receipt of a written report and recommendations to the City Council for the tentative map, the City Clerk shall submit the tentative map and report to the City Council at its next regular meeting following receipt of said report and map, and the City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative subdivision map or parcel map within 50 days thereafter. The City shall comply with the time limits referred to in Section 21151.5 of the Public Resources Code (California Environmental Quality Act) within the 50-day period specified in this chapter.

B. If an Environmental Impact Report is prepared for the map, the 50-day period shall not be applicable, and the City Council shall render its decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map within 45 days after the certification of the Environmental Impact Report by the City Council. The City Council shall certify the Environmental Impact Report within one year of the date the map was filed, plus any approved extensions allowed by law. If a negative declaration is recommended, the City Council must approve or disapprove the map within 50 days of the date the map was filed.

C. The time limits set forth in this chapter for acting upon a tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the City Council. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.303)

16.10.040 Tentative map approval or conditional approval.
In approving or conditionally approving a tentative map, the City Council shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its design and improvements, is consistent with the general plan, and any applicable specific plans, community plans, and planned communities adopted by the City. The City Council may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the Development Services Department report, or by the City Engineer, except conditions required by City ordinance, or the City Council may add additional requirements as a condition of its approval.

If no action is taken by the City Council within the time limit as specified, the tentative subdivision or parcel map as filed, shall be deemed to be approved, only insofar as it complies with California Environmental Quality Act, the State Subdivision Map Act, this, or other City ordinances. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify such approval. If said map fails to comply in whole or in part, as provided in this chapter, said map shall not be so certified. The City Council’s approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision or parcel map shall be expressed in resolution form. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.304)

16.10.050 Tentative map denial.
A. A tentative subdivision or parcel map may be denied by the City Council on any of the grounds provided by City ordinances or the State Subdivision Map Act.

B. The City Council shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings:

1. That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans, including the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in said plans;

2. That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision or lot division is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

3. That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

4. That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

5. That the design of the subdivision or lot division or the proposed improvements are contrary to the policy of the State legislature as stated in Chapter 1, commencing with Section 21000, of the State Public Resources Code, or likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

6. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

7. That the design of the subdivision or lot division, or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision or lot division. In this connection, the City Council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subdivision shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted to the City Council to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision or lot division.

C. The City Council’s denial shall be expressed in resolution form and shall contain the facts supporting the findings causing the denial.

D. 1. A tentative map for residential development, the application for which was not complete until after the effective date hereof,* shall provide that 15 percent of the lots created shall be set aside for low income housing and shall be subject to a restriction on the face of the map providing such set aside.

2. City Council shall deny approval of a tentative map as inconsistent with the housing element of the general plan if it finds that this provision is not made by the tentative map. (Ord. 370 § 1, 1992; Ord. 350 § 1, 1992; Ord. 349 § 1, 1991; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.305)

 

*    Editor’s note: The tentative map in PMC 16.10.050(D) expires on December 9, 1993.

16.10.060 Rehearing.
The City Council’s action to approve, conditionally approve or deny a tentative map is final and effective within 10 calendar days unless a request for a rehearing is filed in accordance with Chapter 2.21 PMC. (Ord. 492 § 5, 1998; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.306)

16.10.070 Length of tentative map approval.
The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 24 months from the date of the adoption of the resolution by the City Council approving or conditionally approving the map. Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative map shall be filed with the City Council for final map approval without first processing a new tentative map. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.307)

16.10.080 Tentative map extension.
A. The subdivider or authorized agent may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision or parcel map by written application to the Development Services Department, filed not less than 90 days before the map is to expire. Such application shall state the reasons for requesting the extension.

B. The Director of Development Services shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the City Clerk who shall set the matter for public hearing in the same manner as prescribed in PMC 16.10.020. The hearing on the application for the extension shall occur prior to the expiration of the map.

C. A copy of the Director’s report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to City Council action on the request.

D. The City Council shall act upon the extension request upon the closing of the hearing and may either approve, conditionally approve or deny the extension. Until the decision of the Council is made, the tentative map shall be considered extended. The decision of the Council to extend the tentative map shall be from the date of expiration and/or the date of Council decision. The Council’s action shall be in resolution form which, if the extension is approved, shall specify the new expiration date of the tentative subdivision or parcel map. No more than five separate extension requests shall be allowed, with each approved extension request to be valid for a period of one year, and the total of all extensions shall not exceed a total of five years. The City Council may not impose any new conditions or revise existing conditions on the approved tentative map. The action of the City Council on extension requests shall be final. A reasonable fee shall be charged for the processing of any such extension, as set by City Council resolution. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 179 § 1, 1985; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.308)

16.10.090 Effect of moratoriums or lawsuits.
A. The period of time specified in PMC 16.10.070 or 16.10.080 shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium, as described in Section 66452.6(f) of the Subdivision Map Act, imposed after approval of the tentative subdivision or parcel map is in existence; provided, however, that the length of the moratorium does not exceed five years.

B. Once a moratorium is terminated, the tentative subdivision or parcel map shall be valid for the same period as was left to run on the map at the time the moratorium was imposed. However, if the remaining time is less than 120 days, the tentative subdivision map or parcel maps shall be valid for 120 days following the termination of the moratorium.

C. The period of time specified in PMC 16.10.070 or 16.10.080 shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval by the City Council. Within 10 days of the service of the initial petition or complaint in the lawsuit upon the City, the subdivider may apply to the City Clerk for a stay of the time period.

D. The City Clerk shall thereafter notice a public hearing before the City Council within 40 calendar days after the City Clerk’s receipt of the application. The public hearing shall be advertised and noticed in the same manner as prescribed in PMC 16.10.020. At the public hearing, all evidence pertaining to the matter shall be presented and the City Council shall thereupon either deny the requested stay, or grant the stay for any period not to exceed five years from the date of the service of the initial petition or complaint in the lawsuit.

E. The Council’s action in approving or denying the application for a stay shall be in a resolution form.

F. Multiple stays may be requested and granted pursuant to this section provided the total of all such stays does not exceed five years.

G. A reasonable fee may be charged the subdivider to process such a request for a stay, in the amount as set by City Council resolution. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.309)

16.10.100 Amendments to approved tentative map.
A. Requests for nonsubstantial changes in an approved tentative map shall be submitted to the Director of Development Services in a form approved by the Director.

B. Any nonsubstantial change may be approved by the Director of Development Services and the City Engineer, provided:

1. No lots, parcels, units, or building sites are added;

2. The changes do not substantially alter the street, traffic circulation, lot, or drainage patterns shown on the approved tentative map;

3. Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval and conditions thereon;

4. There are no resulting violations of the City’s regulatory ordinances.

C. Any nonsubstantial changes approved by the Director of Development Services and the City Engineer shall be indicated on the approved tentative map on file in the office of the Development Services Director.

D. Requested amendments to the tentative map or conditions thereof which the Director of Development Services and/or the City Engineer consider other than minor in nature, shall be presented to the City Council for consideration. Any such changes considered to be major and requiring City Council approval will require the submittal of a replacement tentative subdivision or parcel map, which shall be prepared and processed in accordance with PMC 16.10.010, 16.10.020 and 16.10.030. A reasonable fee shall be charged for the processing of any replacement map, as set by City Council resolution.

E. Approval or conditional approval of a replacement map shall render the previously approved tentative subdivision or parcel map null and void. The public hearing before the City Council regarding the replacement map shall be a new hearing without consideration of the previously approved tentative map. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.310)

Chapter 16.11
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

16.11.010    Citation and authority.

16.11.020    Purpose and intent.

16.11.030    Consistency.

16.11.040    Application.

16.11.050    Filing and processing.

16.11.060    Fees.

16.11.070    Expiration.

16.11.080    Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map.

16.11.010 Citation and authority.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California (referred to in this chapter as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the vesting tentative map ordinance. (Ord. 181 § 2 (Exh. A), 1985)

16.11.020 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the subdivision ordinance. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply to this chapter.

To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of the orderly growth and development. (Ord. 181 § 2 (Exh. A), 1985)

16.11.030 Consistency.
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of the municipal code. (Ord. 181 § 2 (Exh. A), 1985)

16.11.040 Application.
A. This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by the Poway subdivision ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 181 § 2 (Exh. A), 1985)

16.11.050 Filing and processing.
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, a vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner, as set forth in PMC 16.08.050 for a tentative map except at the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

B. In addition to the other information required by this chapter to be shown on or provided with a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall show or be accompanied by the following information in a form satisfactory to the Director of Development Services:

1. The height, bulk and location of proposed buildings;

2. The design and specifications for all public facilities including but not limited to on-site and off-site sewer, water, drainage, roads and other improvements. The subdivider shall submit detailed geological drainage, flood control, soils, traffic or other reports deemed necessary by the Director of Public Services or Director of Development Services to permit a complete review of the design and improvements for the subdivision;

3. Detailed final grading plans showing existing and proposed finished grades at two-foot intervals;

4. Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put and architectural renderings of the buildings;

5. Detailed landscaping plans;

6. A scale model showing proposed finished grades, all public and private improvements and buildings to be constructed. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 181 § 2 (Exh. A), 1985)

16.11.060 Fees.
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by the City Council as adopted by resolution for the filing and processing of a tentative map. (Ord. 181 § 2 (Exh. A), 1985)

16.11.070 Expiration.
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the subdivision ordinance for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 181 § 2 (Exh. A), 1985)

16.11.080 Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map.
A. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2.

However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:

1. A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

2. The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with State or Federal law.

C. The rights referred to in this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in PMC 16.11.070. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

1. An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

2. The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days, from the date a complete application is filed.

3. A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires in accordance with PMC 16.10.080. The decision of the City Council is final.

4. If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, the rights referred to in this section shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.

D. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the amount of any fees which are required to be paid either as a condition of the map approval or by operation of any law shall be determined by application of the law or policy in effect at the time the fee is paid. The fee amount shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time. The amounts of the fees are not vested upon approval of the vesting tentative map or tentative parcel map. (Ord. 683 § 61, 2008; Ord. 181 § 2 (Exhibit A), 1985)

Chapter 16.12
FINAL MAPS
Sections:

16.12.010    Final maps – Form and content.

16.12.020    Submittal of final map.

16.12.030    Final map approval by City Council.

16.12.040    Other actions by City Council.

16.12.050    Filing multiple maps – Submittal by units.

16.12.060    Filing maps with County Recorder.

16.12.070    Waiver of final parcel map.

16.12.080    Maps for reversion to acreage.

16.12.090    Reversion by parcel map.

16.12.010 Final maps – Form and content.
All final maps for five or more lots, parcel maps, reversion to acreage maps, boundary adjustment plats, and other maps submitted for final City approval, shall be in the form and quantity and shall contain and be accompanied with all the information, certificates, signatures, data, reports, and other particulars, as required by the City Council, expressed by resolution. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.401)

16.12.020 Submittal of final map.
A. After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision or parcel map, and prior to the expiration of such map, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof in the case of subdivision of five or more lots, to be surveyed and a final map prepared in accordance with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

B. The final map shall be submitted for technical review to the City Engineer, who shall review the map for correctness, survey accuracy, substantial conformance with the approved tentative subdivision or parcel map, compliance with the conditions of approval thereon, compliance with all requirements imposed by the Subdivision Map Act and City ordinances in effect at the time of tentative map approval, and for compliance with the requirements for form, content, and other details as set forth by City Council resolution pursuant to this chapter. The final map shall be submitted to the City Engineer at least 90 calendar days prior to the expiration date of the tentative map.

C. A reasonable fee shall be paid by the subdivider prior to the City Engineer’s review of the final map, to cover the expenses thereof, in an amount and in the manner as set by City Council resolution.

D. When the City Engineer is satisfied as to the above, the subdivider shall submit the original map tracing in its final form, completely signed and executed, to the City Engineer, who shall sign the appropriate certificates and then transmit the original, along with an explanatory report or transmittal, to the City Clerk. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.402)

16.12.030 Final map approval by City Council.
A. The final map, together with any subdivision agreement, shall be placed before the City Council by the City Clerk at the next meeting following the Clerk’s receipt of the final map from the City Engineer.

B. If the final map is submitted to the City Clerk prior to the expiration date of the tentative subdivision or parcel map, but the Council meeting at which its final approval is to be considered occurs after the expiration date, the expiration date of the tentative map shall be deemed to be extended accordingly; provided, however, the final map is recorded within 15 days after the date final approval of the subdivision or parcel map is given by Council.

C. If the final map conforms to all of the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the requirements of all City ordinances applicable at the time the tentative subdivision or parcel map was approved or conditionally approved, any subsequent conditions added, and any rulings made thereunder, the City Council shall approve the map, and if it does not so conform, the City Council shall disapprove the map.

D. If the City Council does not approve or disapprove the final map at the meeting at which it received the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it received the map, or after any continuance which was mutually approved by the subdivider and the City Council, and the map does conform to the Subdivision Map Act and all City ordinances, it shall be deemed approved, and the City Clerk shall certify approval thereon.

E. The City Council shall not deny approval of the final parcel map if it has previously approved a tentative parcel map for the same subdivision and it finds the final parcel map is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.403)

16.12.040 Other actions by City Council.
At the same meeting at which the final subdivision map or parcel map is scheduled for approval, the City Council may also approve the subdivision agreement for the construction of improvements, accept improvement securities, conditionally accept or reject dedications or offers of dedication, and take other actions as prescribed in the Subdivision Map Act and this division. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.404)

16.12.050 Filing multiple maps – Submittal by units.
A. Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if:

1. The subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs the Director of Development Services of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map; or

2. After filing of the tentative map, the Director of Development Services and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps.

B. In providing such notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define in advance the number of configuration of the proposed multiple maps.

C. In order to assure a logical and orderly development of the entire subdivision, and to assure the provision of adequate access, streets, utilities, and other needed improvements, the shape, configuration and location of each final map increment or unit shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Development Services and the City Engineer, who may require that necessary dedications and improvements outside the increment or unit under consideration to be made, and/or guaranteed to be constructed by the execution of appropriate agreements and posting of improvement securities. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.405)

16.12.060 Filing maps with County Recorder.
A. Upon the approval of the final map by the City Council and its acceptance of an improvement agreement and security, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the Clerk of the County Board of Supervisors for transmittal to the County Recorder. In the case of a final map, the final map shall be forwarded directly to the County Recorder.

B. A reasonable fee shall be paid by the subdivider to cover the cost of recordation of the final map as set by City Council resolution. Upon recordation, the subdivider shall provide the City Engineer with a reproducible mylar copy of the recorded map, and with a sufficient number of prints of the maps as are determined by the City Engineer for City recordkeeping purposes. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.406)

16.12.070 Waiver of final parcel map.
A. The requirement that a final parcel map be prepared, filed for approval, and recorded may be waived, provided a finding is made by the City Council that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood and runoff drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, fire protection, environmental protection, and other requirements of this division and the Subdivision Map Act. The following types of subdivisions are hereby deemed to comply with the findings required by this section for waiver of a final parcel map, unless a showing is made in individual cases upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a final parcel map:

1. A division of land for or resulting from the conveyance of land to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way;

2. A division of land wherein no dedications or improvements are required, and the entire exterior boundary of which is monumented and shown on subdivision maps or parcel maps which were approved and recorded after February 1, 1972.

B. Subdivisions wherein dedications are required, or where improvements are to be installed or guaranteed to be installed by the execution of a secured agreement as a condition of tentative parcel map approval, are hereby deemed not to comply with the findings required by this section for waiver of a final parcel map, and a final parcel map shall be required.

C. When a final parcel map has been waived pursuant to this section, the City Engineer shall cause to be filed with the County Recorder a “certificate of compliance” for the land being divided. A reasonable fee shall be charged for the preparation and recordation of such a certificate of compliance, as set by City Council resolution.

D. The processing of any application for the division of land pursuant to this section shall be subject to the same time limits, appeal provisions, and time extensions as specified in Chapter 16.10 PMC. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.407)

16.12.080 Maps for reversion to acreage.
A. A final map shall be required for the reversion of subdivided real property to acreage. Such reversion process shall be done in accordance with Section 66499.11 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act.

B. The City Council shall, as a condition precedent to the approval of a reversion, make the findings as required in the above specified section of the Subdivision Map Act, and may require dedications, offers of dedication and improvements for the purposes specified elsewhere in this division.

C. Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by complying with all the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land as provided by this division and the Subdivision Map Act. The filing of the final map or parcel map shall constitute legal merging of the separate parcels into one parcel and the resubdivision of such parcel. Any unused fees or deposits previously made pursuant to this division pertaining to the property shall be credited pro rata towards any requirements for the same purposes which are applicable at the time of resubdivision. Any streets or easements to be left in effect after the resubdivision shall be adequately delineated on the map. After approval of the merger and resubdivision by the City Council, the map shall be delivered to the County Recorder. The filing of the map shall constitute legal merger and resubdivision of the land affected thereby, and shall also constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the map. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.408)

16.12.090 Reversion by parcel map.
A. A final parcel map may be filed for the purpose of reverting to acreage, land previously subdivided and consisting of four or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership.

B. Any map so submitted shall be accompanied by evidence of title and nonuse or lack of necessity of any streets or easements which are to be vacated or abandoned. Any streets or easements to be left in effect after the reversion shall be adequately delineated on the map.

C. After approval of the reversion by the City Council, the map shall be delivered to the County Recorder.

D. The filing of the map shall constitute legal reversion to acreage of the land affected thereby, and shall also constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the map.

E. The filing of the map shall also constitute a merger of the separate parcels into one parcel for purposes of this chapter. Except as provided in subdivision (f) of Section 66445 of the Subdivision Map Act, on any parcel map used for reverting acreage, a certificate shall appear signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land being reverted, consenting to the preparation and filing of the parcel map. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.408.1)

Chapter 16.14
BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS
Sections:

16.14.010    Applicability.

16.14.020    Procedure for approval – Application.

16.14.030    Procedure for approval – Sewage disposal.

16.14.040    Procedure for approval – Water supply.

16.14.050    Procedure for approval – Approval.

16.14.060    Procedure for approval – Certification.

16.14.070    Conditions for approval of adjustment plats.

16.14.080    Time to comply.

16.14.090    Adjustment certificate of compliance.

16.14.010 Applicability.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division to the contrary, the procedure set forth in this chapter shall govern the processing of and requirements for boundary adjustments and adjustment plats. Any adjustment plat may be filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to adjust the boundaries between four or fewer existing adjoining legal lots where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of lots than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the City Engineer determines that the proposed boundary adjustment does not:

A. Create any additional lots;

B. Include any lots or parcels which are not legal lots, as defined by City ordinance;

C. Impair any existing access or create a need for new access to any adjacent lots or parcels;

D. Impair any existing easements or create a need for any new easements serving any adjacent lots or parcels;

E. Require substantial alteration of any existing improvements or create a need for any new improvements;

F. Adjust the boundary between lots or parcels for which a covenant of improvement requirements has been recorded and all required improvements stated therein have not been completed unless the City Engineer determines the proposed boundary adjustment will not significantly affect said covenant of improvement requirements. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.501)

16.14.020 Procedure for approval – Application.
The applicant shall file an application for approval of an adjustment plat with the City Engineer accompanied by such other information as required by the City Engineer, and a reproducible adjustment plat, and a fee, all of which shall be in a form, content and amount as required by the City Council, expressed by resolution. The City Engineer shall refer copies of such plat and application to other City departments and public agencies for review and comment thereon. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.502(a))

16.14.030 Procedure for approval – Sewage disposal.
An application for boundary adjustment will not be approved unless it can be shown that each resultant parcel has or can be provided with adequate sewage disposal facilities as follows:

A. Each parcel is connected to a sanitary sewer; or

B. Sanitary sewer service is available to each parcel; or

C. In the case of parcels without sanitary sewer availability, the County Health Officer has certified in writing that said parcels have been approved for installation of an on-site sewage disposal system in accordance with applicable County ordinances. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.502(b))

16.14.040 Procedure for approval – Water supply.
An application for boundary adjustment will not be approved unless it can be shown that each resultant parcel has or can be provided with an adequate potable water supply, as follows:

A. Each parcel is connected to the City water system; or

B. City water service is available to each parcel; or

C. In the case of parcels without City water availability, an adequate water supply can be provided for each by the installation of wells, galleries, or other devices, which can provide the quantity and quality of water as specified in applicable City ordinances or adopted policies. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.502(c))

16.14.050 Procedure for approval – Approval.
A. Within 45 calendar days after said application for a boundary adjustment has been filed, the City Engineer shall notify all persons, including businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 500 feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed adjustment. Notice shall also be given to the members of the City Council. Such notice shall describe the proposed adjustment and all recipients may, within 10 calendar days of the mailing of said notices, reply or respond to the City Engineer; in writing or in person. Any comments or objections received shall be taken into account by the City Engineer prior to his final decision to approve conditionally, approve, or deny the adjustment.

B. Within 20 calendar days of the date said notice was mailed or delivered, the City Engineer shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the adjustment application, and notify the applicant in writing of the City Engineer’s action. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.502(d))

16.14.060 Procedure for approval – Certification.
If the City Engineer determines that the adjustment plat meets the requirements of this chapter, he shall certify on the adjustment plat that it has been approved pursuant to this chapter and file it in the office of the City Engineer. A revised adjustment plat shall be submitted for certification when the City Engineer finds that the number or nature of the changes necessary for approval are such that they cannot be shown clearly or simply on the original adjustment plat. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.502(e))

16.14.070 Conditions for approval of adjustment plats.
Whenever applicable, the City Engineer may prescribe the following conditions for approval of an adjustment plat:

A. Parcel Boundaries. Relocation of lot lines to provide lots that meet the requirements of the County Health Officer, standards of lot design specified elsewhere in this division, or in the City Development Code;

B. Access. The provision of safe and adequate access to each lot or parcel within the adjustment plat;

C. Inundation Line. The addition of a distinctive boundary line, clearly labeled, which delineates the limits of any area determined to be subject to flooding or inundation under 100-year flood conditions. The plat shall contain an appropriate note stating said area is subject to flooding or inundation;

D. Dedication and Improvement. The dedication and/or improvement of any street, right-of-way, easement, or trail as depicted upon or within the general plan or any element thereof, or any specific plan, or other adopted plan, or when required to provide uniform right-of-way widths, provide connections between other easements, provide continuity in trails or ways, or to protect environmentally sensitive objects or areas;

E. Record of Survey Map. When, in the opinion of the City Engineer, boundary monumentation or information of record on the parcels being adjusted is lacking, or where the proposed new boundary lines are of such alignment or complexity that their locations will not be readily traceable, or when any resultant parcel will thereafter be of such size as to allow division, then the City Engineer may require that all or specified portions of the parcels be surveyed and monumented, in which case record of survey map, prepared in accordance with the State Land Surveyors Act, shall be prepared and filed with the County Recorder;

F. Deeds. Provision of copies of the recorded deeds conveying land between the applicants to effectuate the adjustment. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.503)

16.14.080 Time to comply.
All conditions placed upon the approval of a boundary adjustment and adjustment plat by the City Engineer, shall be met and completed within six months from the date of conditional approval of the adjustment. Failure to do so shall terminate all proceedings. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.504)

16.14.090 Adjustment certificate of compliance.
Upon approval of the adjustment, and upon completion of all conditions thereon, within the time limit prescribed in this chapter, the City Engineer shall cause to be filed with the County Recorder a “certificate of compliance-boundary adjustment,” which shall describe the parcels as finally adjusted. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.505)

Chapter 16.16
DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
Sections:

16.16.010    Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements.

16.16.020    Parkland dedication.

16.16.030    Reservations – Generally.

16.16.040    Reservations – Standards for reservation of land.

16.16.050    Reservations – Procedure and payment.

16.16.060    Reservations – Termination.

16.16.070    Dedication procedure.

16.16.080    Acceptance procedure.

16.16.090    Title company report and guarantee.

16.16.100    Certificates.

16.16.110    Relinquishment of dedicated open space, etc.

16.16.010 Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements.
A. As a condition of approval of any tentative map or boundary adjustment, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer to dedicate real property within the subdivision for streets, alleys, drainage and water easements, public utility easements and other public easements including, but not limited to easements for recreation trails, equestrian trails, open space and sewers.

B. Dedications or offers of dedication of streets and highways may include a requirement that direct access rights and abutters’ rights to such street or highway be waived from any property shown on the final subdivision or parcel map as abutting thereon, and if the dedication is accepted, any such waiver shall thereupon become effective.

C. Dedication or offer of dedication may also be required for bicycle paths and land for local transmit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items, subject to the provisions of Sections 66475.1 and 66475.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.601)

16.16.020 Parkland dedication.
Parkland dedication shall be provided by separate ordinance as set out in Chapter 16.38 PMC. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.602)

16.16.030 Reservations – Generally.
As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in PMC 16.16.040 through 16.16.060. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.603.1)

16.16.040 Reservations – Standards for reservation of land.
Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on an adopted specific plan or adopted general plan or any element thereof, the subdivider may be required by the City to reserve sites as so determined by the City or the County in accordance with the definite principles and standards contained in the above specific plan or general plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period; in such an event, the subdivider shall make those changes as are necessary to permit the reserved area to be developed for the intended purpose consistent with good subdividing practices. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.603.2)

16.16.050 Reservations – Procedure and payment.
A. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

B. The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.603.3)

16.16.060 Reservations – Termination.
If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement within the time limit specified in this chapter, the reservation for such area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.603.4)

16.16.070 Dedication procedure.
Pursuant to Section 66447 of the Subdivision Map Act, all dedications or offers of dedication required by the provisions of this division shall be made as follows:

A. All dedications or offers of dedication within the boundary of the subdivision or parcel map shall be made by certificate on the map. Any such dedication or offer of dedication shall be free of any burden or encumbrance which would interfere with the purposes for which the dedication or offer of dedication is required.

B. All dedications or offers of dedication lying outside the boundary of the subdivision map or parcel map or required of a boundary adjustment, shall be made by separate instrument and shall be recorded prior to or concurrently with the filing of the final parcel map or subdivision map or boundary adjustment. Such dedications or offers of dedication shall be signed and acknowledged by the same parties and in the same manner as set forth in Sections 66436, 66439 and 66447 of the Subdivision Map Act. An irrevocable offer of dedication shall be in such terms as to be binding on the owner, his heirs, assigns or successors in interest, and except as provided in subsection (b) of Section 66477.2 of the Map Act, shall continue, until the City Council accepts such offer or it is vacated pursuant to the provisions of said Section 66477.2. Any such dedication or offer of dedication shall be free of any burden or encumbrances which would interfere with the purposes for which the dedication or offer of dedication is required. The subdivider shall provide a current preliminary title report, including an appropriate plat, satisfactory to the City Engineer.

C. Easements for public utilities or other public agencies may be dedicated to and accepted by a public utility or agency by certificate on the final map.

D. The provisions of subsection A of this section notwithstanding dedications or offers of dedication within the boundary of a parcel map may be made by separate instrument if the City Engineer determines that the use of separate instruments is appropriate. In such cases the provisions of subsection B of this section shall apply.

E. When no final parcel map is required, all dedications or offers of dedication shall comply with the provisions of subsection B of this section. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.604)

16.16.080 Acceptance procedure.
A. The final map shall contain a certificate for execution by the Mayor or other City officer so designated by the City Council to act on its behalf, stating that the Mayor or other designated officer acting on behalf of the City Council has accepted, accepted subject to improvement, or rejected, on behalf of the public, any real property or property interest offered for dedication for public use, including, but not limited to, real property, rights-of-way, and easements for park, road, street, alley, path, water, sewer, drainage, flowage, equestrian, recreation, open space, or other public purposes.

B. If at the time the final map is recorded, any offer of real property, right-of-way, easement, or any other offer of dedication is rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the City Council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind the action and accept the real property, right-of-way, or easement, or any portion thereof, and open the roads, streets, alleys, easements or other offers of the County Recorder, as set forth in Sections 66463, 66477.1, 66477.2 and 66477.3 of the Government Code. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.604.1)

16.16.090 Title company report and guarantee.
A. To expedite the verification of ownership and survey procedure by the City Engineer, a current title report or parcel map report, including an appropriate plat from a qualified title insurance company, which shall include all appurtenant access easements, shall accompany each final map when it is initially submitted for the City Engineer’s approval. When the City Engineer is satisfied that the boundary and survey procedure is technically correct as shown on the map and prior to approval of the final map, a map guarantee from a qualified title insurance company shall be filed with the City Engineer, which shall include a legal description of the property which agrees with the final map.

B. The map guarantee shall ensure that the parties named therein are the only parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided and that all record easements upon the property are included therein. Said easements will be shown on the final map as directed by the City Engineer.

C. Prior to the date the approved final map will be transmitted to the County Recorder, a letter from the title company shall be presented to the City Engineer stating that according to the records in the office of the County Recorder at the time of filing of the final map in said office, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the land being subdivided whose signatures are required by Division 2 of Title 7 of the State Government Code and any City code enacted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.604.2)

16.16.100 Certificates.
All certificates required on the final subdivision or parcel map shall be in a form and content as specified by resolution of the City Council. Such certificates shall include those required for execution by the owners of record, the subdivider, City Clerk, City Engineer, County Recorder, County Engineer, Director of Development Services, and the engineer or surveyor who prepared the map. Other certificates and acknowledgements may be required as specified by Council resolution. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.604.3)

16.16.110 Relinquishment of dedicated open space, etc.
A. No easement or fee interest in real property dedicated or offered for dedication to the City for open space, trail or other public recreation purpose shall be vacated, relinquished, abandoned, released, sold, encumbered, or otherwise transferred or conveyed free of such limitation except by ordinance approved by a four-fifths vote of the City Council with the following findings:

1. The purpose of the release or transfer is to permit the property to be used for a valid public purpose, including, but not limited to, public streets or drainage facilities; or

2. The property is being exchanged for property of equal or greater size and quality for open space, trail or other public recreation use, and is being transferred to the City concurrent with the transfer of the subject property.

B. Any ordinance adopted by the City Council purporting to amend or repeal the ordinance codified in this section or purporting to vacate, relinquish, abandon, release, sell, encumber, or otherwise transfer or convey an easement or fee interest in real property dedicated or offered for dedication to the City for open space, trail or other public recreation purpose without a municipal election shall be a legislative act subject to referendum and shall be subject to judicial review by writ of mandate.

C. This section shall apply to all easement or fee interest in real property held or owned by the City for open space, trail or other public recreation purpose whether such interest was acquired by the City through the subdivision process or otherwise.

D. The City Manager is authorized to prepare and record in the record title of open space dedicated or offered for dedication to the City a declaration of restrictions identifying the limitations placed by this section upon the transfer or relinquishment of such open space.

E. In the event that any portion of this PMC 16.16.110 is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such portion shall be severable from all other portions of this section. Those portions not declared invalid shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 189 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 16.18
IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

16.18.010    Purpose.

16.18.020    City standards and specifications.

16.18.030    Improvements required.

16.18.040    Improvement plans.

16.18.050    Review by City Engineer.

16.18.060    Revisions to approved plans.

16.18.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define, specify, regulate and control the design and improvement of public works facilities, both on-site and off-site, and other construction requirements imposed as conditions of the acceptance or approval or conditional approval of subdivision maps, parcel maps, boundary adjustments, reversions to acreage, land development by use permit or building permit, or other public works permits, and all other procedures and processes where public or private improvements, construction, and improvement or construction plans are required as a condition prior to official City approval. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.701)

16.18.020 City standards and specifications.
All public and private improvements and construction required and described in this chapter shall conform to the standards, policies, and specifications of the City, as adopted by resolution of the City Council, on file in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.702)

16.18.030 Improvements required.
A. The minimum public and/or private improvements and conditions which shall be required to be made or guaranteed to be made under the provisions of this division shall include all or any combination of the following:

1. The improvement of public and private streets to provide suitable access and traffic circulation, including the construction and paving of streets, alleys, paths, accessways, private streets and easements, and the construction of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, driveway approaches, transitions and other street work appurtenant thereto, and the execution of a Road Maintenance Agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, covering the maintenance of all nondedicated streets and accessways;

2. A sewerage system, consisting of either a gravity sanitary sewerage system or a septic system approved by the County Health Officer, to provide adequate collection of waste from each lot, parcel, or structure within the area being divided or developed;

3. A water supply system, capable of supplying adequate supplies of potable water, either from the City’s water system or from domestic wells;

4. A fire protection system, consisting of hydrants and appurtenances, including storage tanks capable of providing fire protection to the lots, parcels and structures, shall be installed as required by the Director of Safety Services;

5. Storm drain systems, capable of adequately collecting and disposing of storm runoff, shall be installed as required to protect the area of development from flooding, inundation, and from damage caused by erosion or sedimentation;

6. A street lighting system;

7. Traffic control and warning signs, pavement striping and markings;

8. Traffic signal facilities, including controllers, sensors, safety lighting and interconnecting facilities and appurtenances;

9. Landscaping and irrigation facilities and improvements in conjunction with highway slopes, median islands, and parkway beautification. All public and private landscape and irrigation projects shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 17.41 PMC and the City of Poway Landscape and Irrigation Design Manual and approved by the Director of Development Services, except that landscaping which will be maintained by the City shall be approved by the Director of Public Works;

10. Installation of trails, hiking trails, bicycle paths, equestrian trails, and other facilities as required on any element of the City general plan;

11. Installation of utilities, including telephone, electrical power, gas, and cable television systems and facilities to each lot, parcel, or structure in the area of development. All new utility distribution facilities required as a condition of any subdivision or parcel map shall be placed underground. Transformer, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other facilities appurtenant to such underground facilities may be placed above ground. The requirement for undergrounding existing utilities shall not apply to any overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34,500 volts and long distance and main trunk communication facilities. The requirement for undergrounding utility facilities may be waived or modified by the City Council in accordance with criteria and provisions for such as adopted by resolution of the City Council;

12. Improvements of supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the boundaries of the subdivision, parcel map, or area of development. All such additional or supplemental facilities shall be dedicated to the City for public use. When such additional or supplemental facilities are required, the City may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider or developer, in a form approved by the City Attorney, which shall provide for reimbursement from all parties or owners of properties benefited by said facilities at the time such facilities are utilized by said parties, owners, or properties. The amount of the reimbursement shall be equal to the difference in cost between the total actual cost of the improvements, including the additional or supplemental facilities, and the cost of the improvements had not the additional or supplemental facilities been required;

13. Masonry, wood or composite material fences and walls, for sound attenuation, separation, beautification, or for the control of erosion and sloughage onto public sidewalks or streets;

14. Any other facility or improvement deeded necessary for the public health and safety and the orderly development of the surrounding area;

15. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required, pursuant to Chapter 16.08 PMC, shall provide to the extent feasible, opportunities in the subdivision or lot division for future passive or natural heating or cooling:

a. Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities include design of lot or parcel size and configuration to permit orientation of structures in an east-west alignment for southern exposure; and design of lot or parcel size and configuration to permit orientation of structures to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes,

b. In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in subdivision design, consideration shall be given to local climate, contour, configuration of the property to be divided, and to other design and improvement requirements, and such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed;

16. Each lot within the subdivision or parcel map shall have unobstructed access to sunlight to an area of not less than 100 square feet, falling in a horizontal plane 10 feet above the grade of the buildable area of the lot. The condition of unobstructed solar access shall be considered to be achieved when a specific area of not less than 100 square feet has an unobstructed skyview of the sun between azimuths of the sun at 45 degrees to the east and 45 degrees to the west of true south on December 21st. The purpose of this requirement is to assure solar access to solar water heating systems as required by other applicable codes, located on any future structure built on the lot.

a. This requirement shall not apply to specific lots whenever a subdivider can demonstrate that it is infeasible to comply due to:

i. A finding that the provisions of this section will result in reducing the allowable densities under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed;

ii. A finding that the provisions of this section will result in reducing the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed;

iii. A finding that compliance cannot be accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors;

iv. A finding that it is infeasible to comply due to topographical conditions on or surrounding the land being subdivided, the configuration or orientation of the property being subdivided or existing road patterns contiguous to the subject property;

v. A finding that the nature of the existing or allowed future development contiguous to the subject property precludes adequate solar access to specific lots.

B. No final approval shall be given to any final subdivision map, parcel map, reversion map, adjustment plat, land development permit, use permit, building permit, or other procedure or process requiring City approval, until all improvements required as a condition of its approval or conditional approval have either been constructed in accordance with City standards and specifications, or the subdivider or developer has entered into a suitable agreement to do such work and improvements and has posted improvement securities, all as required and described elsewhere in this division. (Ord. 700 § 2, 2009; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 480, 1997; Ord. 322, 1990; Ord. 178 § 1(B), 1985; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.703)

16.18.040 Improvement plans.
A. Improvement plans for all required improvements conditioned upon the approval or conditioned approval of any subdivision map, parcel map, or other action or procedure requiring City approval, shall be required to be prepared and approved prior to their construction.

B. Such plans shall be prepared by a Civil Engineer, registered in the State. Improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles, and details of all improvements to be constructed, and shall be in a form and content as approved by the City Engineer.

C. Any such plans submitted for the approval of the City Engineer shall be accompanied with all such supplementary plans, plats, sketches, calculations, and studies as required by the City Engineer, including but not limited to hydrology studies, hydraulics studies, structural calculations, quantity estimates, bond estimates, cost estimates, sewerage and water studies, septic system feasibility analyses, water well yield analyses, geohydrologic studies, soil reports, geology reports, traffic studies, pavement analyses, and all such other information and data as required to determine compliance with City standards, specifications, policies and accepted good engineering practice. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.704)

16.18.050 Review by City Engineer.
A. Improvement plans as required in this chapter shall be submitted for the review and approval of the City Engineer. Upon completion of his review, and upon correction and revision of the drawings and when the City Engineer has been satisfied that they comply with City standards, specifications and policies, with the conditions of approval of any map or permit, and when all fees and charges have been paid for such review and required securities posted as outlined elsewhere in this division, the City Engineer shall sign and date the plans. Upon his signature, the originals of the drawings shall become the property of the City. The originals will thereafter be made available for reproduction to the subdivider and his engineer through bonded blueprinting establishments.

B. A reasonable deposit shall be paid by the subdivider or developer, prior to the City Engineer’s review of any improvement plans, to cover the expenses thereof, in an amount and the manner set by City Council resolution.

C. The City Engineer’s signature upon such drawings shall not be construed as his or the City’s acceptance or approval of the detailed design, exact grades, or mathematical correctness of the drawings, but shall only be interpreted as his and the City’s approval of the general design content and with its compliance with established City standards, policies, and specifications, and substantially with the conditions of approval of any tentative map or permit attendant thereto. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.704.1)

16.18.060 Revisions to approved plans.
A. By Subdivider. Requests by the subdivider or the engineer for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the City Engineer or his appointee and shall be accompanied by drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable, the originals shall be made available for revision in a manner as approved by the City Engineer, and afterward shall be initialled by the City Engineer signifying approval of the revision. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until such revision has been approved and revised plans have been received and forwarded to the City’s Engineering Inspection Division.

B. By City Engineer. When revisions are deemed necessary by the City Engineer to protect public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, the subdivider and his engineer shall be so notified. The subdivider’s engineer shall revise the plans and transmit copies to the City Engineer for review and approval within such time as specified by the City Engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the City Engineer until his required revisions have been incorporated into the drawings and revised drawings have been submitted and approved. (Ord. 334 § 20, 1990; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.704.2)

Chapter 16.20
AGREEMENTS AND SECURITIES
Sections:

16.20.010    Generally.

16.20.020    Agreement – Contents.

16.20.030    Agreement – Approval.

16.20.040    Deferred improvement agreement.

16.20.050    Remainders.

16.20.060    Improvement security – Generally.

16.20.070    Form of security.

16.20.080    Amount and purpose of required security.

16.20.090    Reduction of security.

16.20.100    Substitution of securities.

16.20.110    Release of security.

16.20.120    Timing for release.

16.20.010 Generally.
A. The construction of all public and private improvements required in this division as a condition of the approval of subdivisions, parcel maps, reversions, use permits, and other actions or procedures requiring City approval, shall be guaranteed to be installed, provided, and constructed by the execution of a suitable agreement between the City and the subdivider or developer in a form generally described in this division and approved by the City Attorney.

B. All such agreements shall contain the terms and conditions to be met by the subdivider or developer and shall specify a reasonable time in which to construct the improvements or perform the requirements and obligations of the agreement.

C. The time allowed for the completion of the work shall be as specified by the City Engineer and shall depend on the amount and complexity of the work involved, the type of development, and other factors as he may see fit.

D. All such agreements shall be executed by the owner, or the developer, or the subdivider of the property being developed or subdivided.

E. All such signatures shall be acknowledged before a Notary Public, and the agreements shall be accompanied by evidence substantiating the signer’s position, title, and authority to bind the person, company, partnership, corporation, or other business entity to the actions, obligations and responsibilities contained in the agreement.

F. A reasonable deposit shall be paid by the subdivider or developer prior to the City Engineer’s inspection and checking of the construction of such improvements, to cover the expenses thereof, in an amount and in the manner as set by City Council resolution. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.801)

16.20.020 Agreement – Contents.
Any performance shall contain and provide for:

A. Construction of all required improvements per the approved plans and specifications and an estimate of the cost;

B. Completion of all improvements within a specified time;

C. The right of the City to modify the plans and specifications if necessary for the public health and safety, for the orderly development of the surrounding area, or if field situations, changed conditions, design error or omission require such modifications;

D. Improvement security in the amounts and of the type required by this chapter;

E. Warranty of the construction by the subdivider or developer for specified time limits;

F. Payment of all necessary and required fees, deposits, assessments, and costs as specified in this division or any other applicable code, ordinance, or resolution;

G. Maintenance and repair of any defects in materials or workmanship;

H. Release of the City from all liability incurred by the development, and the subdivider’s or developer’s payment of all reasonable attorney’s fees that the City may incur because of any legal action arising from the agreement of subdivision or development;

I. All construction to be performed by contractors licensed in this State;

J. Workman’s Compensation insurance and liability insurance by the subdivider, developer, their contractors and subcontractors, in the amounts and limits specified;

K. The maintenance and upkeep of all improvements until such time as formally accepted by the City, and for the continued maintenance of private, nondedicated roads;

L. The monumentation of the boundary and property lines within the development, submittal of survey tic notes, and the guarantee thereof by the posting of a cash or surety bond. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.802)

16.20.030 Agreement – Approval.
A. All performance agreements as required in this chapter shall be presented to the City Council for approval at the same meeting at which any final subdivision map or final parcel map is submitted for final approval. Upon approval of the instrument by Council, it shall be executed by the Mayor or other authorized representative on behalf of the City. Upon execution, the City may require that the agreement be recorded with the County Recorder.

B. Other performance agreements required for boundary adjustments, use permits, and for other actions and procedures requiring City approval may be approved and executed on behalf of the City by the City Engineer; provided, however, that the estimated cost of the improvements or obligations secured is less than $100,000.

C. Prior to approval by the City, all performance agreements shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.802.1)

16.20.040 Deferred improvement agreement.
A. In subdivisions of four or fewer parcels, or where a use permit or building permit is requested, or where improvements are required as condition of the approval of a boundary adjustment or merger or any other action requiring City approval, any public or private improvements so required may be deferred if it is determined by the City Council in the case of parcel maps or by the City Engineer in the other instances that their construction ahead of other adjacent improvements would cause a safety hazard, maintenance problem, drainage problem, or result in an inconsistent or unreasonably short reach or section of improvements, or that other special circumstances or physical constraints are present which preclude the construction of the improvements in a reasonable or timely manner. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider or developer shall enter into an agreement with the City for the installation of such improvements at some specified time in the future. Such agreement shall provide:

1. Construction of said improvements shall commence within 90 days of receipt of a notice to proceed from the City.

2. That in event of default by the owner, his successors or assigns, the City is authorized to cause said construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the owner, his successors or assigns, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense until paid.

3. That the agreement be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, at the expense of the owner, which shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of the title to said real property of the obligation set forth in this chapter, and also a lien in such amount as will fully reimburse the City, including interest as set forth in this chapter, subject to foreclosure in event of default in payment.

4. That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the owner, his successors or assigns, the owner, his successors or assigns agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorney’s fees, and that same shall become a part of the lien against said real property.

5. That the term “owner” includes not only the present owner but also his heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns, it being the intent of the parties hereto that the obligations undertaken in this chapter shall run with said real property and constitute a lien there against.

B. The agreement shall not relieve the owner from any other requirements specified in this division. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this division and all applicable articles of the municipal code in effect at the time of construction.

C. Deferred agreements for parcel maps shall be approved by the City Council prior to recordation in the case of agreements pertaining to parcel maps, or by the City Engineer, as provided in PMC 16.20.030.

D. Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, the City Council may require the construction of all said improvements as a condition of the approval of a final parcel map of four or fewer parcels if it finds that construction of said improvements are necessary for reasons of:

1. The public health and safety; or

2. The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.802.2)

16.20.050 Remainders.
A. Where remainders are made part of a final or parcel map, the City may enter into an agreement with the subdivider to construction improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder parcel. Said improvements shall be at the developer’s expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the City may require fulfillment of such construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the map, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of:

1. The public health and safety; or

2. The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.

B. Remainder agreements shall contain the same general provisions as required in PMC 16.20.040, and shall be approved by the City Council prior to recordations. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.802.3)

16.20.060 Improvement security – Generally.
Improvement securities shall be required to be posted as the guarantee of any act, obligation, or agreement required as a condition of the approval of any tentative or final subdivision map, parcel map, reversion, boundary adjustment, consolidation, merger, deferral, remainder parcel, use permit, building permit, or other permit or process requiring the official City approval. No final map or parcel map shall be presented to the City Council for final approval nor shall any other instrument or map requiring such securities be approved until all securities required by this chapter have been received and approved by the City Attorney. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.803)

16.20.070 Form of security.
The form of improvement security shall be one or the combination of the following at the option of and subject to the approval of the City Engineer:

A. A bond or bonds from one or more duly authorized corporate sureties, authorized to do business and having an Agent for Service of process in this State, which surety or sureties shall be on the accredited list of the United States Treasury Department and/or having an “A” policyholder’s rating and a financial rating Class XI or better in accordance with the most current “Bests’ Rating”;

B. A time certificate of deposit, savings passbook, or other financial instrument either in the name of or assigned to the City, in a form approved by the City Attorney;

C. Cash deposited with the City;

D. A deposit with a responsible escrow agent or trust company in a form approved by the City Attorney;

E. Negotiable bonds of a kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys;

F. A Letter of Credit or a Set Aside Letter from one or more financial institutions subject to the regulation of the State or Federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act, obligation, or agreement are on deposit with the institution and are available to the City upon demand if the act, obligation, or agreement is not carried out. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.803.1)

16.20.080 Amount and purpose of required security.
A. Performance. Security shall be placed to guarantee faithful performance of any act, obligation, or agreement, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the estimated total cost of the work or improvements to be done.

B. Labor and Materials. Security shall be placed to guarantee payment to any contractor, subcontractor and persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment in an amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the estimated total cost of the work or improvements to be done.

C. Warranty. Prior to acceptance of any subdivision or parcel map improvements by the City, security shall be placed as a guarantee and warranty of the work for the period after acceptance and approval of the work as specified in the agreement against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished. Such security shall be in an amount not less than 10 percent of the estimated total cost of work or improvements to be done.

D. Monuments.

1. Security shall be placed to guarantee placement of final monuments along the exterior boundary of any subdivision or parcel map, and along the interior lot lines, and to guarantee the submittal of survey notes, centerline ties, and other survey monument information as required by the City Engineer and to guarantee payment by the subdivider of the Civil Engineer or land surveyor who set the monuments. The amount of such security shall be as specified by the responsible Civil Engineer or land surveyor, or in the absence of such, by the City Engineer.

2. The amounts of any of the securities described herein shall include costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred by the City in successfully enforcing any of the obligations secured. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.803.2)

16.20.090 Reduction of security.
A. The City Engineer may reduce and partially release securities posted as a guarantee of any act, obligation, or agreement as follows:

1. Improvement security shall be reduced only upon written request by the subdivider or developer who posted such security.

2. The City Engineer shall consider requests for the partial reduction of security only twice for any one agreement.

3. Upon receipt of a written request for reduction together with detailed estimates of the value of the work remaining to be completed, the City Engineer shall make determination whether such requests exceed the number allowed and if the security is sufficient in amount to be reduced. If satisfied that the security may be reduced, the City Engineer shall inspect the improvements and verify the percentage and the value of work remaining to be completed. The City Engineer may then authorize a reduction in the amount of security as follows:

a. No reduction shall be made where more than 50 percent of the original value of work remains to be completed.

b. Whenever 50 percent or more of the work has been completed, the original security may be reduced to the current value of the remaining work as a contingency. No reduction shall result in a remaining security less than 10 percent of the original. Any reduction authorized herein shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty period, nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the City Engineer for such guarantee, nor to costs and reasonable attorney’s fees therefor.

c. Upon a determination that the security may be reduced and where the security takes the form of a surety bond or a letter of credit, the City Engineer shall notify the subdivider in writing of the amount of reduction and that the reduction does not apply to the warranty or guarantee period or the amount of security deemed necessary for such warranty or guarantee, not to costs and reasonable expenses and fees including attorney’s fees.

d. When the security takes the form of cash or other negotiable instrument, the City Engineer shall notify the Director of Finance to release an amount of said deposit which is computed as provided above in this section, less amounts estimated by the City Engineer to be necessary for the guarantee or warranty period, costs and reasonable expenses and fees including reasonable attorney’s fees. The Director of Finance is authorized to release said amounts upon written notification by the City Engineer.

B. Reduction of securities shall only be construed as formal acceptance of any of the improvements completed at the time of reduction, but shall not be construed as acknowledgement by the City that a specified amount of construction has been completed. (Ord. 811 § 15, 2017; Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.803.3)

16.20.100 Substitution of securities.
A subdivider or developer who has furnished improvement security to guarantee any act, obligation, or agreement, pursuant to this chapter, may request in writing that the City Engineer accept in place of said security any different form of security as provided for in this chapter. Upon receipt of the different security, and subject to its approval by the City Attorney, the original security may be released by the City Engineer, or by any other City officer having custody of the security instrument. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.803.4)

16.20.110 Release of security.
A. Any and all securities required to be posted to guarantee performance, labor and materials, warranty, or monumentation within or in conjunction with any subdivision or parcel map, shall be released by the City Council.

B. All securities to guarantee performance, labor and materials, warranty, or other act, obligation, or agreement, posted in conjunction with any boundary adjustment, use permit, construction permit, or other action or process requiring City approval may be released by the City Engineer, upon his filing of a written instrument with the City Clerk; provided, however, that the estimated total cost of the improvements or work to be constructed or provided does not exceed $100,000. Securities for work in excess of $100,000 shall be released by the City Council. The City Engineer, at his discretion, may refer any project, regardless of the security amount, to the City Council for consideration of release. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.803.5)

16.20.120 Timing for release.
A. Performance Security. Performance security shall be released only upon completion of all of the required work and improvements, and after all acts, obligations, and agreements have been completed and complied with, and only after suitable warranty security has been provided.

B. Labor and Material Security. Security securing the payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment, may, after passage of time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the State Civil Code and after acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount not less than the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the City Clerk of the City, and if no such claims have been recorded, the security may be released in full.

C. Warranty Security. Security posted for the warranty and guarantee of the work against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished shall be released upon termination of the warranty period specified in the performance agreement provided that all defects, if any, have been satisfactorily corrected.

D. Monument Security. Security given to guarantee installation of monuments, preparation and submittal of survey tie notes, and payment of the responsible Civil Engineer or land survey for same, shall be released upon:

1. Submittal to the City Engineer of an affidavit, signed by the Civil Engineer or land surveyor, certifying that all of the monuments shown on the final subdivision map or parcel map have been set and placed as shown on said map, and that he has been compensated by the subdivider or developer for those services;

2. The submittal to the City Engineer of a set of survey tie notes, in a form approved by the City Engineer; and

3. Field verification by the City Engineer that the monuments have been set. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982; CC § 81.803.6)

Chapter 16.22
MERGER
Sections:

16.22.010    Prohibitions.

16.22.020    Merger by City.

16.22.030    Unmerger.

16.22.040    Request for determination of merger.

16.22.050    Merger by owner.

16.22.010 Prohibitions.
A. No real property, improved or unimproved, consisting of a single unit or two or more contiguous units and owned by the same person or persons shall be divided into two or more lots, whether or not one or more of such lots is retained by the owner, except in accordance with this title.

B. No parcel may be subdivided if it was illegally created unless, as part of the division, the illegality is eliminated. If such elimination is not possible, a notice of violation with respect to the parcel shall be recorded. When the owner of any portion of an illegally created lot is the person who owned the property at the time of the illegal subdivision, a lawful subdivision of the property shall not be permitted unless the entire legal parcel is included in the application for such subdivision. (Ord. 143 § 2, 1984)

16.22.020 Merger by City.
A. This chapter shall not apply to the sale, lease or financing of one or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been created under the provisions of City ordinances regulating the division of real property and the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of their creation, or which were not subject to such provisions at the time of their creation, even though such contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner; except that if any one of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size to permit use or development under the zoning ordinance of the City and the standards established by subsection B of this section, then those parcels or units shall be merged.

B. Contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner, on the date that notice of intention to determine status is filed, shall be merged if one of the parcels or units does not conform to the minimum parcel size to permit use or development and if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

1. At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit.

2. With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:

a. Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger;

b. Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;

c. Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;

d. Does not meet slope stability standards;

e. Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;

f. Its development would create health or safety hazards;

g. Is consistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

3. Subsection (B)(2) of this section shall not apply if the conditions stated in Section 66451.11(b)(A) through (E) of the Subdivision Map Act exist.

C. Whenever the Director of Public Services has knowledge that real property has merged pursuant to this chapter he shall record and shall mail by certified mail to the current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status.

The notice of intention shall state:

1. That the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this chapter;

2. That the owner may request, within 30 days from the date the notice of intention was recorded, a hearing before the Director of Public Services to present evidence that the property does not meet the standards for merger; and

3. That the notice of intention was recorded with the County Recorder on the date the notice of intention was mailed. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Director of Public Services shall set the hearing for a date not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days from the date of receipt of the request. The property owner shall be notified of the hearing by certified mail. After the hearing the Director of Public Services shall determine whether the affected property has merged pursuant to this chapter. The decision shall be made and notification of the decision shall be mailed to the property owner within five working days of the date of the hearing. If the parcels have merged, the Director of Public Services shall file a notice of merger with the County Recorder within 30 days from the date of the hearing unless the decision has been appealed as provided in subsection E of this section. The notice of merger shall specify the name or names of the record owner or owners and shall particularly describe the real property. If it is determined that the parcels have not merged, the Director of Public Services shall record a release of the notice of intention within 30 days from the date of the decision, and shall mail a copy of the release to the owner. If no hearing is requested the decision shall be made not later than 90 days after the mailing of the notice of the opportunity for a hearing.

D. If the owner requested and presented evidence at a hearing, the decision of the Director of Public Services may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 2.20 PMC. If after a hearing the Council grants the appeal, the City Clerk shall record within 30 days with the County Recorder a release of the notice of intention. If the appeal is denied, the City Clerk shall within 30 days record a notice of merger with the County Recorder. A copy of either the release or the notice of merger shall be sent to the owners.

E. Prior to January 1, 1986, the Director of Public Services shall record with the County Recorder a notice of merger for any parcel merged under the provisions of any law prior to January 1, 1984. At least 30 days before filing the notice of merger the Director of Public Services shall mail written notice to the property owner of the intention to record the notice and specify a time, date, and place at which the owner may present evidence to the Director of Public Services why the notice should not be recorded. If, after the hearing, the Director of Public Services determines that the parcels have merged, a notice of merger shall be filed. The decision of the Director of Public Services may be appealed according to the procedures established in subsection D of this section.

Failure of the Director of Public Services to record a notice of merger pursuant to subsection E of this section shall not preclude the City from determining that such property was created illegally or has merged pursuant to the provisions of any law effective on or after January 1, 1984. (Ord. 334 § 21, 1990; Ord. 143 § 2, 1984)

16.22.030 Unmerger.
Any parcel or unit of land which merged pursuant to the provision of any law prior to January 1, 1984, but for which a notice of merger was not recorded on or before that date is deemed unmerged if on January 1, 1984, all of the criteria established by Section 66451.30(a) of the Subdivision Map Act is met and if none of the conditions of Section 66451.30(b) exist. Upon request of an owner the Director of Public Services may file a certificate of compliance whenever the Director of Public Services determines that a parcel is unmerged pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 143 § 2, 1984)

16.22.040 Request for determination of merger.
A. A property owner may request that the Director of Public Services determine whether the property has merged or is deemed unmerged. A request for determination shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by a deposit established by City Council resolution to be applied against actual costs incurred by the Director of Public Services in the processing of the request. The unpaid balance of costs shall be paid prior to recordation of a notice of merger of certificate of compliance.

B. Upon determination that property has merged, the Director of Public Services shall issue to the owner and record with the County Recorder a notice of merger.

C. Upon determination that property is deemed unmerged, the Director of Public Services shall issue to the owner and record with the County Recorder a certificate showing each parcel as a separate parcel. (Ord. 143 § 2, 1984)

16.22.050 Merger by owner.
A. Upon application by the owner thereof, in a form approved by the Director of Public Services, any contiguous parcels under the same ownership, whether or not such parcels conform to all legal requirements and standards, may be merged without filing a map for reversion to acreage. The form and content of such application and the information, data, fees, and other details required for the processing of same, shall be as set by the Director of Public Services.

B. The Director of Public Services shall have the authority to approve such mergers, and no final map shall be required provided the merger does not involve:

1. Streets or other easements to be vacated;

2. Previously posted agreements or securities for improvements;

3. Previously paid fees or deposits made pursuant to the division of the properties to be merged.

C. Upon approval of such a merger, the Director of Public Services shall cause to be prepared an appropriate instrument describing the parcels to be merged, which shall be executed by the owner involved and the Director of Public Services and which shall thereafter be recorded with the County Recorder in accordance with California Government Code Section 66499.20 3/4. (Ord. 143 § 2, 1984)

Chapter 16.38
PARKLAND DEDICATION PROCEDURE
Sections:

16.38.010    Title and purpose.

16.38.020    Applicability.

16.38.030    Standards for dedication.

16.38.040    Computation of in-lieu fee (interim).

16.38.050    Combination of parkland and fees required.

16.38.060    Procedure – Generally.

16.38.070    Procedure – City option.

16.38.080    Procedure – Determination.

16.38.090    Procedure – Prerequisites or approval of final map or parcel map.

16.38.100    Procedure – Park and recreational use land credit for private open space.

16.38.110    Procedure – In-lieu fee credit for developer installed parkland improvement.

16.38.120    Exemptions.

16.38.010 Title and purpose.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “parkland dedication procedure.”

B. The City finds that the parkland dedication procedure supports the implementation of the general plan and its elements, in particular parks and recreation. The City further finds that parkland dedication, in-lieu payment of fees or a combination of both are necessary for the development of parkland within the City. (Ord. 124 § 1, 1984)

16.38.020 Applicability.
Land under this chapter shall be conveyed directly to the City prior to or concurrent with final map/parcel map approval. Park fees for all residential development pursuant to PMC 15.06.050 shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits or may be deferred by posting of a security satisfactory to the City Attorney. The acceptance of such land or fees shall be applied as provided as follows:

A. Use of Land and Fees. The land, fees or combination thereof are to be used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities which will reasonably serve or benefit future residents of such subdivision or development.

B. Establishment and Development Time. Any fees collected under this chapter from subdivisions shall be committed within five years after the payment of such fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If such fees are not committed, they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lots bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision.

C. Land Disposition. In the event that opportunities for better recreation facilities than those provided by the dedication materialize, the land so dedicated may be sold with the proceeds therefrom being used for suitable park and recreation facilities which serve the neighborhood in which that subdivision is located.

D. Payment of Fees Only. Only payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions of less than 50 lots unless agreed otherwise by the City Council and the subdivider.

E. Fees deferred by posting of security must be paid prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 124 § 2, 1984)

16.38.030 Standards for dedication.
A. The amount of land to be dedicated shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreation facilities by the future residents of the subdivision. A ratio of five park acres to 1,000 population, in accordance with the adopted park and recreation element of the City’s general plan shall be used to compute the amount of land to be dedicated.

B. The minimum amount of acreage to be dedicated shall be computed by using the following formula:

0.005 NP

=

Total land in acres to be dedicated for subdivision.

 

WHERE:

 

 

 

N

=

Number of dwelling units proposed.

 

P

=

Average population per dwelling unit based on single-family, multiple-family, and mobile homes as established each calendar year by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 124 § 3, 1984)

16.38.040 Computation of in-lieu fee (interim).
A. The amount of in-lieu fees shall be based upon the estimated costs of improvement of the total of all acreage currently owned by the City or other public agency that has been designated as parkland or open space on the park and recreation element or land use and circulation plan of the comprehensive plan.

B. The amount of in-lieu fees shall be computed by using the following formula:

D ÷ (P-C)

N

 

=

Total amount in dollars of in-lieu fees per dwelling unit.

 

WHERE:

 

 

 

C

=

Current estimated population as established each calendar year by resolution of the City Council.

 

P

=

Ultimate population as established in the land use element of the general plan.

 

D

=

Total estimated costs, as established each calendar year by resolution of the City Council, for development of public-owned parkland designated on the park and recreation element or land use and circulation plan of the comprehensive plan.

 

N

=

Average population per dwelling unit based on single-family, multiple-family and mobile homes as established each calendar year by resolution of the City Council.

(Ord. 282 § 1, 1988; Ord. 124 § 4, 1984)

16.38.050 Combination of parkland and fees required.
When a combination of land dedication and in-lieu fees are required as a condition of approval, the fair market value of the land as adopted by the City Council and the in-lieu fees, as computed under PMC 16.38.030, shall be of an equal value to provisions of PMC 16.38.030 applied to the entire subdivision. (Ord. 124 § 5, 1984)

16.38.060 Procedure – Generally.
The requirements of this chapter shall be met prior to or concurrent with final map or parcel map approval, or prior to issuance of building permits, by the provision of parkland in whole or in part, the payment of park fees, or by a combination of both as required by the City Council. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 124 § 6, 1984)

16.38.070 Procedure – City option.
At the time of filing a tentative tract map or a tentative parcel map for approval, the City shall determine whether dedication of property for park and recreational purposes or in-lieu of fees are necessary. If the City desires dedication, the area shall be designated on the tentative tract map or tentative parcel map when deemed complete for submission. (Ord. 124 § 6(A), 1984)

16.38.080 Procedure – Determination.
The City Council shall determine whether to require land dedication, payment of fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, by consideration of the following:

A. Parks and recreation element of the general plan;

B. Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; and

C. Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for subdivision. (Ord. 124 § 6(B), 1984)

16.38.090 Procedure – Prerequisites or approval of final map or parcel map.
Where dedication is offered and accepted, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act. Where fees are required the same shall be deposited or secured with the City prior to the issuance of building permits. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 124 § 6(C), 1984)

16.38.100 Procedure – Park and recreational use land credit for private open space.
A. Where substantial private open space for park and recreational purposes is proposed to be provided in a subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, up to 50 percent of such areas may be credited against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, as set forth in PMC 16.38.030; provided, that the following findings are met:

1. That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space;

2. That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded, written agreement, conveyance or restrictions;

3. That the use of the private open space is restricted for private park and/or recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property within the tract which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City or its successor;

4. That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology and access;

5. That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the park and recreation element of the general plan;

6. That the open space for which credit is given is a minimum of two acres and provides a minimum of four of the local park basic elements listed below, or a combination of such and other recreational improvements that will meet the specific recreation park needs of the future residents of the area:

Criteria List

 

Acres

 

Children’s Play Apparatus Area

0.50 – 0.75

Landscape Park-like and Quiet Areas

0.50 – 1.00

Family Picnic Area

0.25 – 0.75

Game Court Area

0.25 – 0.50

Turf Playfield

1.00 – 3.00

Swimming Pool (42 feet by 75 feet with adjacent deck and lawn areas)

0.25 – 0.50

Recreation Center Building

0.15 – 0.25

B. Before credit is given the City Council shall make written findings that the above standards are met. (Ord. 489 § 2, 1997; Ord. 124 § 6(D), 1984)

16.38.110 Procedure – In-lieu fee credit for developer installed parkland improvement.
Where specific parkland improvements are required to meet needs identified in the park and recreation element of the general plan, and when such improvements are recommended by the Director of Community and Development Services and approved by the City Council, 100 percent of those improvements may be credited against the requirement for payment of in-lieu fees as set forth in PMC 16.38.040; provided, that the following conditions are met:

A. Any such improvements shall bear a reasonable relationship to the utility of the specific park site where those improvements will be installed as determined by the Director of Community and Development Services.

B. Any such improvements for which credit is given shall be designed and installed by the developer of residential property based on City specifications to the satisfaction of the Director of Community and Public Services.

C. Such improvements shall serve future residents of the proposed subdivision and the public. Installation of those improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy of any residential units within the subdivision. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 489 § 2, 1997; Ord. 124 § 6(E), 1984)

16.38.120 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to commercial or industrial subdivisions; nor do they apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 124 § 7, 1984)

Chapter 16.40
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.40.010    Title.

16.40.020    Purpose.

16.40.030    Other permits required.

16.40.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “grading ordinance of the City of Poway.” (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.40.020 Purpose.
The purpose of the grading ordinance is:

A. To establish an official set of standards regulating the design and construction of building sites and the development of property by grading;

B. To regulate the alteration of the ground surface to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare;

C. To regulate the clearing, brushing and grubbing, grading, excavating, stockpiling of earth, filling, earth moving and alteration of private and public lands to preserve environmentally significant features and to protect environmentally sensitive species and habitats including but not limited to archaeological or historical resources, open space areas with biological significance, and transition areas between land to be cleared for fire-fuel mitigation and permanent open space;

D. To minimize differential settlement, slipping or sliding of earth;

E. To protect adjacent properties from damage caused by blockage, diversion, or channeling of natural runoff waters;

F. To require engineering and geological analysis of soil conditions;

G. To provide erosion control and proper drainage;

H. To provide a basis for the design of footings, floor slabs and structures to be erected on parcels of land whose natural topography has been altered;

I. To establish an administrative procedure for issuance of permits;

J. To provide for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction; and

K. To provide for the enforcement of the requirements contained in this division. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.40.030 Other permits required.
Nothing in this grading code shall preclude the inclusion in any use permit, subdivision approval, variance, waiver, review or other approval issued or approved pursuant to the City zoning ordinance or requirement concerning the grading of land. Nothing in this grading code shall preclude the requirement for the owner or applicant to obtain any other permit or approval required by law from any other public or private party, or agency. (Ord. 345, 1991)

Chapter 16.41
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

16.41.010    Administrative clearing permit.

16.41.015    Advanced treatment.

16.41.020    Approval.

16.41.030    Approved plans.

16.41.040    Approved testing agency.

16.41.050    Archaeologist.

16.41.060    As-graded.

16.41.070    Bedrock.

16.41.080    Bench.

16.41.085    Best management practices (BMPs).

16.41.090    BMP Manual.

16.41.095    Borrow.

16.41.100    Buttress fill.

16.41.110    Certify or certification.

16.41.115    City.

16.41.120    City Building Code.

16.41.125    City Engineer.

16.41.130    City Project Engineer.

16.41.140    Civil engineer.

16.41.150    Civil engineering.

16.41.160    Clearing, brushing and grubbing.

16.41.170    Construction permit.

16.41.180    Compaction.

16.41.190    Competent in-place material.

16.41.200    Concrete drainage structures.

16.41.210    Contour grading.

16.41.220    Contractor.

16.41.230    Crib wall.

16.41.240    Director of Development Services.

16.41.245    Discharge.

16.41.250    Earth material.

16.41.260    Engineering geologic report.

16.41.270    Engineering geologist.

16.41.280    Engineering geology.

16.41.290    Engineer of work.

16.41.295    Environmentally sensitive areas.

16.41.300    Erosion.

16.41.310    Erosion control plan.

16.41.320    Erosion control system.

16.41.330    Excavation.

16.41.340    Expansive soils.

16.41.350    Fault.

16.41.360    Fill or embankment.

16.41.370    Geologic hazard.

16.41.380    Geotechnical report.

16.41.390    Grade.

16.41.400    Grading.

16.41.410    Grading contractor.

16.41.420    Grubbing.

16.41.430    Guide to landscape requirements.

16.41.440    Implementing agreement (IA).

16.41.450    Key.

16.41.460    Landscape architect.

16.41.470    Landslide.

16.41.475    Maximum extent practicable (MEP).

16.41.480    Mined lands.

16.41.490    Minerals.

16.41.500    Mining waste.

16.41.505    MS4 Permit.

16.41.510    Natural terrain.

16.41.515    Nonstormwater discharge.

16.41.520    Overburden.

16.41.530    Owner.

16.41.540    Paleontologist.

16.41.550    Permittee.

16.41.560    Pollutants.

16.41.570    Pollution.

16.41.580    Poway subarea HCP.

16.41.590    Precise conformance.

16.41.600    Precise grading.

16.41.605    Priority development project.

16.41.610    Rainy season.

16.41.615    Receiving waters.

16.41.620    Reclamation.

16.41.630    Record drawings.

16.41.635    Redevelopment.

16.41.640    References.

16.41.650    Relative compaction.

16.41.660    Retaining wall.

16.41.670    Rough grading.

16.41.680    Routine landscaping.

16.41.685    Runoff.

16.41.690    Sediment.

16.41.700    Shall.

16.41.710    Site.

16.41.720    Slope.

16.41.730    Slope revegetation.

16.41.740    Slope stability.

16.41.750    Soil.

16.41.760    Soils engineer.

16.41.770    Soils engineering.

16.41.780    Soils engineering report.

16.41.790    Stockpile.

16.41.800    Stop work order.

16.41.810    Stormwater.

16.41.815    Stormwater conveyance system.

16.41.820    Structural post-construction BMP.

16.41.825    Suitable material.

16.41.830    Terrace.

16.41.840    Topsoil.

16.41.850    Uniform Administrative Code.

16.41.860    Unsuitable material.

16.41.870    Watercourse.

16.41.875    Water quality standards.

16.41.880    Wetlands.

16.41.010 Administrative clearing permit.
An “administrative clearing permit” is a permit issued to authorize the clearing, brushing or grubbing of a portion of land beyond that scope exempted from the permit process by the ordinance codified in this Division III. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.015 Advanced treatment.
“Advanced treatment” means using mechanical or chemical means to flocculate and remove suspended sediment from runoff from construction sites prior to discharge. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.020 Approval.
“Approval” means a written professional opinion by the responsible principal of record concerning the satisfactory progress and completion of the work under his purview. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.030 Approved plans.
“Approved plans” means the most current grading plans which bear the signature or stamp of approval of the City Engineer. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.040 Approved testing agency.
“Approved testing agency” means a facility which spends the majority of its time in the field of applied soil mechanics and foundation engineering; which is equipped to perform and certify the tests and procedures required in this division; and which operations are conducted under the responsible supervision of a registered civil engineer with expertise in soil mechanics and foundation engineering. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.050 Archaeologist.
“Archaeologist” means a person who does scientific study of material remains of past life and activity. The City Archaeological/Historical Guidelines describes the prerequisite qualifications of an archaeological/historical consultant. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.060 As-graded.
“As-graded” means the site configuration upon completion of grading. This includes all horizontal and vertical dimensions and relationships and all physical features installed, reconstructed, eliminated or altered by the grading operations as shown on the record drawings prepared by the engineer of work. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.070 Bedrock.
“Bedrock” means in-place solid rock. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.080 Bench.
“Bench” means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.085 Best management practices (BMPs).
“Best management practices” (BMPs) shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. “Erosion control measures” are BMPs. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.090 BMP Manual.
“BMP Manual” or “Manual” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.095 Borrow.
“Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.100 Buttress fill.
“Buttress fill” means an engineered fill designed to stabilize an adverse geologic condition (landslide, adverse bedding, etc.). (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.110 Certify or certification.
“Certify or certification” means a signed written statement that the specific inspections and/or tests required have been performed and that the works comply with the applicable requirements of this Division III, the plans, and the permit. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.115 City.
“City” means the City of Poway. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.120 City Building Code.
“City Building Code” means the California Building Code and the International Building Code, as adopted by the City in accordance with PMC 15.04.010. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.125 City Engineer.
“City Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City or his duly authorized representatives. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.130 City Project Engineer.
“City Project Engineer” means the City employee or agent responsible for coordination of administrative duties on a given project. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.140 Civil engineer.
“Civil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the State to practice in the field of civil engineering. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.150 Civil engineering.
“Civil engineering” means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials to evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.160 Clearing, brushing and grubbing.
“Clearing, brushing and grubbing” means the removal of vegetation (grass, brush, trees, and similar plant types), manmade structures, environmentally sensitive species and habitats, rock, archaeological artifacts and sites, or other environmentally sensitive features by any means. For purposes of this chapter, references to “clearing” mean clearing, brushing and grubbing individually and separately. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.170 Construction permit.
For the purposes of this division, “construction permit” means any valid permit issued by the City specifically authorizing construction or demolition activities including various building permits, grading permits and right-of-way permits. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.180 Compaction.
“Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical or other acceptable means. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.190 Competent in-place material.
“Competent in-place material” means material designated by the Geotechnical Engineer as being competent to support proposed structures or additional fill without adverse settlement or expansion. This is usually bedrock or natural ground with an in-place density greater than 90 percent of its maximum density. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.200 Concrete drainage structures.
“Concrete drainage structures” means any device constructed, in whole or in part, of concrete cement for the purpose of collecting, diverting, storing or conveying of stormwater runoff; including swales, brow ditches, curbs and gutters, catch-basins, pipes, downdrains, cut-off walls, headwalls or other similar devices. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.210 Contour grading.
“Contour grading” means grading which creates or results in land surfaces that reflect the pregraded natural terrain or that simulates natural terrain (i.e., rounded, nonplanar surfaces and rounded, nonangular intersections between surfaces). (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.220 Contractor.
“Contractor” means a contractor licensed by the State to do work by the ordinance codified in this division. A contractor may be authorized to act for a property owner in doing such work. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.230 Crib wall.
“Crib wall” means a crib-type retaining wall as described in the most recent publication of Standard Plans, Department of Transportation, State of California. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.240 Director of Development Services.
“Director of Development Services” means the Director of Development Services of the City or his duly authorized representatives. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.245 Discharge.
“Discharge” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.250 Earth material.
“Earth material” means any rock, natural soil, or fill, and/or any combination thereof. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.260 Engineering geologic report.
“Engineering geologic report” means a report prepared under the supervision of an engineering geologist, geophysicist, or a geologist providing a geologic map of a site, information on geologic measurements and exploration performed on the site and surrounding area, and providing recommendation for remedial measures necessary to provide a geologically stable site for its intended use. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.270 Engineering geologist.
“Engineering geologist” means a person regularly engaged in the practice of engineering geology recognized as an engineering geologist by the Director of Development Services or a geologist certified by the State. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.280 Engineering geology.
“Engineering geology” means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil work. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.290 Engineer of work.
The “engineer of work” means the civil engineer holding a current registration in the State who signed the grading plan approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.295 Environmentally sensitive areas.
“Environmentally sensitive areas” are defined by Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego region (RWQCB), Order No. R9-2013-0001, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit No. CAS0109266, as “areas that include but are not limited to all Clean Water Act Section 303(d) impaired water bodies; areas designated as Areas of Special Biological Significance by the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) and the RWQCB; State Water Quality Protected Areas; water bodies designated with the RARE beneficial use by the SWRCB and RWQCB; areas designated as preserves or their equivalent under the Natural Communities Conservation Program within the Cities and County of Orange; and any other equivalent environmentally sensitive areas which have been identified by the Copermittees.” (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.300 Erosion.
“Erosion” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.310 Erosion control plan.
An “erosion control plan” is a plan prepared under the direction of and signed by a civil engineer competent in the preparation of such plans and knowledgeable about current erosion control methods. The plan shall provide for protection of exposed soils, prevention of discharge of sediment, and desiltation of runoff at frequent intervals along flowage areas, at entrances to storm drains, at entrances to streets and driveways, and at the exit of the area being graded. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.320 Erosion control system.
“Erosion control system” means any combination of desilting facilities, retarding basins, flow decelerators, and/or erosion protection (including effective planting and the maintenance thereof) to protect the project site, adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities, graded improvements, existing natural features, archaeological artifacts, and to relieve waters of suspended sediments or debris prior to discharge from the site. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.330 Excavation.
“Excavation” means any act by which soil, sand, gravel or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed or relocated, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.340 Expansive soils.
“Expansive soils” means any soil with an expansion index greater than 20, as determined by the Expansive Index Tests (UBC Standards 29.2). (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.350 Fault.
“Fault” means a fracture in the earth’s crust along which movement has occurred. A fault, as defined by the California Division of Mines and Geology, is considered active if the movement has occurred within the last ± 11,000 years (Holocene geologic time). (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.360 Fill or embankment.
“Fill” or “embankment” means a deposit of soil, sand, gravel, rock, or other material placed by artificial means. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.370 Geologic hazard.
“Geologic hazard” means any geologic feature capable of producing structural damage or physical injury. Geologic hazards include:

A. Landslides and potential slope instabilities resulting from bedding faults, weak claystone beds and oversteepened slopes;

B. Deposits potentially subject to liquefaction, seismically induced settlement, severe ground shaking, surface rupture, debris flows, or rock falls resulting from fault activity;

C. Deposits subject to seepage conditions or high groundwater table. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.380 Geotechnical report.
“Geotechnical report” means a report which contains all appropriate soil engineering, geologic, geohydrologic, and seismic information, evaluation, recommendations and findings. This type of report combines both engineering geology and soil engineering reports. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.390 Grade.
“Grade” means the vertical elevation of the ground surface.

A. “Existing grade” means the ground surface prior to grading.

B. “Finish grade” means the final grade of the site which conforms precisely to the City-approved plans, approved construction changes or approved record drawings.

C. “Natural grade” (or “natural ground”) means the ground surface unaltered by artificial means.

D. “Rough grade” means the stage at which the work is in to precise conformance with the approved plan and when all excavations for drainage structures and retaining walls are complete. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.400 Grading.
“Grading” means any process of excavation or filling, including paving over exposed ground surface, or combination thereof. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.410 Grading contractor.
“Grading contractor” means a contractor licensed and regulated by the State who specializes in grading work or is otherwise licensed to do grading work. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.420 Grubbing.
“Grubbing” means the removal of roots and stumps. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.430 Guide to landscape requirements.
“Guide to landscape requirements” means the most recent guideline containing information concerning the design, installation, and maintenance of landscape and irrigation systems and fire-fuel control, as adopted by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.440 Implementing agreement (IA).
“Implementing agreement (IA)” means the legally binding agreement that specifies the responsibilities and obligations of the City of Poway/Poway Redevelopment Agency (City) to implement the adopted City of Poway subarea habitat conservation plan (Poway subarea HCP), as fully executed by the City, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and California Department of Fish and Game. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.450 Key.
“Key” means a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.460 Landscape architect.
“Landscape architect” means a landscape architect registered by the State. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.470 Landslide.
“Landslide” means the downward and outward movement of soil, sand, gravel, rock or fill or a combination thereof. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.475 Maximum extent practicable (MEP).
“Maximum extent practicable” (MEP) shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.480 Mined lands.
“Mined lands” includes the surface, subsurface and groundwater of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted. This includes private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other related materials or property are located. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.490 Minerals.
“Minerals” are any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, aggregate, coal, peat and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas and petroleum. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.500 Mining waste.
“Mining waste” includes the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other material or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.505 MS4 Permit.
“MS4 Permit” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.510 Natural terrain.
“Natural terrain” means the lay of the land prior to any grading or other artificial landform modification. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.515 Nonstormwater discharge.
“Nonstormwater discharge” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.520 Overburden.
“Overburden” means soil, rock or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.530 Owner.
“Owner” means any person, agency, firm or corporation having a legal, possessory or equitable interest in a given real property. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.540 Paleontologist.
“Paleontologist” means a person who has a minimum of a master’s degree in geology with a focus on paleontology with demonstrated local paleontological experience including paleontological field survey work and museum-level identification of paleontological samples. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.550 Permittee.
“Permittee” means any person or owner to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this code. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.560 Pollutants.
“Pollutants” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 8.68.020. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.570 Pollution.
“Pollution” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.580 Poway subarea HCP.
“Poway subarea HCP” means the City of Poway subarea habitat conservation plan. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.590 Precise conformance.
“Precise conformance,” for the purposes of the ordinance codified in this division, means:

A. Pad elevations within plus or minus four-tenths of a foot of planned elevation or approved construction change;

B. Street subgrade within plus or minus four-hundredths of a foot of planned elevation or approved construction change;

C. Slope grades within plus or minus one foot of planned elevation or approved construction change;

D. Rock slopes (riprap armoring) and horizontal locations within two feet of planned elevation and location or approved construction change;

E. Drainage gradient to within two-tenths of one percent of planned slope or approved construction change; and

F. Structures within the tolerances specified in the latest adopted version of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (Green Book). (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.600 Precise grading.
“Precise grading” means grading that is based on approved plans which show the precise locations of structures, finished elevations, drainage details and all on-site improvements on a given property, including concrete or bituminous pavement surfacing on natural or existing grade in excess of 10,000 square feet for any commercial, industrial, multiresidential, or other parking lot. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.605 Priority development project.
“Priority development project” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.610 Rainy season.
“Rainy season” means the period beginning October 1st and ending April 30th in the next calendar year. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.615 Receiving waters.
“Receiving waters” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.620 Reclamation.
“Reclamation” means the process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines. Mined lands must be reclaimed to a usable condition, be readily adaptable for alternate land uses, create no danger to public health and safety, and be consistent with the general plan, zoning ordinance and applicable specific plans. The process may extend to affected land and surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization or other measures. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.630 Record drawings.
“Record drawings” means plans prepared by the engineer of work subsequent to the completion of all work on the approved plans and approved changes thereon depicting the as-graded condition. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.635 Redevelopment.
“Redevelopment” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.640 References.
Unless indicated otherwise, “references” means references to civil engineer, soil engineer, geologist, landscape architect, and engineering geologist referring to the professional person(s) preparing, signing, or approving the project plans and specifications which comprise the approved grading or landscape-irrigation plan, or his successor appearing pursuant to this division. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.650 Relative compaction.
“Relative compaction” means the in-place dry density expressed as a percentage of the maximum dry density. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.660 Retaining wall.
“Retaining wall” means a wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials, and shall not include “crib walls,” slope stabilizing systems, or other proprietary processes unless a positive determination is made by the City Engineer in writing. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.670 Rough grading.
“Rough grading” means grading that is based on approved plans which show finished elevations, interim building pad elevations and drainage to the degree required by the City Engineer. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.680 Routine landscaping.
“Routine landscaping” means maintenance of existing landscaping features, removal of dead or diseased trees or shrubs, and planting and irrigating new trees, shrubs, and ground cover in accordance with the landscape grading exemption. Routine landscaping shall not extend into previously undisturbed natural areas or open space easements. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.685 Runoff.
“Runoff” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.690 Sediment.
“Sediment” means eroded earth material that is carried or deposited by water, wind, gravity or ice, and is a major source of water pollution. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.700 Shall.
“Shall” is mandatory. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.710 Site.
“Site” means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous lots or parcels, or combination thereof, where grading is performed or permitted. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.720 Slope.
“Slope” means an inclined ground surface of fill, excavation or natural terrain, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.730 Slope revegetation.
“Slope revegetation” means the planting of graded slopes with native and/or naturalizing plant species which, after an initial establishment period, usually requiring irrigation, will survive with normal precipitation. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.740 Slope stability.
“Slope stability” shall be defined as follows:

A. “Gross stability” means the factor of safety against failure of slope material located below a surface approximately three to four feet deep, measured from and perpendicular to the slope face.

B. “Surficial stability” means the factor of safety against failure of the outer three to four feet of slope material measured from and perpendicular to the slope face. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.750 Soil.
“Soil” means earth material of whatever origin, overlying bedrock, and may include the decomposed zone of bedrock which can be readily excavated by mechanical equipment. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.760 Soils engineer.
“Soils engineer” means a civil engineer duly registered in the State, who:

A. Is engaged in the practice of civil engineering and spends a majority of his time in the field of applied soil mechanics and foundation engineering;

B. Has at least four years of responsible practical experience in the field of applied soil mechanics; and

C. Has access to an adequately equipped soils testing laboratory. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.770 Soils engineering.
“Soils engineering” means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.780 Soils engineering report.
“Soils engineering report” means a report prepared under the responsible supervision of a soils engineer and approved by the City Engineer or his representative which includes:

A. Preliminary information concerning engineering properties of soil and rock on a site prior to grading, present, historical and future groundwater levels, analysis for both gross and surficial slope stability, fill settlement, liquefaction potential, alluvium deposits, describing locations of these materials and providing recommendations for preparation of the site for its intended use;

B. Grading report, including information on site preparation, compaction of fills placed, providing recommendations for structural design and approving the site for its intended use. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.790 Stockpile.
“Stockpile” means a temporary, uncompacted fill or embankment placed by artificial means, which is designated or intended to be moved or relocated at a later date. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.800 Stop work order.
“Stop work order” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.810 Stormwater.
“Stormwater” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 8.68.020. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.815 Stormwater conveyance system.
“Stormwater conveyance system” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 8.68.020. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.820 Structural post-construction BMP.
“Structural post-construction BMP” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.825 Suitable material.
“Suitable material” means any soil or earth material which, under the criteria of this division or under the criteria of an approved geotechnical report, is suitable for use as fill or for other intended purpose. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.830 Terrace.
“Terrace” means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.840 Topsoil.
“Topsoil” means soil which is within the uppermost horizon of a soil profile, and which contains organic matter, nutrients and microorganisms necessary for plant growth. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.850 Uniform Administrative Code.
“Uniform Administrative Code” means the latest version of the Uniform Administrative Code of the International Building Code as adopted by the City in accordance with PMC 15.02.010. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.860 Unsuitable material.
“Unsuitable material” means any soil or earth material having properties or characteristics which, under the criteria of this division or under the criteria contained in any approved geotechnical report, make it unsuitable for use as fill and/or for any other intended use. These properties or characteristics include, but are not limited to: organic content of the material exceeds three percent; rock diameters exceeding 12 inches; the presence of concrete or asphalt; or the presence of expansive soils within four feet of finish grade of any area intended or designed as a location for a building. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.870 Watercourse.
“Watercourse” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.875 Water quality standards.
“Water quality standards” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 13.09.030. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

16.41.880 Wetlands.
“Wetlands” means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For the purposes of this classification, wetlands must have one or more of the following three attributes:

A. At least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes;

B. The substrate is predominantly undrained hydric soil; and/or

C. The substrate is nonsoil and is saturated at some time during the growing season of each year. (Ord. 775 § 4, 2015)

Chapter 16.42
PERMITS REQUIRED
Sections:

16.42.010    Permits required – Exceptions.

16.42.020    Prohibited permits.

16.42.030    Responsibility.

16.42.040    Types of grading permits.

16.42.010 Permits required – Exceptions.
No person shall conduct any grading, excavation, earth moving, filling, clearing, brushing, or grubbing on natural or existing grade, or perform work that is preparatory to grading, without first having obtained a valid grading permit, stockpile permit, or administrative clearing permit in accordance with this division, except for the following:

A. An excavation below finished grade for recompaction within the building zone (within five feet of footings) or for basements and footings for a building, mobile home, retaining wall, septic system, well, or structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than two feet after the completion of such structure. This shall not prohibit a minimum-fee grading permit or soils or geologic report from being required for foundation design and inspection purposes when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, stability considerations warrant such inspection;

B. Cemetery graves;

C. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations or agencies;

D. Earthwork or construction controlled by the Federal, State, County, or City governments, or by a local agency as defined by Government Code Sections 53090 through 53095 (special districts) including the Poway Redevelopment Agency or pipeline or conduit excavation and backfill conducted by local agencies. This exemption, however, shall apply only when the earthwork construction takes place on the property or dedicated rights-of-way or easements of the above agencies;

E. Excavation and backfill for installation of underground utilities by public utilities or companies operating under the authority of a franchise or public property right-of-way permit;

F. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay for commercial purposes, where established and provided for by a valid conditional use permit, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressures upon any adjacent or contiguous property, or alter the orientation of or contribute excessive sedimentation to natural watercourses which may result in adverse changes on adjoining property;

G. Exploratory excavations under the direction of civil engineers, soils engineers, engineering geologists, and/or archaeologists or paleontologists, or pursuant to a well permit, provided all excavations are properly backfilled or otherwise restored. When such work involves removal of any native vegetation, it must be accompanied by an administrative clearing permit. Any access roadways or pads constructed for this work shall only be constructed as approved in the administrative clearing permit and shall be restored as required in the permit;

H. An excavation less than two feet in vertical depth which does not create a cut slope greater than two feet in vertical height and steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one site and does not adversely affect the stability of any existing slopes or alter drainage conditions;

I. A fill less than two feet in depth, placed on natural grade with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1), which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course;

J. Excavation or fill on a developed parcel of land that is done for the purposes of minor landscaping improvements or recreational purposes and which:

1. Is a minimum of 10 feet away from any structures and three feet from any property line, unless entirely contained by a retaining wall;

2. Does not exceed 250 cubic yards of total excavation and fill;

3. Does not exceed three vertical feet in depth;

4. Does not create a cut or fill slope greater than five feet in height nor a slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1);

5. Does not divert, concentrate or otherwise alter surface or subsurface drainage as it leaves or enters adjacent properties;

6. Is not undertaken within any open space, utility, access or other easement; and

7. Is not in an area where any structure is planned, including patios, swimming pools and accessory structures;

K. Clearing and brushing when directed by the Fire Chief to mitigate a potential fire hazard in accordance with Chapter 8.76 PMC, with the concurrence of the Director of Development Services that such clearing and brushing will not cause significant damage to any rare, endangered or protected species of plant or wildlife, or cause any significant damage to any habitat of any rare, endangered or protected species of wildlife, or endanger any archaeological or historical resources, open space areas with biological significance, or transition areas between land to be cleared for fire-fuel mitigation and permanent open space;

L. Clearing and brushing, expressly for the following purposes, with the concurrence of the Director of Public Works:

1. Routine landscaping and maintenance of already landscaped areas, and the removal of dead or diseased trees or shrubs;

2. Clearing which conforms to the location, extent and purpose authorized explicitly by a construction permit pursuant to a discretionary land use permit or a discretionary development permit. An administrative permit shall be required for any purpose which is not specifically addressed by the construction permit;

3. Clearing of sites of 10,000 square feet or less which are not part of a larger parcel owned by the same person, persons or entity;

4. Clearing for agricultural purposes on land which has been legitimately used for agricultural purposes within five years immediately prior to institution of the clearing operation. This exemption shall not apply to those portions of any property which contain natural vegetation which has been in existence for more than five years. The owner shall supply written proof or other evidence satisfactory to the Director of Development Services that the property has previously been used for agricultural purposes within the past five years prior to commencement of clearing;

M. Paving over an exposed ground surface less than 5,000 square feet in size and the subgrade preparation necessary for that work, provided no grading beyond the limits of other exemptions is performed;

N. Minor maintenance and alterations to natural drainage areas that do not:

1. Obstruct drainage from adjacent properties;

2. Divert the outflow of drainage from the natural discharge point of the property;

3. Unduly concentrate or accelerate the flow of drainage as it leaves the property;

4. Create ponding, siltation or erosion in or of the streambed; nor

5. Disturb wetlands.

Note: The above-listed exemptions do not apply to clearing, grubbing, brushing or grading when:

a. Work will occur in, or physically impact, designated or dedicated open space or environmentally sensitive areas designated in the general plan or shown on any approved specific plan;

b. Work will occur in any waterway or wetland, stream, river, channel, pond, lake, marsh, bog, lagoon, vernal pool, or riparian habitat, except as provided in subsection N of this section;

c. Work will occur in any floodway or floodplain as shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodplain Maps, or on City revised maps, except as provided in subsection N of this section. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.42.020 Prohibited permits.
No person shall grade upon nor shall any permit be issued for grading upon a significant portion of natural or existing grade which exceeds a slope of 45 percent unless such grading is required to mitigate a geologic hazard to adjacent grade, or is required for the construction of necessary water or sewer mains, storm drains, or fire roads, all as approved and determined necessary by the City Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.42.030 Responsibility.
Except as exempted above, no person shall do any clearing, brushing, grubbing or grading, nor shall an owner allow any of these activities on his property unless the person or owner has a valid permit of the type described in PMC 16.42.040, issued by the City Engineer authorizing such activities. An owner is presumed to have allowed grading which has been done on property occupied by him or is under his dominion and control. This is a presumption affecting the burden of producing evidence. A separate permit shall be required for each site. A grading permit may authorize both excavations and fills. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.42.040 Types of grading permits.
A. A permit for rough or precise grading may be issued for grading work, as defined in this chapter, upon completion of a proper application, submittal of other required data, and review and approval of grading plans by the City Engineer.

B. Stockpile Permit. A stockpile permit may be issued for the temporary stockpiling of materials, provided the materials shall be removed from the stockpile site, or compacted and worked thereon under a subsequently issued rough or precise grading permit within two weeks, or a timeframe specified by the City Engineer, of the issuance of the stockpile permit; and, provided further, that the stockpile material is graded and placed such that unreasonable erosion will not occur. Erosion control plans are required for every submittal of a stockpile permit application. Erosion control devices designed by the engineer of work shall be installed promptly at the commencement of stockpiling. A stockpile permit and a stockpile plan prepared by a civil engineer along with an engineer’s cost estimate, minimum administrative and inspection fees, and a cash deposit shall be required by the City Engineer to ensure proper erosion control and cleanup and removal of stockpile.

In no case shall a stockpile permit application be accepted by the City prior to City Council or written staff approval of a project on the site, including environmental review by the Development Services Department, and submittal of a complete grading application including plans, soils report, engineer’s cost estimate, fees and application.

C. Administrative Clearing Permit. No person shall commence any clearing and grubbing operation without first receiving a grading, stockpiling or an administrative clearing permit from the City Engineer. An administrative clearing permit shall not be issued until all of the following have occurred to the satisfaction of the City Engineer after review by the Director of Development Services:

1. For development-related clearing, where the proposed clearing and grubbing is in anticipation of, or pursuant to, development of the affected property, the following shall be accomplished:

a. All applicable discretionary approvals for development of the land shall have been issued;

b. All required environmental mitigation measures shall have been implemented;

c. All applicable fees and deposits shall have been paid;

d. A satisfactory clearing plan shall have been approved; and

e. An erosion control plan shall have been approved and cash security posted to assure implementation.

Any clearing done pursuant to this section shall conform to the location, extent and purpose authorized explicitly by the applicable approvals for development of land.

2. For nondevelopment clearing, in all other instances where development is not anticipated, the following shall be accomplished:

a. A satisfactory clearing plan showing the location of existing natural vegetation, locations of all existing buildings or structures on the property and the specific area to be cleared shall have been approved;

b. Photographs of the site and surrounding properties which clearly indicate existing conditions and vegetation shall have been submitted;

c. A biological report or other documentation which indicates the quantity and quality of existing vegetation as potentially suitable habitat for sensitive species, and any potential impacts on the suitability of remaining habitat on site and adjacent properties shall be submitted and approved by the Director of Development Services (on disturbed sites, this report may be required to recommend revegetation with native plants);

d. All required environmental mitigation measures shall have been implemented;

e. An erosion control plan shall have been approved and cash security posted to assure implementation; and

f. An archaeological resources report which indicates the location of sensitive resources, as determined by a qualified archaeologist or paleontologist, shall have been submitted and approved. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

Chapter 16.43
PERMITS – ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Sections:

16.43.010    Environmental review.

16.43.020    Determination that project has a significant effect upon environment – Permit issuance.

16.43.030    Permit issuance – Borrow sites.

16.43.040    Permit issuance – Terms and conditions.

16.43.050    Application – Permit expiration and extension.

16.43.060    Denial of permit.

16.43.070    Temporary suspension of permit.

16.43.080    Revocation of permit.

16.43.010 Environmental review.
A. Prior to the issuance of any permit under this division, the City Engineer shall refer the permit application to the Development Services Department for review and determination whether the proposed grading and/or clearing could have a significant effect upon the environment or verification that the City Council, a commission or City officer having final authority for project approval has adopted an environmental impact report or other environmental clearance which considered the proposed grading and/or clearing or has determined that the project, which included the proposed grading and/or clearing, would not have a significant effect upon the environment.

Prior to the issuance of any permit under this division for any proposed clearing or development that will impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and/or associated natural habitats both inside and outside the established resource conservation area of the adopted Poway subarea HCP, the property owner shall either demonstrate that the proposed clearing has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or request reliance upon the City’s incidental take/management authorization permit and comply with the provisions of the Poway subarea HCP and companion IA documents prior to the issuance of such permits.

B. Anything contained in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, if, in the opinion of the City Engineer and/or the Development Services Director, there are unusual conditions with respect to the property for which an application is filed which renders an environmental review desirable or necessary, the City Engineer shall refer the application to the Development Services Department for the aforementioned determination. Such unusual conditions include but are not limited to land located in:

1. Watercourses;

2. Wetlands;

3. Scenic corridor zones or other areas officially designated by Federal, State or local governments as scenic areas;

4. Areas of severe geologic hazard;

5. Resource conservation areas;

6. Natural habitats of significant species of wildlife or biological resources; or

7. Archeological artifacts or sites.

C. A fee shall be paid as set by resolution for environmental determination. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 449 § 3, 1995; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.43.020 Determination that project has a significant effect upon environment – Permit issuance.
If the Development Services Department determines that the proposed grading and/or clearing could have a significant effect upon the environment, the grading and/or clearing permit shall not be issued unless and until the adoption of an Environmental Impact Report prepared pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act and City rules and procedures adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.43.030 Permit issuance – Borrow sites.
No grading and/or clearing permit shall be issued by the City Engineer when, in the opinion of the Director of Development Services, a significant amount of borrow or waste material is to be removed from a grading site for commercial purposes unless a conditional use permit has been issued for the operation of a borrow pit on the grading site, a legally nonconforming borrow pit is being operated on the grading site, or the grading and/or clearing comes within one of the exceptions listed in the zoning ordinance of the City. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.43.040 Permit issuance – Terms and conditions.
Upon receipt of the required information, fees, plans, reports and other requirements of this division, completion of environmental review and approval by the Director of Development Services, the City Engineer may issue the permit pursuant to this division to the applicant along with any terms and conditions deemed necessary to ensure conformance with the purposes of the grading ordinance. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.43.050 Application – Permit expiration and extension.
A. Permit applications for which a valid permit has not been issued shall expire automatically 180 days after receipt of the application by the City, after which time the application and plans shall be deemed as expired and invalid. The City Engineer may extend the expiration of the application up to one year after the receipt of the application.

B. Every duly issued permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, and all work covered in the permit shall be completed within that period, except as specified in this section.

C. The City Engineer may specify longer periods of time, up to two years, with discretionary authority to allow additional extensions if the scope of the work dictates such time period or any action by the City or litigation causes a delay in proceeding.

D. If the work authorized by the permit is not completed within the allowed permit period, the City Engineer, upon written request from the permittee submitted prior to the expiration of the allowed period, may extend the permit for a period or periods reasonably necessary to complete the work, provided the applicant diligently pursues the permitted work.

E. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and shall become null and void, unless an extension is approved by the City Engineer, if the work authorized by the permit is not commenced and diligently pursued within 90 days from the date of permit issuance, or if, after work is commenced, the work is terminated, stopped, suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days. The applicant must request the extension prior to the expiration of the permit.

F. Upon written request from the permittee, submitted prior to the expiration of the 90-day period in which work was to commence, the City Engineer may extend the period in which the permittee must start work, provided the permittee demonstrates to his satisfaction that circumstances beyond the permittee’s control prevented commencement of the approved work.

G. As a condition of the extension of any time period, the City Engineer may require the payment of additional permit, plan checking, inspection, and/or soils review fees required to cover the administration of the extensions and/or increased costs to the City and to bring the project into conformance with any fee schedule, as established by City Council resolution from time to time, in effect at the time of extension.

H. The City Engineer may require the amendment or change of approved plans for any of the following reasons:

1. Extension or renewal of the permit;

2. Changes have been made in the actual work which is not reflected on the approved plans;

3. Change of the scope or quantity of work;

4. Construction, traffic, drainage, soil, geologic, public safety, or environmental problems not considered, known or evident at the time of permit issuance or plan approval.

I. For the purpose of this section, “diligently pursued” work shall be work of such magnitude, frequency or complexity as to require the regular services of the permittee’s soils engineer and/or civil engineer, or other professionals, and which is inspected at regular intervals by the City. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 683 § 62, 2008; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.43.060 Denial of permit.
A. General Conditions. The City Engineer shall not issue a permit in any case where he finds, or where it may reasonably be inferred, that the work as proposed by the applicant will:

1. Damage any private or public property;

2. Expose any property to landslide or geologic hazard;

3. Adversely interfere with existing drainage courses or patterns;

4. Cause erosion which could result in the depositing of mud, silt, or debris on any public or private street or way or any municipal separate storm sewer system or receiving water; or

5. Create any hazard to person or property. If it can be shown to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the hazard can be mitigated by the construction of retaining structures, buttress fills, drainage structures or facilities or by other means, the City Engineer may issue the permit on the condition that such construction be performed.

B. Geological Hazard. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to person or property, the permit shall be denied.

C. Flood Hazard. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the proposed grading would adversely affect the flow of runoff in any identified floodplain or floodway, or would alter runoff to the detriment of upstream, downstream, or adjacent properties, or would be in conflict with any general plan objectives of preserving riparian corridors and buffer areas, the permit shall be denied.

D. Subdivision or Use Permit. Under either of the following circumstances, a grading permit shall not be issued unless and until a tentative map or subdivision or a valid use permit has been approved or conditionally approved by the City:

1. If the purpose of the proposed grading or clearing as proposed in the application is to prepare the land for subdivision of for some use which a use permit is required; or

2. Notwithstanding the purpose of the proposed grading or clearing as stated in the application, if the City Engineer and the Director of Planning Services find that the purpose of the proposed grading is to prepare the land for subdivision or for some use for which a use permit is required.

E. Other Reasons.

1. The City Engineer shall deny the issuance of a permit if so directed by the City Council; if prohibited therefrom by a duly elected moratorium, court order, injunction, or other legal order; or if the applicant or owner has failed to comply with the provisions of this code, or if the work proposed is not consistent with the City general plan, or any element thereof, or any specific plan, use permit, land use ordinance or regulation, zoning ordinance regulation or permit, or subdivision map.

2. The City Engineer shall deny applications which are not in the interest of the public health, safety or general welfare, or do not constitute a reasonable use of land as indicated by the existing zoning or an approved land use plan. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.43.070 Temporary suspension of permit.
The City Engineer shall have the authority to temporarily suspend all work on a project and suspend the permit if it is determined that field conditions present an immediate hazard or danger to life, property, or the environment; or if the permittee fails to or refuses to correct a deficiency or hazard, including inadequate erosion control or cleanup; or if the work being done is contrary to the approved plans or conditions thereof; or if there is lack of supervision of the grading or clearing operation, lack of engineering control, soils engineering control is not being adequately provided, or for any other condition which in the opinion of the City Engineer presents a threat to the public safety or welfare immediately or in the future, and which may cause unstable earth conditions. This temporary suspension shall continue in effect until the hazard or condition is removed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.43.080 Revocation of permit.
A. The City Engineer shall have the power to revoke any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter if the City Engineer determines that the permit was obtained by fraud; or that one or more of the conditions upon which said permit was granted have been violated; or that the permittee failed or refused to correct a deficiency or a hazard upon the receipt of written notice and within the time specified in such notice; or that the permittee fails or refuses to perform any of the work required; or fails or refuses to conform with any of the conditions or standards established for any subdivision, use permit or other approval granted by the City; or fails to eliminate any hazard or condition as referred to in the above section.

B. The permittee may file a written appeal with the appropriate fee, which shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time, with the City Clerk within 30 days of the decision of the City Engineer.

C. All work shall be suspended between the date the permittee is notified of revocation and the date upon which the City Council hears any appeal pursuant to this code and renders its decision. Any interested person may appear at an appeal hearing and present evidence. At the conclusion of a hearing on any appeal of a permit revocation, the Council may deny the appeal, modify existing conditions of or add new conditions to the permit, or reinstate the permit. The decision of the City Council shall be final.

D. If a permit is revoked, no further work shall be done upon that site except the correction of hazards, and the completion of any work required by the permittee’s agreement. Every agreement and every security required by this division shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding any such revocation. (Ord. 683 § 63, 2008; Ord. 345, 1991)

Chapter 16.44
PERMITS – LIMITATIONS, CONDITIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Sections:

16.44.010    Permit authorization.

16.44.020    Other permits may be required.

16.44.030    Right of entry – Indemnification.

16.44.040    Liability.

16.44.050    Responsibility of permittee – Protection of adjacent property.

16.44.060    Safety precautions.

16.44.070    Public facilities within public rights-of-way.

16.44.080    Responsibility of permittee – Protection of utilities.

16.44.090    Responsibility of permittee – Contents of permit.

16.44.100    Maintenance of protective devices.

16.44.110    Design responsibility.

16.44.120    Transfer of responsibility.

16.44.130    Contractor qualifications.

16.44.140    Time of grading and clearing operations.

16.44.010 Permit authorization.
The issuance of a permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the permit, or on the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer, and the work shall be done in accordance with any conditions imposed by the City Engineer and in accordance with the requirements of this division. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.020 Other permits may be required.
Permits issued pursuant to this division shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for securing required permits for work to be done which is regulated by any other provision of this code or by any other person, body or agency. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.030 Right of entry – Indemnification.
As a condition of application for any permit, the owner of the site to be graded or cleared and the contractor, if any, shall thereby grant to the City or the City’s Contractor a right of entry on the site for the purposes of inspection and for purposes of correction of grading not performed in compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. The owner and the contractor shall agree to indemnify the City for any claims or damages which may result from the City’s or City’s Contractor’s entry onto the property including any corrective action taken pursuant to such right of entry. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.040 Liability.
A. Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this division, nor the compliance with the provisions of this division or with any conditions imposed by any City official under this division, shall relieve any person from any responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the City for damage to persons or property.

B. The City Engineer or any employee charged with the enforcement of this division, acting in good faith and without malice for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required, or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the City Engineer or employee, because of such act or omission performed by them in the enforcement of any provisions of this division, shall be defended by the legal department of the City until final termination of the proceedings. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.050 Responsibility of permittee – Protection of adjacent property.
A. Notwithstanding the minimum standards set forth in this division, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property, and no person shall excavate on land so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or any other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage which might result.

B. For all public watercourses, the applicant shall grant or cause to be granted, at the City Engineer’s discretion, to the City, a drainage easement in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer prior to the issuance of the grading permit.

C. For all private watercourses, including brow ditches, where the continuous functioning of the drainage way is essential to the protection and use of multiple properties, a covenant, a maintenance agreement and/or deed restriction shall be recorded by the applicant, placing the responsibility for the maintenance of the drainage way(s) on the owners of record of each respective lot affected. Permanent off-site drainage or flowage easements, as required by the City Engineer, shall be acquired by the applicant. Such easements shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer and recorded prior to issuance of the grading permit.

D. No manmade dams, ponds, diversions, flow decelerators, or excessive vegetation shall be placed, allowed to be placed or allowed to grow within the property without suitable provisions, as approved by the City Engineer, for maintenance. Erosion or siltation as a result of these features shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner.

E. The permittee has the right to the proper discharge of natural drainage, within the provisions of this division, into natural drainage courses. In order to reduce pollutants and peak runoff from new development and redevelopment, the runoff shall be limited to the peak runoff of predevelopment conditions to the maximum extent practicable (as defined in Chapter 13.09 PMC) to the discretion of the City Engineer and as required by the City’s hydromodification management standards. Post-development runoff from the site shall not contain pollutant loads which cause or contribute to an exceedance of receiving water quality standards or which have not been reduced to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 775 § 5, 2015)

16.44.060 Safety precautions.
A. If, at any stage of work, the City Engineer determines that authorized grading is likely to endanger any public or private property, result in the deposition of debris on any public way, or interfere with any existing drainage course, the City Engineer may specify and require reasonable safety precautions to avoid the danger. The permittee may be responsible for removing excess soil and debris deposited upon adjacent and downstream public or private property resulting from his grading operations. Soil and debris shall be removed and damage to adjacent and downstream property repaired as directed by the City Engineer. Erosion and siltation control may require temporary or permanent siltation basins, energy dissipaters or other measures as field conditions warrant, whether or not such measures are a part of approved plans. Cost associated with any work outlined in this section shall be incurred by the permittee.

No off-site work will be required when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the permittee has properly implemented and maintained erosion control measures in accordance with the City’s BMP Manual and the deposition of soil and debris or erosion on adjacent properties is the direct or indirect result of actions of the downstream property owner.

B. During grading operations, the contractor and property owner shall take all necessary measures to eliminate any hazard, resulting from the work, to the public in its normal use of public property or right-of-way. Any fences or barricades installed shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall be properly constructed and maintained. They shall separate the public from the hazard as long as the hazard exists.

C. Maximum Disturbed Area. Cleared or graded areas left exposed at any given time are limited to the amount of acreage that the project proponent can adequately protect prior to a predicted storm event or 17 acres, whichever is smaller, unless the disturbance of a larger area is approved in writing by the City Engineer. In the event that a project proponent requests approval to disturb an area greater than 17 acres, the project proponent shall first submit to the City Engineer written documentation describing how it will ensure that it reduces discharges of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable (as defined in Chapter 13.09 PMC) and prevents discharges of pollutants that would cause or contribute to violations of water quality standards despite the larger disturbed area. (Ord. 775 § 6, 2015)

16.44.070 Public facilities within public rights-of-way.
The following provisions of this section shall apply unless provision is made by a secured agreement pursuant to land development work done in conjunction with the subdivision of land as set forth in Division 1 of this title:

A. A property owner shall pay the City for all costs of placing, repairing, replacing or maintaining a City-owned facility within a public right-of-way when the City’s facility has been damaged or has failed as a result of the construction or existence of the owner’s land development work during the progress of such work;

B. The costs of placing, replacing or maintaining the City-owned facility shall include the cost of obtaining an alternate easement if necessary;

C. The City Engineer shall notify the property owner of such damage or failure as set forth in the above provisions. The City may withhold permits or certification of the completion of a building or other permitted work where a notice has been issued. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.080 Responsibility of permittee – Protection of utilities.
A. During grading operations, the permittee shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to public utilities or services and for confining grading activities to the area permitted on the approved plans. This responsibility applies within the limits of grading or clearing and along any routes of travel of equipment.

B. Before starting any excavation work, the permittee shall be responsible to contact Underground Service Alert, Inc., and coordinate the proposed excavation with all interested utility companies, districts and agencies. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.090 Responsibility of permittee – Contents of permit.
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to be knowledgeable of the conditions and/or restrictions placed on the permit and as outlined in applicable sections of this code, and as contained on the approved plans and in the approved geotechnical report(s). The permittee shall also be responsible to maintain, in an obvious and accessible location on the site, a copy of the permit and approved plans bearing the approval of the City Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.100 Maintenance of protective devices.
The owner of the property on which a fill or excavation has been made pursuant to a permit granted under the provisions of this division, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures and other protective devices and planting shown in the approved plans and specifications or in the record drawings or required by the permit. Facilities dedicated for use by the public and accepted for such use by a public agency are excepted. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.110 Design responsibility.
A. 1. It shall be the responsibility of the Engineer of Work who prepared the grading plans to incorporate the applicable recommendations from the Soils Engineer and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. The Engineer of Work shall be responsible for establishing line and grade for the grading and drainage improvements and to establish limits of clearing and shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor and the City Engineer. The Engineer of Work shall inspect the project at various stages of work to ensure that the work is being carried out in strict conformance with the approved plans. The Engineer of Work shall also be responsible for the preparation of plan revisions and, upon the completion of rough grading, the submittal of a certification of line and grade attesting to the completion of work in precise conformance with the approved plans. For exceptions exceeding the tolerances of precise conformance, three sets of red-lined changes must be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer prior to submittal for rough grade approval. In the case of administrative clearing permits, the Engineer of Work will certify to the City Engineer that the area cleared is in precise conformance with the approved plans.

2. Upon completion of the work, the Engineer of Work shall submit record drawings incorporating all changes and/or additions made during construction. These record drawings shall be based on detailed field observations by the Engineer of Work both during and after completion of the grading. They shall include horizontal and vertical locations of all subdrains, fill key locations, buttresses, areas and depths of removal of unsuitable material, and daylight lines. Subsequent subsurface investigations may be required if necessary to verify locations of subsurface features.

B. 1. Soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required as specified in this code. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data, soils engineering and engineering geology recommendations and reports shall be submitted to the client for distribution as required, and a copy of all said documents shall be provided to the City Engineer.

2. The soils engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, the observation of all fills placed, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, design of buttress fills where required, and incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist. The soils engineer shall provide a final soils report including compaction test results to the City Engineer prior to rough grade approval.

3. The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but not be limited to, professional inspection and approval of the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He shall report his findings to the soils engineer for engineering analysis.

C. The City Engineer or his representative shall inspect the project at various stages of work requiring approval and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate inspection and testing is being exercised by the professional consultants. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.120 Transfer of responsibility.
A. If the civil engineer, engineer of work, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist, or the grading contractor of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until:

1. The owner or agent submits a letter of notification verifying the change of the responsible professional; and

2. The new responsible professional submits in writing that he has reviewed all prior reports and/or plans (specified by date and title) and work performed by the responsible professional party, and that he concurs with the findings, conclusions and recommendations, and is satisfied with the work performed. He must state that he assumes all responsibility within his purview as of a specified date. All exceptions must be justified to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

B. Where clearly indicated that the firm, not the individual engineer and/or geologist, is the contracting party, the designated engineer or geologist may be reassigned and another engineer and/or geologist within the firm may assume responsibility. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.130 Contractor qualifications.
A. Every person doing land development shall meet such qualifications as may be determined by the City Engineer to be necessary to protect the public interest. The City Engineer may require an application for qualification which shall contain all information necessary to determine the person’s qualifications to do the land development.

B. All land development work shall be performed by a contractor licensed by the State to perform the types of work required by the permit. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.44.140 Time of grading and clearing operations.
Grading, clearing, and equipment operations being conducted in association with a valid grading permit shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays, and at no time on weekends or holidays, without written approval of the City Engineer. The City Engineer may, however, permit grading, clearing, or equipment operations during specific hours before 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on weekdays, or on weekends or holidays if he or she determines that such operations are not detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of such a structure. Permitted hours of operations may be shortened by the City Engineer’s finding of a previously unforeseen effect on the health, safety or welfare of the surrounding community.

For purposes of this section, “holiday” shall mean January 1st, known as “New Year’s Day”; the third Monday in January, known as “Martin Luther King, Jr. Day”; the third Monday in February, known as “Washington’s Birthday”; March 31st, known as “Cesar Chavez Day”; the last Monday in May, known as “Memorial Day”; the fourth day of July, known as “Independence Day”; the first Monday in September, known as “Labor Day”; the eleventh day in November, known as “Veterans Day”; the last Thursday in November, known as “Thanksgiving Day”; the day after “Thanksgiving Day”; and December 25th, known as “Christmas Day.” In the event “New Year’s Day,” “Cesar Chavez Day,” “Independence Day” or “Christmas Day” falls on Sunday, the following day will be deemed a holiday, and if they fall on Saturday, the Friday preceding will be deemed a holiday. (Ord. 646 § 5, 2006; Ord. 345, 1991)

Chapter 16.46
FEES AND SECURITIES
Sections:

16.46.010    Plan checking fees.

16.46.020    Review of geotechnical reports fee.

16.46.030    Permit fees.

16.46.040    Inspection fees.

16.46.050    Fees – Work commenced before permit issued.

16.46.060    Fees – Exemption.

16.46.070    Refunds.

16.46.080    Security required.

16.46.010 Plan checking fees.
Before accepting an application and a set of plans and specifications for review, the City Engineer shall collect a plan checking fee or cash deposit. Separate permits and fees may apply to retaining walls or major drainage structures, as indicated elsewhere in the City Code. The plan checking fees for plans shall be as set forth by Council resolution. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.46.020 Review of geotechnical reports fee.
Before accepting a geotechnical report for review, the City Engineer shall collect a report review fee. A separate fee will be charged for each individual report submitted for review. The amount of the report review fee shall be as set forth by Council resolution. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.46.030 Permit fees.
A fee for each permit application shall be paid to the City Engineer as set forth by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.46.040 Inspection fees.
Prior to the issuance of a permit, there shall be paid to the City Engineer a fee, or cash deposit, to cover the City’s expenses, costs, and overhead for field inspection, office engineering and planning, review of proposed construction changes and record drawings, and administration of the work performed. The amount of the inspection fee or cash deposit shall be as set forth by Council resolution. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.46.050 Fees – Work commenced before permit issued.
In addition to any penalty prescribed for violation of this code or for violation of the provisions of this division, and in addition to the fees required in this division, a separate fee, as set forth by Council resolution, shall be assessed for any work for which a permit is required by this division, commenced prior to obtaining such permit. Payment of such fee shall not relieve any person from any liability under the provisions of this code or from fully complying with the requirements of this division. The fee prescribed by this section shall not be construed as a penalty but is added to defray the expense of enforcement of the provisions of this division. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.46.060 Fees – Exemption.
Permits for grading for soil and water conservation projects, when approved and inspected by a County, State or Federal agency, may be issued without payment of any or all of the fees set out in this chapter. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.46.070 Refunds.
No fee collected pursuant to this division shall be refunded, in whole or in part, except as provided as follows:

A. Plan Checking Fees. Plan checking fees may be refunded, less any City expenses, including overhead incurred, upon the applicant’s request, provided the grading application has expired, or is withdrawn by the applicant. A handling charge shall be deducted from any such refund. No refund shall be due for plan checking fees after permit issuance.

B. Geotechnical Report Review Fees. Geotechnical report review fees may be refunded, less any City expenses, including overhead incurred, upon the applicant’s request, provided the grading application or permit has expired or is withdrawn by the applicant, or if the project does not warrant geotechnical reports to be prepared. A handling charge shall be deducted from any such refund.

C. Permit Fees. After submittal and commencement of processing by the City, no permit fees paid shall be refundable.

D. Inspection Fees. Inspection fees may be refunded, less any City expenses, including overhead incurred, at any time prior to the start of the work authorized by the permit, upon the applicant’s request, provided the grading application has expired or has been withdrawn. A handling charge shall be deducted from any such refund.

E. No refund shall be made if the applicant or permittee has any outstanding debts owed to the City, or if corrective work remains to be done on the grading work itself.

F. No refund shall be made pursuant to this section if a request for refund is submitted to the City more than five years from the date of payment of the fee as to which a refund is claimed; nor shall any refund be paid if the total refundable amount, after deduction of City costs as provided in this section, is less than $100.00. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.46.080 Security required.
A. No permit shall be issued pursuant to this division unless the applicant shall first post a security with the City comprised of a cash deposit or a combination of a cash deposit and a corporate surety bond of a surety authorized to do business in the State, instrument of credit or other security pledge in the performance of the permitted work, agreeing such funds are trust funds for the purposes of satisfying the cost of correcting any deficiency or any hazard or injury created by the work or its lack of maintenance. An irrevocable standby letter of credit issued by a financial institution subject to regulation by the State or Federal government may be posted in lieu of the surety bond, instrument of credit or other security.

B. The total security shall be in the form approved by the City Attorney. The engineer’s cost estimate shall be calculated using the City’s adopted unit costs. The total amount of the security shall be equal to 30 percent of the estimated cost of the grading work authorized by the permit, plus an additional sum equal to 100 percent of the estimated cost of the construction of retaining walls and drainage structures or facilities, including standard terrace drains, slope planting, erosion control facilities, and similar facilities authorized by the permit. The estimated cost of the work shall be determined by the City Engineer after reviewing the civil engineer’s estimates. If the City Engineer determines that the size, complexity and scope of the work does not justify the full amount of the security, he may waive all or part of the amount to the extent that there is no hazard or danger.

C. The cash deposit shall be equal to 20 percent of the total security required with a maximum of $40,000. In no instance shall the cash deposit be less than $2,000. This cash deposit shall be used by the City at its sole discretion to satisfy the cost of correcting any deficiency, hazard, or injury created by the work in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit and in violation of the provisions of this code or any other applicable law or ordinance; or for the maintenance, cleanup or repair of any public or private property, street or easement, or for the maintenance, upkeep or installation of debris basins, erosion control devices, etc. Use of the cash deposit or a portion thereof shall in no way limit or release the obligation of the permittee or surety to satisfy the cost of correcting any deficiency, hazard or injury created by the work, or to maintain same in a safe condition. If the amount of the cash deposit is insufficient to satisfy the said cost in full, the surety shall be liable to satisfy the City in causing any and all such work to be done. In the case of a cash deposit, any unused portion thereof shall be refunded to the permittee.

D. The permittee may elect to substitute cash instead of bonds for the remaining security. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

Chapter 16.48
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

16.48.010    Grading permit application.

16.48.020    Grading plan requirements.

16.48.030    Soils and/or engineering geology investigation report required.

16.48.040    Revegetation.

16.48.050    Haul route.

16.48.060    Other data.

16.48.010 Grading permit application.
A. Grading permit applications shall be provided by the applicant in a form approved by the City Engineer.

B. A separate application, with plans, specifications and other supplemental data, shall be required for each grading permit. The application shall be signed by the owner or designated agent of the property to be graded.

C. A complete grading permit application shall be submitted for City review and approval along with the following items, completed and signed by the applicant or his representatives, unless otherwise waived or specified by the City Engineer or this code:

1. Transmittal letter;

2. Completed application form;

3. Grading plan including erosion control plans (six sets of prints);

4. Preliminary soils/engineering geologic investigation reports (three sets);

5. Hydrology and hydraulic report (three sets);

6. City conditions of approval (three sets);

7. Preliminary title report (three sets);

8. Initial grading plan check fees, initial and final soils review fees, and administrative fees as established by City Council resolution from time to time;

9. Letters of permission from the owners of any adjacent properties that are proposed to be graded on;

10. Haul route for import or export of excess material, including source of borrow material or disposal site; and

11. Water quality technical report for projects subject to SUSMP requirements. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 683 § 64, 2008; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.48.020 Grading plan requirements.
A. A grading plan shall consist of a general set of plans on reproducible mylar sheets measuring 24 inches by 36 inches, drawn to a maximum of one-inch-equals-40-feet scale, showing the original and designed finish contours at a maximum interval of two feet, spot elevations of building pads and public improvements, slope ratios, proposed and existing drainage facilities and patterns, protective fencing, retaining walls, and any structures or buildings on adjacent properties within 15 feet of the common property lines, and the existing elevations of adjoining/adjacent properties and parcels.

B. All grading plans shall be signed by the engineer of work and the soils engineer.

C. All grading plans, regardless of the date of submittal, shall include an erosion control plan designed to limit erosion of all disturbed portions of the property and to eliminate the transport of soil onto adjacent properties or into streets, storm drains, or drainage ways to the maximum extent practicable.

D. A statement of quantities shall be on the plan, giving the estimated cubic yards of excavation, embankment, import, export, and the shrinkage or swell factor.

E. All grading plans shall include a vicinity map, clearly delineated property lines, all public and private easements, all public facilities and utilities, all drainage ways, prominent existing or natural terrain features, and setbacks from tops and toes of slopes to property lines or other features.

F. Precise grading plans shall show the footprint for all proposed structures, setback distances therefrom, detailed finish grading, finish floor elevations, yard swales and drains, and all concrete sidewalks, driveways, or flatwork which will be used for drainage or potentially obstruct drainage.

G. The title sheet of all grading plans shall show the names, addresses, and phone numbers of the site owner, the responsible civil engineer, project soils engineer and geologist, the person available on 24-hour call to provide erosion control installation, and the subdivider or developer of the property if different than the owner.

H. The grading plan shall include all standard City grading notes and show such other information as required by the City Engineer including any special conditions of approval. (Ord. 553, 2002; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.48.030 Soils and/or engineering geology investigation report required.
A. The City Engineer shall require a soils investigation and/or an engineering geology report to correlate surface and subsurface conditions with the proposed grading plan. The results of the investigation shall be presented in a report in conformance with the requirements of this code.

B. The City Engineer may require such supplemental reports and data as he deems necessary upon his review of the site and the reports and other data submitted. Such required data may include tests for soil fertility and agricultural suitability to be performed at the conclusion of rough grading by a recognized agronomic soil testing laboratory, with written analysis and recommendation, to be utilized during any required revegetation.

C. Three copies of each soils/engineering geologic report required in this section shall be submitted as part of the application for grading permit. Each report shall contain all information applicable to the project and shall be prepared accordance with generally accepted soils engineering practice to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

D. Recommendations contained in the approved reports shall be incorporated into the grading plans and specifications and shall become conditions of the grading permit.

1. Preliminary Soils Report. The preliminary (initial) soils engineering report shall be prepared subsequent to a subsurface investigation of the site and shall include information and data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils and rock on the site, the physical properties of existing soils, slope stability analysis, fill/alluvial settlement analysis, liquefaction potential analysis, conclusions as to adequacy of the site for the proposed grading; recommendations for general and corrective grading procedures including the correction of weak or unstable soil conditions and treatment of any expansive soils that may be present, foundation and pavement design criteria, and shall provide other recommendations, as necessary, commensurate with the project grading and development.

2. Preliminary Engineering Geology Report.

a. Engineering geologic reports shall be required for all grading on hillside sites where geologic conditions are considered to have a substantial effect on existing and/or future site stability or where the height of cut slopes exceeds six feet unless the requirement is waived by the City Engineer. This requirement shall be extended to other sites suspected by the engineering geologist, geophysicist, geologist or City Engineer of being adversely affected by faulting, or by landslides.

b. The preliminary (initial) engineering geology report shall include a comprehensive description of the site topography and geology including a geology map, an opinion as to the adequacy of the proposed development from an engineering geologic standpoint, an opinion as to the extent that known or reasonably inferred instability on adjacent properties may adversely affect the project, a description of the nearest active faults and their locations, a description of the field investigation and findings, conclusions regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and specific recommendations for plan modification, corrective grading and/or special techniques and systems to facilitate a safe and stable development, and shall provide other recommendations as necessary, commensurate with the project grading and development. The preliminary engineering geology report may be combined with the preliminary soils engineering report.

c. Seismicity Report.

i. A seismicity report shall be required as a condition for issuance of a grading permit and/or building permit for all subdivisions (tracts) and all sites for public and semipublic structures (fire stations, nursing homes, etc.) and major structures, as determined by the City Engineer. Additionally, sites containing earthquake-sensitive earth materials and/or sites that are located on or near potentially active or active faults shall also require a seismicity report, as determined by the City Engineer.

ii. The seismicity report shall be prepared by an engineering geologist, geophysicist, or a geologist with expertise in earthquake technology and its application to buildings and other civil engineering works. The scope of the report shall be commensurate with the proposed development and shall reflect the state of the art. The seismic report may be combined with the soils and engineering geology reports. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.48.040 Revegetation.
A. Revegetation shall be required for, but not limited to, all graded slopes, and for all graded areas determined by the City Engineer to be susceptible to erosion, within all residential, commercial and industrial development, subdivisions, lot divisions, condominium projects, planned developments, borrow areas, disposal areas, and other graded areas, unless such requirement is waived or amended by the City Engineer or City Landscape Architect in writing.

B. Revegetation shall consist of, at a minimum, hydroseeding with a native and/or naturalizing seed mix with provisions for temporary watering to provide for adequate ground cover and root growth to resist erosion of the soil.

C. The planting and irrigation shown on the plan shall conform to the City’s adopted Guide to Landscape Requirements (latest edition) and accepted industry standards with special consideration for soil conditions encountered within the project area. Extraordinary effort shall be made to develop water conservation programs throughout the planting, irrigation, and maintenance plans and specifications. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.48.050 Haul route.
A. If the grading project includes the import or export of earth material in an amount considered substantial by the City Engineer, the permittee shall submit the haul route for review and approval by the Development Services Department. Alternate routes or special requirements in consideration of the possible impact on the adjacent community environment, or the effect on the public right-of-way itself, may be prescribed by the City Engineer as a condition of the grading permit.

B. Deviation from this designated haul route shall constitute a violation of the conditions of the permit issued under this division.

C. The City Engineer may further specify load limits where, in his opinion, the standard load capacity of vehicles used in such hauling would cause excessive damage to streets on the designated route. Any grading or hauling contractor moving earth materials in violation of this division shall be financially responsible for any damage to the public streets done by the hauling vehicles, and shall pay to the City the cost, including reasonable overhead charges as determined by the City Engineer, of repairing such damage.

D. At least 24 hours before hauling is to commence, the applicant shall also be required to notify the City’s Project Engineer. The City Engineer may require traffic-control devices to be provided by the applicant where reasonably necessary to protect public health, safety and general welfare.

E. The permit may specify other conditions, including the posting of a cash bond, which may be determined necessary in order to minimize disruption of normal traffic activities and public inconvenience, and to prevent or minimize damage to public or private streets or improvements. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.48.060 Other data.
A. Unless waived by the City Engineer, the applicant shall submit hydrology and hydraulic calculations and drainage area maps to determine the quantity of runoff generated by or tributary to the site, and its effects on the site or upon upstream or downstream properties. Erosion and sediment transfer studies, and other supporting data may be required.

B. Limits of inundation on the subject property during specified storm frequencies may be required to be delineated on the grading plan, along with the submittal of supporting calculations.

C. The civil engineer responsible for preparation of the plans may also be required to certify that the building pads to be created through any proposed grading are free from inundation from runoff from specified storms and to provide floodplain elevations and widths, sheet flow depths, floodway elevations and widths, and any other data required by the City Engineer, or by any applicable County, State or Federal flood protection insurance program or requirement.

D. The civil engineer or applicant may also be required to prepare and submit suitable studies and data regarding percolation and permeability characteristics of the soils and their suitability for the use of septic tanks, groundwater hydrology studies, data, and tests regarding the quantity and quality of groundwater which can be produced from properties not served by City water systems, and its adequacy for domestic and agricultural use and for fire protection. (Ord. 345, 1991)

Chapter 16.50
DESIGN STANDARDS PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

16.50.010    Cuts.

16.50.020    Fills – Maximum slope and construction.

16.50.030    Fills – Preparation of ground.

16.50.040    Fills – Fill material.

16.50.050    Fills – Compaction.

16.50.060    Fills – Buttress/stabilization fills.

16.50.070    Fills – Utility line backfill.

16.50.080    Berms.

16.50.090    Setbacks – Generally.

16.50.100    Setbacks – Location.

16.50.110    Design standards for setbacks.

16.50.120    Terraces and terrace drains.

16.50.130    Interceptor drains.

16.50.140    Subsurface drainage.

16.50.150    Pad grading.

16.50.160    Retaining walls.

16.50.170    Erosion and sediment control required.

16.50.180    Debris on public street.

16.50.190    Dust control.

16.50.200    Protection of adjoining property.

16.50.210    Drainage easement.

16.50.220    Expansive soils.

16.50.230    Asphalt concrete pavement.

16.50.240    Retention of topsoil.

16.50.010 Cuts.
A. Cut slopes shall generally be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). In special circumstances where no evidence of previous instability exists and, when recommended in the soils engineering and engineering geologic report and approved by the Director of Development Services and the City Engineer, cut slopes may be constructed steeper than two to one (2:1). The soils reports must include calculations that show that the steeper slope has a factor of safety of greater than one and one-half, both in mass stability and surficial stability. Special designs to mitigate minor surficial instability may be considered for approval by the City Engineer.

B. Slopes steeper than two to one (2:1) shall not be approved if two to one (2:1) or flatter slopes are required as a condition of prior approval of any project without appropriate revision of said condition by the approving body. Cut slopes steeper than two to one (2:1) in granite or metamorphic rock may be required to be graded with “stairstep” benches no more than one foot high cut into the surface such that the average slope of the surface conforms to this title.

C. Cut slopes in Friars Formation material shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) unless the cut slope is buttressed or otherwise supported by competent material as recommended by the Soils Engineer or geologist and approved by the City Engineer.

D. Slope stability analysis shall accompany soils engineering reports for all cut slopes over two feet in height regardless of the slope ratio. The soils engineer shall consider both gross and surficial stability of the slope and provide a written statement accompanying the slope stability analysis referencing a minimum safety factor of one and one-half. In addition, the soils engineer shall recommend alternative methods of construction or reinforced safety walls or fencing necessary to ensure surficial stability or mitigate the effects of surficial instability. These analyses shall incorporate all data and information generated by the engineering geologist, geophysicist or geologist.

E. Where public streets are to be underlain by bedrock which can be excavated by grading equipment but cannot be excavated with conventional trenching equipment, the plans shall specify a zone in the street to be undercut and replaced as compacted fill to facilitate placement of utilities without resorting to blasting.

F. Any grading plan which proposes cut slopes having a vertical height of 30 feet or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Council prior to permit issuance. Any adjacent retaining wall or crib wall height shall not be included in slope height calculations.

G. Exceptions to the above may be made for temporary slopes upon written request at the discretion of the City Engineer where the public health, safety or welfare is not threatened. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.020 Fills – Maximum slope and construction.
A. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), exclusive of benches or terraces.

B. All fill slopes shall be overfilled to a distance from finished slope face that will allow compaction equipment to operate freely within the zone of the finished slope, and then cut back to the finish grade to expose the compacted core. Alternate methods may be employed by the grading contractor subject to approval by the soils engineer and City Engineer. In such instances, the grading contractor shall provide detailed specifications for the method of placement and compaction of the soil within a distance of an equipment-width from the slope face.

C. Slope stability analyses shall accompany soils engineering reports for all fill slopes over two feet in height regardless of the slope ratio. The soils engineer shall consider both the gross and surficial stability of the slope and provide a written statement accompanying the slope stability analysis referencing a minimum safety factor of one and one-half. In addition, the soils engineer shall recommend alternative methods of construction, compaction, or reinforced safety fencing necessary to provide surficial stability.

D. At least 20 percent of the field density tests taken within 100 feet of slope during grading shall be located within three feet of the final slope location, and at least one density test shall be taken in the outer one-foot of finished slope face for every 5,000 square feet of slope area.

E. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), where the fill slope toe is within 12 feet horizontally of the top of existing cut slopes or in any Friars Formation materials, unless evidence is submitted by the soils engineer and/or engineering geologist which indicates adequate stability. Any such proposed slope must be approved by the City Engineer.

F. Any grading plan which proposes fill slopes having a vertical height of 30 feet or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Council prior to permit issuance. Any contiguous retaining wall or crib wall height shall not be included in slope-height calculations.

G. Exceptions to the above may be made for temporary slopes upon written request at the discretion of the City Engineer where the public health, safety or welfare is not threatened. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.030 Fills – Preparation of ground.
A. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, and by scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill. Where existing slopes exceed five feet in height and/or are steeper than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1), the ground shall be prepared by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils engineer and approved by the City Engineer. The lowermost bench beneath the toe of a fill slope shall be a minimum 15 feet in width. The ground surface below the toe of fill shall be prepared for sheet flow runoff, or a paved drain shall be provided.

B. Where fill is to be placed over a cut slope, the bench under the toe of the fill shall be at least 15 feet wide and shall meet the approval of the soils engineer and/or engineering geologist as a suitable foundation for fill. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.040 Fills – Fill material.
A. Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Except as outlined below, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches shall buried or placed in fills.

B. The City Engineer may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, continuously inspects placement, and approves the soil stability and competency. The following conditions shall also apply:

1. Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal area(s) shall be delineated on the grading plan.

2. Rock sizes greater than 12 inches in maximum dimension shall be six feet or more below grade, measured vertically, and/or 10 feet measured horizontally from slope faces whichever is greater.

When the design of the development or covenants and restrictions clearly provide irrevocable assurance that no structure or utilities will be placed on a precisely definable area, these burial depths may be reduced with the approval of the City Engineer.

3. Rocks greater than 12 inches shall be placed so as to be completely surrounded by soils; no nesting of rocks will be permitted. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.050 Fills – Compaction.
A. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of 90 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D1557-78 (five layer test). Field density tests shall be performed in accordance with ASTM D1556-78, or equivalent, as approved by the City Engineer. At least 25 percent of the total tests shall be by ASTM D1556-78 to verify the accuracy of the equivalent method. All such tests shall be reasonably uniformly distributed within the fill or fill slope surface so that the representative results are obtained.

B. Locations of field density tests shall be determined by the engineer or approved testing agency, but shall be sufficient in both horizontal and vertical placement to provide representative testing of all fill placed.

C. Supplemental testing shall be done in areas of a critical nature or where special emphasis has been placed by the soils engineer or geologist. This supplemental testing shall be in addition to a traditional network of representative sampling. Where very high potential expansion characteristics exist, as defined in the City Building Code, lesser compaction may be granted by the City Engineer upon justification and recommendation by the soils engineer in relation to foundation design.

D. Sufficient maximum density determinations by test method ASTM 1557-78 shall be performed during the grading operations to verify that the maximum density curves used are representative of the material placed throughout the fill. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.060 Fills – Buttress/stabilization fills.
Recommendations for buttress fills or stabilization fills by the soils engineer shall be accompanied by a report setting forth the soil or geologic factors necessitating the buttress/stabilization fill, stability calculations based on both static and pseudostatic conditions (pseudostatic loads need not normally be analyzed when bedding planes are flatter than 12 degrees from the horizontal), laboratory test data upon which the calculations are based, a copy of the approved grading plan showing the location of the buttress/stabilization fill, a scaled section of the buttress/stabilization, and recommendations with details of subdrain requirements. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.070 Fills – Utility line backfill.
A. Backfills for on-site utility line trenches such as water, sewer, gas, and electrical services shall be compacted and tested in accordance with the above section. Alternate materials and methods may be used for utility line backfills, provided that the material specification and method of placement are recommended by the soils engineer and approved by the City Engineer prior to backfilling.

B. The final utility line backfill report from the project soils engineer shall include a statement of compliance by the soils engineer that the tested backfill is suitable for the intended use. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.080 Berms.
Unless waived by the City Engineer, a compacted earthen berm shall be constructed at the top of all slopes steeper than five to one (5:1). The berm shall conform to the slope and shall be a minimum of six inches high and one foot wide. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.090 Setbacks – Generally.
The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this chapter are minimum and may be increased by the City Engineer or by the recommendation of a civil engineer, soils engineer or engineering geologist if necessary for safety and stability, to prevent damage of adjacent properties from deposition or erosion or to provide access for slope maintenance and drainage. Retaining walls may be used to reduce the required setbacks when approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.100 Setbacks – Location.
The tops and toes of slopes shall be set back from the outer boundaries of the permit area, including slope rights areas and easements, and from structures, in accordance with the latest adopted version of the City Building Code. Lot lines shall be located at the top of slopes, including berms, wherever practicable. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.110 Design standards for setbacks.
A. Setbacks between graded slopes (cut or fill) and structures shall be provided in accordance with Figure A set out in this chapter.



Notes for Figure A:

1. Property line setbacks shall also comply with the minimums in the zoning code.

2. Setbacks apply to manufactured and natural slopes steeper than 5:1. Setbacks from flatter slopes shall meet the approval of the City Engineer.

3. “B” may be reduced if an approved drainage device is installed or the total area of “B” is less than 200 square feet with roof gutters and downspouts provided. “D” may not be reduced.

4. If a retaining wall is placed at the toe of Slope 1, “A” may be reduced to six inches. “B” remains unchanged.

5. “B” is measured from the face of the structure to the top of berm or back of retaining wall. “D” is measured from the lower outside edge of the footing along a horizontal line to the face of the slope or back of retaining wall.

6. “C” may be reduced to zero if the building permit authorizes a combination structure wall-retaining wall with adequate drainage disposal.

7. Slopes over 30 feet high are subject to City Council approval. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.120 Terraces and terrace drains.
A. Terraces at least eight feet in width shall be established at not more than 30-foot vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris. Where only one terrace is required, it shall be at midheight. Terrace widths shall be subtracted from the horizontal component of the slope ratio so that slope faces do not exceed the maximum slope. Accordingly, each component section of the slope between terraces will be calculated independently. Terrace widths and spacing for cut-and-fill slopes greater than 90 feet in height shall be designed by the civil engineer upon recommendation of the soils engineer and approved by the City Engineer. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.

B. Terrace drains shall be constructed on all terraces, using concrete with suitable reinforcement, with a minimum gradient of three percent unless waived by the City Engineer due to special circumstances. Construction of the drains shall be such that concrete is a minimum of one-half inch below (and a maximum of four inches below) the surface elevation of the adjacent grade. The terrace drain shall have a minimum depth at the deepest point of one foot and a minimum width of three feet (measured across the top), and shall be designed to accommodate the runoff intercepted.

C. Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, a single run of terrace drain shall not collect more than 15,000 square feet of drainage area without discharging into a downdrain or other approved collection device. Splash walls, velocity reducers, flow spreaders and other structures shall be provided to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. All downdrains shall be constructed of concrete with suitable reinforcement and shall equal the cross-sectional area of the terrace drain or be a pipe of approved material and of 12 inches minimum diameter.

D. Construction of the terrace drains shall be as described for gutters and downdrains herein, and shall be located on the terraces with one side of the ditch at least two feet from the toe of the slope.

E. In special circumstances, when recommended in the soil engineering report, and approved by the City Engineer, fill slopes constructed at inclinations no steeper than two to one may be constructed without terraces. However, the global slope stability analysis calculations shall demonstrate a factor of safety no less than 1.5. In addition, slope stability calculations for surficial stability shall demonstrate a factor of safety no less than 1.5 for a depth of wetting corresponding to four feet and assuming slope-parallel seepage. Finally, analyses shall be submitted that demonstrate that the removal of terraces will not create adverse slope erosion debris and surface drainage conditions. (Ord. 655 § 3, 2007; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.130 Interceptor drains.
Concrete interceptor drains shall be installed along the top or toes of all cut or fill slopes where the tributary drainage area directs runoff over the slope or toward or along the toe of slope unless waived by the City Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.140 Subsurface drainage.
A. Cut-and-fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability, and as recommended by the soils engineer, geologist and/or the engineering geologist.

B. All canyons and buttress fills shall be provided with subdrains approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.150 Pad grading.
Stormwater runoff from lots or adjacent properties shall not be carried over cut or fill slopes steeper than five to one (5:1). Such runoff shall be provided for as follows:

A. Whenever practicable, each lot shall be graded so that stormwater will drain from the back yard through the side yard and front yard with a grade of one percent minimum directly to an abutting street or approved drainage facility, without flowing across other lots or cut-and-fill slopes. Pads shall be rough graded to a minimum slope of one and one-half percent to ensure that finished grading provides one percent minimum slope on swales. Where the velocity of the flow is found to be erosive, an improved drainage device shall be required.

B. When the above is not possible, as determined by the City Engineer, stormwater shall be collected along the top of banks or at the rear of the graded lots by means of improved gutters, interceptor drains five feet from the structure, or in area drains, and carried to properly sized outfalls or devices which shall not be allowed to drain across the surface of sidewalks.

C. Area drains shall be sized by the engineer’s hydraulic calculations and in every case shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter and constructed of solid-wall pipe (not corrugated). Minimum slope shall be one-half percent and cleanouts shall be provided every 100 feet and at angle points and junctions in the system. An alternative overflow shall be designed and constructed to ensure the safety of the structure and adjacent properties in the event of drain blockage.

D. All foundations shall be designed and installed to produce a finished floor elevation a minimum of six inches above surrounding grade.

E. 1. No landscape area shall allow ponding of water within five feet of any structure. Irrigation and rain runoff shall not be designed to overflow sidewalks or patio areas.

2. Catchbasins and area drains shall be installed in all landscape areas adjacent to structures and bounded by hardscape areas within five feet of the structure. Catchbasins in these areas shall be provided at a minimum of every 10 feet measured longitudinally along the face of the structure.

F. Finished grading shall slope away from the perimeter of the building toward the pad swale (that goes around the building) at a slope of two percent for a minimum of five feet. This requirement shall also apply to all flatwork and landscaped areas adjacent to the structure.

G. The discharge from any downdrain, ditch or pipe shall be controlled so as to prevent the erosion of the adjacent grounds, and installed a minimum of five feet beyond any structure on top or toe of slope. Velocities shall be reduced by means of adequately sized aprons of rock, grouted riprap, or box-type energy dissipaters. Riprap sizing shall be designed based upon flow velocities and riprap shall be placed in a manner so as not to create other erosion problems and in conformance with standard specifications.

H. Surface drainage shall not be carried across a lot or parcel within three feet of a structure without the use of an approved drainage structure.

I. Roof gutters shall not be tied into sanitary sewer systems. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.160 Retaining walls.
A. Retaining walls may be specified by referencing a current City-adopted standard design with clear notation on the plans of specific wall heights, dimensions, reinforcement options, exceptions, and modifications. All exceptions and modifications must be justified by the engineer of work to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

B. Any special retaining wall designs must be performed by a registered structural engineer or a registered civil engineer competent in structural calculations. Complete structural calculations must be provided to the City for review and approval. The City Engineer may require special inspections in accordance with PMC 16.52.110.

C. Cross-sectional views of all retaining walls must be provided on the grading plan.

D. All retaining walls shall include an engineered foundation drain system consisting, at a minimum, of the following:

1. A minimum four-inch-diameter solid-wall pipe with perforations, at a minimum slope of one percent, encased in approved filter rock, wrapped in an approved geotextile fabric; or

2. A prefabricated drainage system equal to Miradrain 6000 with perforated solid-wall pipe; and

3. Where determined necessary by the City Engineer, a waterproofing system and/or vertical drainage system behind the wall.

E. Where a walkway is within two feet of the top of a retaining wall greater than 30 inches in height, a guardrail 42 inches in height shall be constructed to the specifications of the latest adopted version of the City Building Code.

F. Where a driveway, roadway, or parking area is within five feet of the top of a retaining wall, a vehicle guardrail shall be constructed to the specifications of the latest adopted San Diego Regional Standard Drawings or any alternate approved by the City Engineer.

G. Where a driveway is within five feet of the top of a slope steeper than five to one (5:1), a minimum six-inch-high berm or curb shall be constructed at the edge of the driveway.

H. Wall design shall conform to the requirements of the City Zoning Code.

I. All retaining walls shall be set back a minimum of six inches from adjacent property lines.

J. Asphalt or concrete chevrons shall be installed adjacent to all curbs where the lateral grade exceeds 10 percent, except where sidewalks are installed.

K. The grading plan shall clearly indicate which walls are to be constructed as a part of this permit and which walls are to be constructed and inspected under the authority of a building permit after rough grade approval. Any temporary slopes shall be clearly shown on the plan. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.170 Erosion and sediment control required.
A. Plans for an erosion control system shall be prepared and submitted for the review and approval of the City Engineer as a part of any application for a permit under this division. The erosion control system shall comply with the requirements of the latest State general construction stormwater permit (NPDES Permit No. CAS000002) and any amendments thereto; the MS4 Permit; and the City’s stormwater management and discharge control ordinance (Chapter 13.09 PMC) to satisfy the requirements for erosion control and eliminate the discharge of sediment and pollutants. The erosion control plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

1. Name, address and a 24-hour phone number of the owner or responsible party, and the person or contractor responsible for installing and maintaining the erosion control system and performing emergency erosion control work;

2. The name, address and signature of the civil engineer or person who prepared the plan;

3. All desilting basins, debris basins, silt traps, and other desilting, velocity retarding and protection facilities necessary to adequately protect the site and downstream properties from erosion and its effects, preserve natural hydrologic features, and preserve riparian buffers and corridors;

4. The streets, easements, drains, and other improvements;

5. The location and placement of gravel bags, diverters, check dams, slope planting, drains, and other erosion controlling devices and measures required by the BMP Manual; and

6. Access routes to all such erosion control facilities and how access shall be maintained during inclement weather.

B. Erosion control system standards shall be as follows:

1. Erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be implemented as required by the City’s BMP Manual.

2. The permittee or owner shall be responsible for control of erosion on all areas of grading until acceptance of the completed grading by the City Council. This responsibility extends to completed and occupied lots.

3. No earth or organic material shall be deposited or placed where it may be directly carried into a stream or body of standing water.

4. Maintenance and repair of required temporary sediment or siltation basins shall be provided for by the developer for a minimum of three years after completion and acceptance of the work. A special bond to ensure adequate maintenance and repair, in an amount to be determined by the City Engineer, shall be required for that period.

5. Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be made available at all times. One hundred twenty-five percent of all necessary materials shall be available on site and stockpiled at convenient locations to facilitate rapid construction of temporary devices at all times.

6. All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when there is a 50 percent chance of rain within a 48-hour period. If the developer does not provide the required installation or maintenance of erosion control structures within two hours of notification at the 24-hour number on the plans, the City Engineer may order City crews or the City’s contractor to do the work or may issue contracts for such work and charge the cost of this work, along with reasonable overhead charges, to the cash deposits or other instruments implemented for this work without further notification to the owner. No additional work on the project, except erosion control work, may be performed until the full amount drawn from the deposit is restored by the developer.

7. At any time of year, an inactive site shall be fully protected from erosion and discharges of sediment. Flat areas with less than five percent grade shall be fully covered unless sediment control is provided through desilting basins at all project discharge points. A site is considered inactive if construction activities have ceased for a period of 14 or more consecutive days.

C. No grading work shall be allowed between October 1st and the following April 30th on any site when the City Engineer determines that erosion, mudflow, or sediment or silt discharge may adversely affect downstream properties, drainage courses, storm drains, streets, easements, or public or private facilities or improvements unless an approved erosion control system has been implemented on the site. If the City determines that it is necessary for the City to cause erosion control measures to be installed or cleanup to be done, the developer shall pay all of the City’s direct and indirect costs, including extra inspection, supervision and reasonable overhead charges.

D. Advanced treatment for sediment shall be required for construction sites determined by the City Engineer to be an exceptional threat to water quality. In evaluating the threat to water quality, the City Engineer shall consider the following factors:

1. Soil erosion potential or soil type;

2. The site’s slopes;

3. Project size and type;

4. Sensitivity of receiving waters;

5. Proximity to receiving waters;

6. Non-stormwater discharges;

7. Ineffectiveness of other BMPs; and

8. Any other relevant factors. (Ord. 775 § 7, 2015)

16.50.180 Debris on public street.
A. The California Vehicle Code and this code forbid the placing, dumping or depositing of dirt and rocks on the public streets or any portion of the public right-of-way. All vehicles engaged in hauling materials under the permit provisions of this division shall refrain from depositing dirt or debris on the public streets by any means, including, but not limited to, spillage from the bed of a truck or other vehicle and debris collected on the wheels of the haul vehicle.

B. The permittee conducting any earth-moving operation under this division which requires vehicles to haul earth materials on any public street shall be responsible for the complete removal of such materials from the street, including earth, mud, or other material spilled, dumped, or deposited on a public street. If the permittee fails to immediately remove completely such spillage, and it is necessary for the City to cause such removal to be made, the permittee and/or the property owner shall be liable to pay the City the full cost of such removal work plus reasonable overhead. The grading deposit may be used by the City for this purpose without notice to the owner. An additional cash deposit may be required prior to resumption of grading to ensure the cleanup of public streets. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.190 Dust control.
The contractor/permittee conducting any earth-moving operation under this division shall be responsible for controlling dust at all times. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.200 Protection of adjoining property.
Each adjacent owner is entitled to the lateral and adjacent support which his land receives from the adjoining land, subject to the right of the owner of the adjoining land to make proper and usual excavations on the same for purposes of construction or improvement, under the following conditions:

A. Any owner of land, or his lessee, intending to permit or to make an excavation greater than 10 feet in depth within 10 feet of his property lines shall give reasonable notice to the owner or owners of land abutting the property lines affected by such excavation, stating the depth for which such excavation is intended to be made and when the excavation will begin.

B. In making any excavation, reasonable care and skill shall be used and reasonable precautions taken that the soil of adjoining property will not cave in or settle to the detriment of any building or other structure which may be thereon. Excavations shall meet all State and Federal regulations, including, but not limited to, obtaining CAL OSHA permits.

C. No grading shall be approved which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, physically prevents the use of existing legal access to any parcel.

D. No rock blasting shall be permitted until a preblast survey of the surrounding property is conducted to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. During rock blasting, seismic recordings shall be taken for all blasts at locations and levels approved by the City Engineer. All blasting shall conform to the requirements of the City Engineer.

1. The contractor shall prepare a site plan, to scale, showing where the blasting will occur and all the buildings and utilities within 500 feet.

2. A preblast survey of all buildings within 300 feet will automatically be required. Other structures within 500 feet should be surveyed, if they are more than 15 years old and/or sensitive, such as historical buildings. The preblast surveys shall be submitted with the permit application. Alternately, a letter from an authorized survey service may be submitted with a scale drawing showing distances to all structures to be surveyed prior to the blast.

3. A seismic monitor shall be located adjacent to the closest building or most sensitive building. The seismic recordings shall be submitted to the project inspector as soon as they are available.

4. Ground accelerations shall be limited to 1.0 feet per second per second (fpss) in the area of new construction, and 0.5 fpss around older or sensitive buildings.

5. The blasting contractor shall notify in writing all residents within 500 feet of the blast area. At a minimum, the notice is to be in the form of a door-hanger stating the approximate time the blast or blasts will occur. The notices are to be in place at least 48 hours prior to blasting.

6. The applicant shall pay an appropriate administrative fee, as established by City Council resolution, which may be amended from time to time, for processing of each blasting permit. (Ord. 683 § 65, 2008; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.210 Drainage easement.
For all drainageways where the competent functioning of the drainageway is essential to the protection and use of multiple properties, a covenant and/or deed restriction shall be recorded by the applicant, placing the responsibility for the maintenance of the drainageways on the owner of record of each respective lot affected. Permanent off-site drainage easements, as required by the City Engineer, shall be acquired by the permittee. Such easements shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer and City Attorney and recorded prior to issuance of the grading permit. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.220 Expansive soils.
A. Tests for expansive soils shall be performed on soils within four feet of the finish grade of any area intended or designed as a location for a building. Whenever expansive soils are encountered in this zone then:

1. The permittee shall cause such expansive soil to be removed to a minimum depth of four feet below finish grade and replaced with properly compacted, nonexpansive soil; or

2. The Soils Engineer may recommend a modification to the requirement for removal and replacement of the expansive soils reported on the project. In that case, the Soils Engineer shall make recommendations for the design of footings, foundations, slabs, and other load-bearing features, or for other special procedures which will alleviate any problem created by the remaining expansive soils.

B. In general, at the discretion of the Soils Engineer, expansive soil from cut areas shall be placed in the lower extremities of embankments, and nonexpansive materials shall be reserved, stockpiled, or otherwise handled so that they may be placed as a cap over expansive soils.

C. Expansive soils which cannot be disposed of on-site, as described above, shall be disposed of off-site by either:

1. Their disposal outside the City limits; or

2. Their disposal at another location within the City, provided the location is covered by a valid grading permit or stockpile permit and the expansive soils can be disposed of at such location with the written approval of the owner and Soils Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.230 Asphalt concrete pavement.
A. Requirements. For the purpose of this chapter, asphalt concrete (A.C.), aggregate base (A.B.), prime coat, tack coat and seal coat shall meet the current standards of the City for road construction and/or the approval of the City Engineer.

B. Cost Estimates. Asphalt concrete is classified as a secondary drainage device when used for roadway and parking lot surfacing and other similar uses. Accordingly, the cost of all paving, with the exception of single-family driveways, shall be included in the engineer’s cost estimate.

C. Subgrade Compaction. Subgrade earth materials must be compacted to a minimum of 12 inches in depth and shall comply with all other requirements of this division.

D. Soil Sterilization. Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, subgrade earth materials shall be sterilized with nonpollutant materials to preclude plant growth.

E. Pavement Structural Section. The project soils engineer or design civil engineer shall recommend a pavement structural section(s) for parking lots/service roads, private streets, and dedicated streets for all developments based on:

1. Soils tests of the subgrade soil(s) performed in accordance with the latest revision of ASTM 1557-82; and

2. Anticipated traffic and/or loading conditions. Design shall be in accordance with the CalTrans Highway Design Manual. The structural sections shall be not less than the minimum standards established by the City. Minimum traffic index for pavement design shall be 4.5.

F. All adjoining pavement edges shall be saw-cut for butt joints or ground with a minimum of one and one-half inches of asphalt applied. No feathering is allowed.

G. Minimum overlay depth shall be one and one-half inches.

H. A minimum cross slope of two percent shall be utilized on all asphalt road and driveway pavement sections. Parking lots shall have a minimum cross slope of one percent. Concrete drainage structures placed at less than one percent slope must have grade stakes set by the engineer of work at no greater than 20-foot intervals.

I. Maximum gradient for parking stalls shall be eight percent.

J. Maximum gradient change in driveways and parking lots shall be eight percent in every 20 horizontal feet. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 553, 2002; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.50.240 Retention of topsoil.
Unless otherwise specifically noted on the approved plan, the topsoil removed in conjunction with grading activities shall be retained on-site and reused in areas slated for on-site landscaping, plant habitat restoration or revegetation, as deemed appropriate by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

Chapter 16.52
GRADING INSPECTION
Sections:

16.52.010    Initial inspection by City Engineer.

16.52.020    Required inspections – Generally.

16.52.030    Excavation and fill inspection.

16.52.040    Concrete or gunite drainage device inspection.

16.52.050    Other drainage devices.

16.52.060    Paving inspection.

16.52.065    Parking lot construction inspection.

16.52.070    Rough grade inspection.

16.52.080    Final inspection.

16.52.090    Erosion control facilities.

16.52.100    Notification of noncompliance.

16.52.110    Special inspections.

16.52.120    Stopping and correction of work.

16.52.130    Completion of work – Final reports.

16.52.140    Completion of work – Notification of completion.

16.52.010 Initial inspection by City Engineer.
A. Prior to the approval of any building or grading plans and specifications, the City Engineer may inspect the site to determine that the plans and specifications are current and reflect existing conditions.

B. Before permit issuance, but prior to any grading, brushing or clearing, there shall be a preconstruction meeting held at a location specified by the Engineering Services Inspector. Prior to placement of curb and gutter or placement of pavement base material, there shall be a prepaving meeting held on the site. The permittee, or his agent, shall notify the Development Services Engineering Inspector at least five working days prior to the meetings and shall be responsible for notifying all principals responsible for grading or paving related operations. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.020 Required inspections – Generally.
The inspections set out in this division are to be required of the items of work listed, at the stage or time indicated and are generally performed by the City Inspector. The engineer of work and the soils engineer are responsible for periodic inspections from time to time as required to fulfill their responsibilities. The permittee shall notify the City Engineer at least 48 hours ahead of the time the work will be ready. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.030 Excavation and fill inspection.
Excavation and fill inspections are required as follows:

A. Canyon Cleanout. After all brush and unsuitable material has been removed and an acceptable base has been exposed, but before any fill is placed;

B. Toe Bench and Key. After the natural ground or bedrock is exposed and prepared to receive fill, but before fill is placed;

C. Over-Excavation. After the area has been excavated but before fill is placed;

D. Excavation. After the excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation exceeds 10 feet, and every 10-foot interval thereafter;

E. Fill. After the fill has started, but before the vertical height of the fill exceeds 10 feet and every 10-foot interval thereafter. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.040 Concrete or gunite drainage device inspection.
Concrete or gunite drainage device inspection is required as follows:

A. Alley gutter and/or concrete swale:

1. Subgrade. After subgrade is prepared and required reinforcement placed,

2. Concrete. During concrete placement;

B. Curb and gutter (private property):

1. Subgrade. After subgrade is made, forms in place, with required reinforcement,

2. Concrete. During concrete placement;

C. Terrace drains, down drains, brow ditches, and all other paved drainage devices:

1. Subgrade. After grade is made but prior to placement of welded wire mesh or reinforcing steel,

2. Reinforcement. After thickness-control wire and reinforcing steel or welded wire are in place,

3. Concrete. During concrete or gunite placement. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.050 Other drainage devices.
Inspections are required on drainage devices, other than concrete and gunite, as follows:

A. Subdrains.

1. After excavation but prior to placement of filter material and pipe. The subdrain pipe and filter material shall be on site for inspection;

2. After filter material and subdrain have been placed but prior to covering with backfill;

B. Storm Drains and Inlets.

1. After placement of storm drains but prior to covering with backfill. The engineer of work shall provide written certification indicating precise conformance to line and grade on any storm drain being placed flatter than one percent grade;

2. After placement of inlet forms but prior to placement of concrete. The engineer of work shall provide written certification indicating precise conformance to line and grade of all structures;

C. Earth Swales.

1. Prior to rough grading approval, storage of combustible materials, or lumber drop; and

2. Prior to final grading approval. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.060 Paving inspection.
Paving inspection is required as follows:

A. Subgrade. Inspection is required after subgrade has been established, tested and approved by the soils engineer, or his qualified representative. The soils engineer must leave a field memo or compaction test results on site. The engineer of work shall provide written certification indicating precise conformance to line and grade;

B. Base. After base course has been placed, tested, and approved by the soils engineer, or his qualified representative, but prior to prime coat and asphalt placement. The soils engineer may leave a field memo on-site to provide compaction test results. Material invoices may be required;

C. Asphalt Concrete.

1. During asphalt lay-down, to verify compliance with plans and specifications. Continuous inspection shall be provided by an approved testing agency, retained by the owner or soils engineer of record, or its qualified representative. Material invoices may be required,

2. Prior to application of the seal coat, the paved surface shall be water-tested to reveal any irregularities and shall be patched where required. Material invoices may be required after placement of the seal coat. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.065 Parking lot construction inspection.
A. Subgrade. Inspection is required after subgrade has been established and prior to base placement. The soils engineer shall provide written documentation that the subgrade compaction meets the project requirements. The engineer of work shall provide written documentation that the subgrade drains as intended, per the approved plans.

B. Base. Inspection is required after the base material is placed and grade is established, and prior to asphalt concrete placement. The soils engineer shall provide written documentation that the base compaction meets the project requirements.

C. Final Surfacing. Inspection is required for the final surfacing operation. Compaction testing of the asphalt concrete mat is required during placement. Asphalt concrete mat compaction test results shall be included in the final project compaction report. Portland cement concrete pavement may be sampled and tested at the direction of the City Engineer. The engineer of work shall certify the site was graded and improved in accordance to the approved plans and approved construction change orders developed during the course of construction. (Ord. 497, 1998)

16.52.070 Rough grade inspection.
Rough grade inspection is required as follows:

This inspection must be called for by application to the Development Services counter at the completion of rough grading. The engineer of work must submit written certification attesting to precise conformance to line and grade and proper excavation and preparation of all areas ready to receive concrete structures to be built under the grading permit. Under normal circumstances, all subdrains and slope drains shall be in place and approved as a condition for rough grading approval. The soils engineer must submit a final soils report certifying the grading along with successful compaction test results. These reports must be submitted to the Development Services counter along with all required development fees prior to rough grade approval and building permit issuance. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.080 Final inspection.
Application shall be made when all work, including installation of all drainage structures, irrigation, slope planting and other protective devices, has been completed and all written professional approvals, certifications and the required reports have been submitted to the Development Services counter, approved by the City Engineer, and all applicable fees paid. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.090 Erosion control facilities.
Erosion control facilities inspection is required as follows:

A. After excavation of desilting basins but prior to fill placement, prefabricated devices are to be available on-site for inspection;

B. After fill placement for desilting basins but prior to placement of concrete or other nonerosive materials;

C. After installation of an erosion control system in accordance with an approved erosion control plan and the requirements of the City Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.100 Notification of noncompliance.
If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this division, the engineer of work, the soils engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency finds that the work is not being performed in accordance with approved plans, specifications or this division, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the grading contractor, the owner and the City Engineer. Recommendations for corrective measures shall be submitted for approval by the City Engineer. (Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.110 Special inspections.
The City Engineer may establish special inspection requirements in accordance with the City Building Code, amended, for special cases involving retaining walls, grading or paving related operations. Special cases may apply to work where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, it is necessary to supplement the resources or expertise available for inspection. (Ord. 705 § 2, 2010; Ord. 345, 1991)

16.52.120 Stopping and correction of work.
Reference is made to the permit requirements section of this code.

A. The provisions of PMC 13.09.120 shall apply to all grading work. Whenever the City Engineer determines that any work does not comply with the terms of a permit, or this division, or that the soil or other conditions are not as stated on the permit, or that work is being done improperly or in a hazardous manner, he may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the City Engineer to proceed with the work.

B. Whenever any work on which inspections are required is covered or concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the City Engineer may require that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering shall not be subject to any expense by the City.

C. If the inspector finds the soil or other conditions not as stated in the approved plans and geotechnical reports, or in additional information which was required for issuance of the grading permit, he may issue a stop work order until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which will conform to the conditions.

D. Work may resume and the stop order shall be rescinded upon the City Engineer’s determination that conditions have changed, corrections have been made, or the causes or actions which require a stop order have been acceptably remedied or alleviated to his satisfaction. (Ord. 775 § 8, 2015)

16.52.130 Completion of work – Final reports.
A. Upon completion of the rough grading work and prior to issuance of a building permit, the City Engineer will require:

1. A written statement by the engineer of work certifying the grading as being in precise conformance with the approved grading plan and which specifically states the following items were performed under his supervision, and are shown correctly on the record drawings:

a. Staking of line and grade for all engineered drainage devices and retaining walls;

b. Staking of property corners for proper building and slope location;

c. Location of permanent walls or structures on property corners or property lines;

d. Location and slope ratio of all manufactured slopes; and

e. Construction of earthen berms and positive building pad drainage in accordance with this division.

2. A final soils engineering report prepared by the soils engineer, including type of field testing performed, suitability of utility trench and retaining wall backfill, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the soils engineering investigation report. Each field density test shall be identified, located on a plan or map, the elevation of test, and the test method of obtaining the in-place density described in either ASTM D1556-78 or the approved equal shall be so noted. The soils engineer shall provide written approval as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use, as affected by soils engineering factors, and a statement of compliance to finish grade. Such report may consist of a series of reports at various stages of construction.

3. A geologic report prepared by the engineering geologist, including a final description of the geology of the site, including any new information disclosed during the grading, and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. The geologist shall provide written approval as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geologic factors, a statement of compliance to finish grade, and when required by the City Engineer, shall submit an as-built geologic map.

B. Upon the final completion of the work under the grading permit, but prior to the release of grading securities or issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy, the City Engineer will require:

1. A red-lined copy of the approved grading plan, signed and dated by the engineer of work, which shall include original and as-graded ground surface elevations, pad elevations, slope ratios, and elevations and locations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities, location and scaled sections of all buttress/stabilization fills, subdrains, and general location and depth of all areas of removal of unsuitable soil;

2. Supplemental soils and geologic reports for all work done subsequent to rough grade approval; and

3. Submittal of fully executed agreements for the maintenance of private roads, drainage systems, and structural post-construction BMPs. (Ord. 775 § 9, 2015)

16.52.140 Completion of work – Notification of completion.
The permit holder or his agent shall notify the City Engineer when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion control measures, has been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports and statements of compliance have been submitted to the Engineering Services counter, approved by the City Engineer, and all applicable fees paid. (Ord. 345, 1991)

Chapter 16.54
SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION
Sections:

16.54.010    Purpose and intent.

16.54.020    Incorporation by reference.

16.54.030    Scope.

16.54.040    Vested rights.

16.54.050    Applications and reviews.

16.54.060    Standards for reclamation.

16.54.070    Financial assurances.

16.54.080    Findings for approval.

16.54.090    Modifications.

16.54.100    Agreements with City required – Borrow pits and quarries.

16.54.110    Public records.

16.54.120    Interim management plans.

16.54.130    Inspections.

16.54.140    Successors in interest.

16.54.150    Liability and responsibilities of permittee.

16.54.160    Violation – Misdemeanor.

16.54.170    Enforcement of provisions.

16.54.180    Arrests and citations.

16.54.190    Appeals.

16.54.010 Purpose and intent.
A. This chapter is provided pursuant to the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, Chapter 9, of the Public Resources Code and amendments thereto.

B. The City recognizes that the extraction of minerals is essential to the continued economic well being of the City and to the needs of society, and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety.

C. The City also recognizes that surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different, and that reclamation operations and the specifications therefor may vary accordingly.

D. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the continued availability of important mineral resources, while regulating surface mining operations as required by California’s Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Public Resources Code Sections 2710 et seq.), as amended, hereinafter referred to as “SMARA,” Public Resources Code (PRC) Section 2207 (relating to annual reporting requirements), and State Mining and Geology Board regulations (hereinafter referred to as “State regulations”) for surface mining and reclamation practice (California Code of Regulations [CCR], Title 14, Division 2, Chapter 8, Subchapter 1, Sections 3500 and 3700 et seq.), to ensure that:

1. Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition, which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses.

2. The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment.

3. Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.020 Incorporation by reference.
The provisions of SMARA (PRC Sections 2710 et seq.), PRC Section 2207, and State regulations CCR Sections 3500 and 3700 et seq., as those provisions and regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that when the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than correlative State provisions, this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.030 Scope.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the City, public and private.

B. Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall conduct surface mining operations unless a conditional use permit, reclamation plan, and financial assurances for reclamation have first been approved by the City.

C. This chapter shall not apply to the following activities, subject to the above-referenced exceptions:

1. Minor excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site construction, or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster;

2. On-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities which are an integral and necessary part of a construction project that are undertaken to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping or other land improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the creation of fills, road cuts and embankments, whether or not surplus materials are exported from the site, subject to all of the following conditions:

a. All required permits for the construction, grading, landscaping, or related land improvements have been approved by the City in accordance with applicable provisions of State law and locally adopted plans and ordinances, including, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA,” Public Resources Code, Division 13, Sections 21000 et seq.);

b. The City’s approval of the construction project included consideration of the on-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities pursuant to CEQA;

c. The approved construction project is consistent with the general plan, applicable specific plan or zoning of the site; and

d. Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and until actual construction work has commenced, and shall cease if it is determined that construction activities have terminated, have been indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued.

3. Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing, including associated on-site structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials, including the on-site stockpiling and on-site recovery of mined materials, subject to all of the following conditions:

a. The plant site is located on lands within a zoning category intended for the specific use and all other required City permits and approvals have been obtained;

b. None of the minerals being processed are being extracted on site; and

c. All reclamation work has been completed pursuant to the approved reclamation plan for any mineral extraction activities that occurred on site after January 1, 1976.

4. Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than 1,000 cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less.

5. Surface mining operations that are required by Federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely for that purpose.

6. Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the Department of Water Resources or the Reclamation Board for the purpose of averting, alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to imminent or recent floods, disasters or other emergencies.

D. Any applicable exemption from this requirement does not automatically exempt a project or activity from the application of other regulations, ordinances or policies of the City, including, but not limited to, the application of CEQA, the requirement of conditional use permit approvals or other permits, the payment of development impact fees, or the imposition of other dedications and exactions as may be permitted under the law. (Ord. 775 § 10, 2015)

16.54.040 Vested rights.
No person or corporation who obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a conditional use permit so long as the vested right continues in accordance with Chapter 17.02 PMC and as long as no substantial changes have been made in the operation except in accordance with SMARA, State regulations, and this chapter. However, where a person or corporation with vested rights has continued surface mining in the same area subsequent to January 1, 1976, they shall obtain City approval of a reclamation plan covering the mined lands disturbed by such subsequent surface mining. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the horizontal and/or vertical sense) between pre- and post-Act mining, the reclamation plan shall call for reclamation proportional to that disturbance caused by the mining after the effective date of the Act (January 1, 1976). (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.050 Applications and reviews.
A. Any person who proposes to engage in surface mining operations as defined in this chapter shall, prior to the commencement of such operations, obtain:

1. Approval of a conditional use permit, if required.

2. Approval of a reclamation plan.

3. Approval of financial assurances in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter and as further provided in the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

A fee, as established by City Council resolution from time to time for the permitted uses in the consolidated fee schedule, shall be paid to the City at the time of filing.

B. Applications for a conditional use permit or reclamation plan for surface mining or land reclamation projects shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Development Services. Said application shall be filed in accord with this chapter and procedures as established by the Director of Development Services. The forms for reclamation plan applications shall require, at a minimum, each of the elements required by SMARA (Sections 2772 through 2773) and State regulations, and any other requirements deemed necessary to facilitate an expeditious and fair evaluation of the proposed reclamation plan, as established at the discretion of the Director of Development Services. All applications for a conditional use permit for surface mining shall be made, considered, and granted or denied pursuant to Chapter 17.48 PMC. Such applications shall be accompanied by other data or information required by the Director of Development Services. All plans and specifications for the grading of the property shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer, sealed and signed in accordance with the Business and Professions Code.

C. Application shall include all required environmental review forms and information prescribed by the Director of Development Services.

D. Within 30 days of acceptance of an application for a conditional use permit for surface mining operations and/or a reclamation plan as complete, the Department of Development Services shall notify the State Department of Conservation of the filing of the application. Whenever mining operations are proposed in the 100-year floodplain of any stream, as shown in zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or downstream, of any State highway bridge, the Department of Development Services shall also notify the State Department of Transportation that the application has been received.

E. The Department of Development Services shall process the application(s) through environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) and the City’s environmental review guidelines.

F. Upon completion of the environmental review procedure and filing of all documents required by the Director of Development Services, consideration of the conditional use permit approval and reclamation plan for the proposed surface mining shall be scheduled for public hearing before the City Council, and pursuant to Section 2774 of the Public Resources Code.

G. Prior to final approval of a reclamation plan, financial assurances (as provided in this chapter), or any amendments to the reclamation plan or existing financial assurances, the Department of Development Services shall submit the plan, financial assurance, or amendments to the State Department of Conservation for review. City Council may conceptually approve the reclamation plan and financial assurance before submittal to the State Department of Conservation. If a conditional use permit is being processed concurrently with the reclamation plan, City Council may also conceptually approve the conditional use permit. However, City Council may defer action on the conditional use permit until taking final action on the reclamation plan and financial assurances. If necessary to comply with permit processing deadlines, the City Council may approve the conditional use permit with the condition that the conditional use permit shall not be issued until cost estimates for financial assurances have been reviewed by the State Department of Conservation and final action has been taken on the reclamation plan and financial assurances. Pursuant to PRC Section 2774(d), the State Department of Conservation shall be given 30 days to review and comment on the reclamation plan and 45 days to review and comment on the financial assurance. The Department of Development Services shall evaluate written comments received, if any, from the State Department of Conservation during the comment periods. Staff shall prepare a written response describing the disposition of the major issues raised by the State for City Council’s approval. In particular, when the City’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised in the State’s comments, the written response shall address why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. Copies of any written comments received and responses prepared for the City Council shall be forwarded to the applicant.

H. The City Council shall then take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the conditional use permit and/or reclamation plan, and to approve the financial assurances pursuant to PRC Section 2770(d).

I. By July 1st of each year, the Department of Development Services shall forward to the State Department of Conservation a copy of each newly approved conditional use permit approved during the previous fiscal year for mining operations and/or a copy of the approved reclamation plan and approved financial assurances. The Department shall also include a copy of any conditional use permit or reclamation plan amendments, as applicable.

J. Where any requirement of the reclamation plan conflicts with any requirement of the approved conditional use permit, the Director of Development Services and the City Engineer shall determine which requirement shall apply. In making this determination, the requirements of SMARA shall not be superseded by any requirements of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 683 § 66, 2008; Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.060 Standards for reclamation.
A. All reclamation plans shall comply with the provisions of SMARA (Sections 2772 and 2773) and State regulations (CCR Sections 3500 through 3505). Reclamation plans approved after January 15, 1993, reclamation plans for proposed new mining operations, and any substantial amendments (as determined by the Director of Development Services) to a previously approved reclamation plan shall also comply with the requirements for reclamation performance standards (CCR Sections 3700 through 3713).

B. The City may impose additional performance standards as developed either in review of individual projects, as warranted, or through the formulation and adoption of City performance standards.

C. Reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance. Interim reclamation may also be required for mined lands that have been disturbed and that may be disturbed again in future operations. Reclamation may be done on an annual basis, in stages compatible with continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill, as approved by the City. Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described in the reclamation plan and shall include (a) the expected sequencing for each phase; (b) all reclamation activities required; (c) performance standards and criteria for measuring completion of specific reclamation activities; and (d) estimated costs for completion of each phase of reclamation. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.070 Financial assurances.
A. To ensure reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the City requires, as a condition of approval, security for the faithful performance of the reclamation. The applicant may post security in the form of a surety bond, cash deposit, irrevocable letter of credit from an accredited financial institution, or other method acceptable to the City Attorney and the State Mining and Geology Board as specified in State regulations, and which the City reasonably determines is adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the surface mining operation’s approved reclamation plan. Financial assurances shall be made payable to the City of Poway, the State Department of Conservation, and such other regulatory agencies the City deems necessary.

B. Financial assurances will be required to ensure compliance with the performance standards of the reclamation plan, which may include, but are not limited to, revegetation and landscaping requirements, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, restoration of water bodies and water quality, slope stability, erosion and drainage control, disposal of hazardous materials, and other measures, if necessary.

C. Cost estimates for the financial assurance shall be submitted to the Department of Development Services for review and approval prior to the operator securing financial assurances. The Department of Development Services shall forward a copy of the cost estimates, together with any documentation received supporting the amount of the cost estimates, to the State Department of Conservation for review. If the State Department of Conservation does not comment within 45 days of receipt of these estimates, it shall be assumed that the cost estimates are adequate. The City has the discretion to approve the financial assurance if it meets the requirements of this chapter, SMARA, and State regulations.

D. The amount of the financial assurance shall be based upon 100 percent of the estimated cost of reclamation, plus a 10 percent contingency for the actual amount required to reclaim lands disturbed by surface mining activities since January 1, 1976, all new lands to be disturbed by surface mining activities in the upcoming year and areas not meeting the performance standards for reclaimed areas pursuant to the approved reclamation plan. The estimate shall also include any maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required. Cost estimates shall be prepared by a California registered professional engineer and/or other similarly licensed and qualified professionals retained by the operator and approved by the Director of Development Services. The estimated amount of the financial assurance shall be based on an analysis of physical activities necessary to implement the approved reclamation plan, the unit costs for each of these activities, the number of units of each of these activities, and the actual administrative costs. Financial assurances to ensure compliance with the performance standards, which may include establishing revegetation, restoration of water bodies, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, and any other applicable element of the approved reclamation plan, shall be based upon cost estimates that include, but may not be limited to, labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the mine operator.

E. In projecting the costs of financial assurances, it shall be assumed without prejudice or insinuation that the surface mining operation could be abandoned by the operator and, consequently, the City or State Department of Conservation may need to contract with a third party commercial company for reclamation of the site.

F. The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining operation, and any additional period, until reclamation pursuant to the performance standards in the reclamation plan is completed, including any required maintenance and establishment period as may be identified in the reclamation plan. Upon completion of the surface mining and reclamation of mined lands in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, including maintenance and establishment periods, all financial assurances shall be released; otherwise, they shall remain in full force and effect.

G. The amount of financial assurances required of a surface mining operation for any one year shall be reviewed annually by the City to account for new lands disturbed by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. The financial assurances shall include estimates to cover reclamation for existing conditions and anticipated activities during the upcoming year, excepting that the mine operator may not claim credit for reclamation scheduled for completion during the coming year.

H. Revised estimates for the financial assurances, prepared in accordance with CCR Section 3804, shall be submitted annually to the Director of Development Services at the time of filing of the mine operator’s annual mining operation report.

The estimate shall cover the cost of existing disturbance and anticipated activities for the next calendar year, including any required interim reclamation. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.080 Findings for approval.
A. Conditional Use Permit Approvals. In addition to any other findings required by the City Code, conditional use permit approvals for surface mining operations shall include a finding that the project complies with the provisions of SMARA and State regulations.

B. Reclamation Plans. For reclamation plans, the following findings shall be required:

1. That the reclamation plan complies with SMARA Sections 2772 and 2773, and any other applicable provisions.

2. That the reclamation plan complies with applicable requirements of State regulations (CCR Sections 3500 through 3505, and Sections 3700 through 3713).

3. That the reclamation plan and potential use of reclaimed land pursuant to the plan are consistent with the City’s General Plan and any applicable specific plans, resource plan, or element.

4. That the reclamation plan has been reviewed pursuant to CEQA and the City’s environmental review guidelines, and all significant adverse impacts from reclamation of the surface mining operations are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.

5. That the reclamation plan will restore the mined lands to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with the General Plan and applicable specific plan or resource plan. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.090 Modifications.
A. An approved reclamation plan, or any conditions thereof, may be revised or modified in the same manner provided for a new conditional use permit, including the requirement for environmental impact review. All proposed modifications of an approved reclamation plan shall be consistent with Chapter 17.48 PMC.

B. Minor amendments to the reclamation plan may be approved by the Director of Development Services pursuant to Chapter 17.48 PMC where the Director determines that such approval will not result in a substantial change in the finished appearance of the mining site land form, will not increase the impacts on adjacent property, and is otherwise consistent with the intent of this chapter and the State Surface Mining and Reclamation Act.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17.48 PMC relative to any modification or revocation of a conditional use permit, the City Engineer may modify or add conditions relative to the conduct of grading for the same reasons as specified for grading permits in Division III of this chapter. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.100 Agreements with City required – Borrow pits and quarries.
A. No surface mining shall be conducted pursuant to a conditional use permit or pursuant to vested nonconforming rights unless prior to commencement of grading an agreement has been entered into allowing City employees to enter the property to correct any landscaping or irrigation system deficiencies, any unsafe conditions or breach of provisions of the conditional use permit and/or reclamation plan. The agreement shall specifically authorize the City employees, or any person authorized by the agreement, to enter the property at any reasonable time for inspection or for the purpose of correcting any unsafe conditions resulting from the breach of any provision of the conditional use permit or reclamation plan. As a safety measure, the agreement may provide for a requirement that City employees check in at the facility office, wear appropriate safety gear, and be escorted for the inspection. Said agreement shall be executed by the permittee, the owner of the property, and by holders, except government entities, of any lien upon the property which could ripen into a fee. The permittee shall provide acceptable evidence of title showing all existing legal and equitable interests in the property. The City engineer is authorized to execute and accept the agreement on behalf of the City. The agreement shall be recorded prior to the commencement of grading pursuant to a conditional use permit or reclamation plan.

B. The agreement required by this section shall be secured pursuant to PMC 16.54.070 to assure compliance with the agreement. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.110 Public records.
Reclamation plans, reports, applications, and other documents submitted pursuant to this chapter are public records unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the release of such information, or part thereof, would reveal production, reserves, or rate of depletion entitled to protection as proprietary information. The City shall identify such proprietary information as a separate part for each application. A copy of all permits, reclamation plans, reports, applications, and other documents submitted pursuant to this chapter, including proprietary information, shall be furnished to the Director of the Department of Conservation by the City Department of Development Services. Proprietary information shall be made available to persons only when authorized by the mine operator and by the mine owner in accordance with Section 2778 of the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.120 Interim management plans.
A. Within 90 days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall submit to the Department of Development Services a proposed Interim Management Plan (IMP). The proposed IMP shall fully comply with the requirements of SMARA, including, but not limited to, all conditional use permit conditions, and shall provide measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in a stable condition, taking into consideration public health and safety. The proposed IMP shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the Department of Development Services, and shall be processed as an amendment to the reclamation plan. IMPs shall not be considered a project for the purposes of environmental review.

B. Financial assurances for idle operations shall be maintained as though the operations were active, or as otherwise approved through the idle mine’s IMP. All financial assurances shall conform to PMC 16.54.070.

C. Upon receipt of a complete proposed IMP, the City shall forward the IMP to the State Department of Conservation for review. The IMP shall be submitted to the State Department of Conservation at least 30 days prior to approval by the City.

D. Within 60 days of receipt of the proposed IMP, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the Director of Development Services and the operator, the City shall review and approve or deny the IMP in accordance with this chapter. The operator shall have 30 days, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the Director of Development Services, to submit a revised IMP. The City shall approve or deny the revised IMP within 60 days of receipt.

E. The IMP may remain in effect for a period not to exceed five years, at which time the City may renew the IMP for another period not to exceed five years, or require the surface mining operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.130 Inspections.
A. As a condition of each conditional use permit or reclamation plan, an inspection of the surface mining operation and reclamation activities shall be conducted by the Department of Development Services within six months of receipt of the mine operator’s annual report. Inspection shall be made not less than once in each calendar year by a State-registered geologist, State-registered civil engineer, State-licensed landscape architect, or State-registered forester, who is experienced in land reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous 12 months, or other qualified specialists, as may be determined by the Director of Development Services. All inspections shall be conducted using a form approved and provided by the State Mining and Geology Board. The Development Services Department shall notify the State Department of Conservation within 30 days of completion of the inspection that said inspection has been conducted, and shall forward a copy of said inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of such inspection.

B. If, after conducting the annual inspection or otherwise confirmed by an inspection, the Department of Development Services finds the conditional use permit or reclamation plan is not being followed as approved, the mining operator shall be so notified and be given a reasonable time to comply. Reasonable time to comply shall be no sooner than 30 days and not exceeding 90 days. If, at the end of this period of time, the conditional use permit or reclamation plan is still not being followed as approved, the Director of Development Services shall notify the mining operator involved and set the matter for public hearing in accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 17.48 PMC for modification or revocation of a zoning permit. Failure to correctly comply with the terms or conditions of a reclamation plan shall be considered a violation of the conditional use permit and an unlawful public nuisance.

C. At the hearing, it shall be determined whether or not the mining operator is complying with the conditional use permit or reclamation plan. If it is found that the operator is not in compliance, the City Council shall determine if the permit shall be revoked or merely suspended until the operator either complies or obtains approval of a revised conditional use permit or reclamation plan. If the City Council determines that the mining operator is making a reasonable effort to comply with the reclamation plan, an additional period of time, no shorter than 30 days and not exceeding 180, may be allowed for full compliance. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.140 Successors in interest.
The applicant submitting the reclamation plan and financial assurances shall execute an agreement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney accepting responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan and conditions of their conditional use permit. Said agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder and kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk.

Whenever any surface mining operation or portion of an operation subject to this chapter is sold, assigned, conveyed, exchanged, or otherwise transferred, the applicant shall not be relieved of their obligations under the agreement until such time as their successor in interest shall execute a replacement agreement and post substitute securities agreeing to be bound by the provisions of the reclamation plan and conditions of their conditional use permit. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.150 Liability and responsibilities of permittee.
Neither the issuance of a conditional use permit or reclamation plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with any provisions or conditions thereof, shall relieve any person from any liability or responsibility resulting from grading operations as specified elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.160 Violation – Misdemeanor.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed more than six months in the County Jail or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.170 Enforcement of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any authorized member of the Department of Development Services of the City or such other persons as may be designated by the City Council. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.180 Arrests and citations.
The Director of Development Services and the City Engineer, each agent or deputy thereof who is assigned to duties which include the enforcement of this chapter and any peace officer shall have the power to make arrests for violations of those provisions of this chapter and State law which he/she has duty to enforce and to issue citations for such violations. Any person so arrested who does not demand to be taken before a magistrate may instead be cited in the manner prescribed in Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5) of Title 3 Part 2 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

16.54.190 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the City administrators in the exercise of the authority granted in this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. Any appeal must be filed in accordance with Chapter 2.20 PMC. (Ord. 609 § 3, 2004)

Chapter 16.56
LEGAL PROVISIONS
(Repealed by Ord. 827)

Chapter 16.58
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.58.010    Purpose.

16.58.020    Acts prohibited.

16.58.030    Acts prohibited unless permit obtained.

16.58.040    Exceptions to acts prohibited.

16.58.050    Emergency work authorization.

16.58.060    Referral to Environmental Review Board.

16.58.070    Determination that project does not have significant effect upon environment.

16.58.080    Determination that project could have significant effect upon environment.

16.58.090    Referral to the Director of Development Services.

16.58.100    Determination that proposed drainage or flood-control structure is consistent with general plan.

16.58.110    Determination that proposed drainage or flood-control structure is not consistent with general plan.

16.58.120    Information to be supplied by applicant.

16.58.130    Maintenance of floodway required.

16.58.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to protect persons and property against flood hazards by augmenting the regulations imposed by Chapters 16.40 through 16.52 PMC. In case of conflict between the regulations imposed by this division and any other provision of law or of this code, the more stringent regulation shall apply. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.100)

16.58.020 Acts prohibited.
No person shall do, commit or cause to be done or committed, any of the following described acts:

A. Deposit any material of any kind in a watercourse which may impair or impede the flow of water therein;

B. Plant any vegetation, other than grasses or annual crops, within a watercourse which may impair, impede or divert the flow of water in such watercourse;

C. Commit any act or in any easement dedicated, granted or reserved for flood-control or drainage purposes which will impair the use of such easement for such purposes;

D. Within a floodplain where a Floodplain Designator or a Flood Channel Designator has under the zoning ordinance been applied by the Council or within a floodplain as delineated on approved maps issued by the Federal Insurance Administrator:

1. Construct new or substantial improvements of residential structures unless the lowest floor (including basement) is elevated to or above the level of the 100-year flood;

2. Construct new or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures unless the lowest floor (including basement) is elevated to or above the level of the 100-year flood or the structure, including attendant utility and sanitary facilities, is floodproofed up to the level of the 100-year flood. (Ord. 85 § 1(d), 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.102)

16.58.030 Acts prohibited unless permit obtained.
No person shall do, commit or cause to be done or committed, any of the following described acts without first obtaining a written permit from the Director:

A. Impair, impede or accelerate the flow of water in a watercourse;

B. Alter the surface of land, by construction, excavation, embankment or otherwise, so as to reduce the capacity of a watercourse;

C. Construct, alter or remove any flood-control or stormwater drainage structure, facility or channel of or in a watercourse;

D. Within a floodway as shown on City of Poway floodplain maps, place fill or encroachments that would increase the flood level or impair its ability to carry and discharge the waters resulting from the 100-year flood. Permits may be issued where the effect of the fill or encroachment on flood heights is fully offset by stream improvements. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.103)

16.58.040 Exceptions to acts prohibited.
A. PMC 16.58.020 and 16.58.030 do not prohibit any act lawfully done pursuant to Chapters 12.12 or 12.16 PMC.

B. PMC 16.58.020 and 16.58.030 do not prohibit any act lawfully done pursuant to Chapters 16.40 through 16.52 PMC. Compliance with said Chapters 16.40 through 16.52 PMC constitutes compliance with this division and permits, fees, or inspections are required by this division only to the extent that the particular activity is not fully regulated by said Chapters 16.40 through 16.52 PMC.

C. PMC 16.58.020 and 16.58.030 do not apply to work performed by organization components of the Federal government, the State or their contractors. PMC 16.58.020 and 16.58.030 do not apply to the City.

D. PMC 16.58.020 and 16.58.030 do not apply to acts of the owner of the watercourse in the routine maintenance thereof provided such acts do not impair, impede or divert the flow of water in such watercourse.

E. PMC 16.58.020 and 16.58.030 do not apply to acts of persons engaged in farming, ranching or other agricultural pursuits, or natural resource extraction operations performed pursuant to a special use permit, provided such acts are normally and routinely associated with such pursuits; and, provided further, that such acts do not substantially impair, impede or divert the flow of water in the watercourse.

F. PMC 16.58.020 does not prohibit repair, reconstruction or improvement to existing residential and nonresidential structures within the floodplain, provided such repair, reconstruction or improvement:

1. Is not a substantial improvement;

2. Is designed (modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;

3. Uses construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and

4. Uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.

G. PMC 16.58.020 and 16.58.030 do not prohibit the construction of parking facilities within the floodplain fringe area below the 100-year flood level provided:

1. The parking facility will service a nonresidential building;

2. The structure is open and will not impede the flow of floodwaters. (Ord. 743 § 3, 2012)

16.58.050 Emergency work authorization.
PMC 16.58.020 and 16.58.030 do not prohibit any person from performing emergency maintenance or work within, upon, over, under or through any watercourse when such work is necessary and proper for the preservation of life or property and when an urgent necessity therefor has arisen; provided, that the person performing such emergency work applies for a written permit for such work within five calendar days after the commencement thereof, and complies with all terms and conditions of the permit so issued. In any action at law, or in equity between the City and the person doing the emergency work, the latter shall have the burden of proving that an emergency existed if such question be in issue. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.105)

16.58.060 Referral to Environmental Review Board.
Prior to the issuance of any watercourse permit, the Director shall refer the application for such permit to the Environmental Review Board (ERB) for review and determination whether the proposed work could have a significant effect upon the environment; provided, however, such application need not be referred to the ERB if any of the following conditions are met:

A. A City board, commission or officer having final authority for project approval has certified that the Environmental Impact Report which analyzed the proposed work has been completed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act and the State guidelines and has considered the information in said report; or has determined that the project, which included the proposed work, would not have a significant effect upon the environment; or

B. The proposed work is pursuant to a tentative map of subdivision which has been approved or conditionally approved on or before April 4, 1973. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.106)

16.58.070 Determination that project does not have significant effect upon environment.
If the ERB determines that the proposed work would not have a significant effect upon the environment, it shall so inform the applicant and the Director. Upon receipt of notification of such determination by the ERB, the Director may issue the watercourse permit without requiring an Environmental Impact Report. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.107)

16.58.080 Determination that project could have significant effect upon environment.
If the ERB determines that the proposed work could have a significant effect upon the environment, the watercourse permit shall not be issued unless and until the City Council authorizes such issuance following the adoption of an Environmental Impact Report prepared pursuant to the Environmental Quality Act of 1970 and City rules and procedures adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.108)

16.58.090 Referral to the Director of Development Services.
Prior to the issuance of any watercourse permit for construction of any drainage or flood-control structure, the Director shall refer the application for such permit to the Director of Development Services for review and determination whether the proposed work is consistent with the City’s general plan; provided, however, such application need not be referred to the Director of Development Services if any of the following conditions are met:

A. A City board, commission, or officer having final authority for project approval has determined that the project, which included the proposed work, is consistent with the general plan; or

B. The proposed work is pursuant to a tentative map of subdivision which has been approved or conditionally approved. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.109)

16.58.100 Determination that proposed drainage or flood-control structure is consistent with general plan.
If the Director of Development Services determines that the proposed work is consistent with the City’s general plan, he shall so inform the applicant and the Director. Upon receipt of notification of such determination by the Director of Development Services, the Director may issue the watercourse permit. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.110)

16.58.110 Determination that proposed drainage or flood-control structure is not consistent with general plan.
If the Director of Development Services determines that the proposed work is not consistent with the general plan, he shall so inform the applicant, the Director and the Council. The watercourse permit shall not be issued unless and until the Council authorizes such issuance following a review of the permit application and making a finding that the proposed drainage or flood-control structure is consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.111)

16.58.120 Information to be supplied by applicant.
When an application for a watercourse permit is referred to the Council pursuant to PMC 16.58.080 or 16.58.110, the City Clerk shall not place the matter on the Council agenda for consideration until the applicant has furnished to the Clerk a written statement disclosing the following information:

A. The names of all persons having an interest in the application as well as the names of all persons having any ownership interest in the property involved;

B. If any person identified pursuant to subsection A of this section is a corporation or partnership, the names of all persons owning more than 10 percent of the shares of a corporation or owning any partnership interest in the partnership;

C. If any person identified pursuant to subsection A of this section is a nonprofit organization or a trust, the names of any person serving as director of the nonprofit organization or a trustee or beneficiary or trustor of the trust. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.112)

16.58.130 Maintenance of floodway required.
A. The property owner is responsible for the timely maintenance of any floodway on the owner’s property. Failure to maintain a floodway in a safe and unobstructed condition is a violation of this section and a public nuisance.

B. The Director may serve a written notice of violation on the property owner personally or by registered or certified mail. The notice shall clearly state the nature of the violation and the work that will be required to correct the violation. If served by mail, the notice shall be sufficient if sent to the address of said owner as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or, alternatively, as it appears from such other records of the Assessor or City Treasurer that contain the more recent addresses in the opinion of the Director.

C. The notice shall require the property owner to abate the conditions constituting the violation within 60 days of the date of the notice except that in case of an emergency, the property owner may be required to abate the nuisance in such shorter time as the Director requires.

D. If the property owner fails to abate the nuisance within the time specified, the Director may cause the abatement to be done with City forces or by contract, in which event the property owner shall be liable for all costs of such abatement, as described in Chapter 16.68 PMC. (Ord. 85 § 1(e), 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.113)

Chapter 16.60
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

16.60.010    Generally.

16.60.020    Council.

16.60.030    Director.

16.60.040    Federal insurance administrator.

16.60.050    Floodplain.

16.60.060    Floodplain fringe.

16.60.070    Floodway.

16.60.080    Maintenance.

16.60.090    One-hundred-year flood.

16.60.100    Stream improvements.

16.60.110    Substantial improvement.

16.60.120    Watercourse.

16.60.010 Generally.
Whenever the words set out in PMC 16.60.020 through 16.60.120 are used in this division they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101)

16.60.020 Council.
“Council” means the City Council of the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(a))

16.60.030 Director.
“Director” means the Director of Public Services of the City. (Ord. 85 § 1(a), 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(b))

16.60.040 Federal insurance administrator.
“Federal insurance administrator” means the administrator designated by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(i))

16.60.050 Floodplain.
“Floodplain” means a land area in and adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, ocean, bay or lake, which is likely to be flooded. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(e))

16.60.060 Floodplain fringe.
“Floodplain fringe” means all that land lying within the 100-year floodplain that is not within a floodway, where a floodway has been defined. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(g))

16.60.070 Floodway.
“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to carry and discharge a flood. The selection of the floodway shall be based on the principle that the area chosen for the floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the 100-year flood, without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(f))

16.60.080 Maintenance.
“Maintenance” means cleaning, removing obstructions, and repair of existing facilities to the satisfaction of the Director. Obstructions include vegetation, shrubs, trees, tree stumps, limbs and foliage, debris, trash, rubbish, waste matter, deposits of dirt, sand or rock, walls, structures, building materials or any other material which, in the opinion of the Director, may impede, impair, restrict or divert the flow of water from its natural course. Removal of natural siltation is not considered a maintenance item. (Ord. 85 § 1(c), 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(k))

16.60.090 One-hundred-year flood.
“One-hundred-year flood” means a flood estimated to occur on an average of once in 100 years (one percent probability of occurrence each year) which is determined from an analysis of historical flood rainfall records and computed in accordance with the current San Diego County Flood Control District Design and Procedure Manual. (Ord. 85 § 1(b), 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(d))

16.60.100 Stream improvements.
“Stream improvements” means a complete system of approved drainage or flood-control facilities constructed in accordance with the San Diego Flood Control Design Procedure Manual approved by the Board of Supervisors of the County on May 19, 1970, and filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors as Document Number 427201 and as amended by the Board of Supervisors of the County on July 8, 1975, and filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors as Document Number 506917; and constructed in accordance with San Diego County Standards adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the County April 1, 1960, and filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors as Document Number 357917. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(j))

16.60.110 Substantial improvement.
“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

1. Before the improvement is started; or

2. If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any alteration to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations; or

2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(h))

16.60.120 Watercourse.
“Watercourse” means any watercourse, stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, arroyo, or wash in which waters flow in a definite direction or course either continuously or intermittently, and any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation from a 100-year flood. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.101(c))

Chapter 16.62
PERMITS – APPLICATIONS
Sections:

16.62.010    Issuance of permits – Liability.

16.62.020    Application for permit.

16.62.030    Filing fee and deposit.

16.62.040    Other permits may be required.

16.62.050    Revocation of permit.

16.62.060    Modification of watercourse permit by City Council.

16.62.010 Issuance of permits – Liability.
Permits required by this division shall be issued by the Director subject to such conditions as may be imposed pursuant to this division or as may be required by law. In case of conflict between the regulations imposed by this division and any other provision of law or of this code, the more stringent regulation shall apply and only the requirements of the more stringent regulation will govern. Neither the issuance of a permit, nor compliance with the conditions thereof or with the provisions of this division, shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to person or property. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.201)

16.62.020 Application for permit.
A. A separate application for a permit shall be made for each act listed in Chapter 16.60 PMC; except that only one application need be made for two or more such acts which are done on the same or contiguous parcels or lots and which are part of a unified plan of development or improvement. Plans and specifications and estimated value of work shall be submitted with each such application, unless waived by the Director for small and unimportant work. Such plans and specifications shall be prepared or approved, and signed, by a Civil Engineer unless:

1. Waived by the Director; or

2. The plans are prepared and/or approved by an agency of the Federal or State government.

B. The plans shall show the following:

1. Everything listed as required in the City grading ordinance set out in Chapters 16.40 through 16.52 PMC;

2. Such other information or data as may be required by the Director, including, but not limited to, a soil investigation report prepared in the manner required by Chapters 16.40 through 16.52 PMC. (Ord. 85 § 1(e), 1983; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.202)

16.62.030 Filing fee and deposit.
Before a permit is issued an applicant shall pay the Director the fee and deposit established by this section unless the plans have been prepared and/or approved by an agency of the Federal, State, County or City government, in which case the fee and deposit are waived if installation is supervised by an agency of the Federal, State, County or City government.

A. Filing Fee. A filing fee in the amount that shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time shall be paid at the time application is made for a permit.

B. Deposit. A deposit shall be made in addition to the filing fee to cover plan checking, environmental review, processing of easement documents, administration, and inspection of the work. This deposit is to cover the actual cost incurred by the City as estimated by the Director of Public Services. If the actual cost of checking, review, processing, administration and inspection is less than the deposit, the unused balance of the deposit shall be refunded in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. If any deposit is insufficient to pay all the actual costs of checking review, processing, administration and inspection, the permittee, upon demand of the Director of Public Services, shall pay to him an amount deemed sufficient by him to complete the work in process. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such amount upon demand, the Director may refuse issuance of a watercourse permit until the amount is paid in full, or, if a permit is already issued, the work shall be considered incomplete and the permit revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in PMC 16.62.050. (Ord. 683 § 67, 2008; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.203)

16.62.040 Other permits may be required.
A permit issued pursuant to this division does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility for securing the required permits for work to be done which is regulated by any other provision of this code, any City ordinance or County or Federal or State law. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.204)

16.62.050 Revocation of permit.
A. The Council shall have the power to revoke any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter if said Council determines that said permit was obtained by fraud, or that one or more of the conditions upon which said permit was granted have been violated, or that the permittee fails or refuses to correct a deficiency or a hazard upon the receipt of written notice and within the time specified in such notices; or that the permittee fails or refuses to perform any of the work required or fails or refuses to conform with any of the standards established by a special use permit. A request that said Council revoke said watercourse permit may be made by any City officer; the request for revocation shall be in writing, and shall set forth the grounds upon which revocation is sought.

B. If a permit is revoked no further work shall be done upon that site except the correction of hazards, and the completion of any work required by the permittee’s agreement. Every agreement and every security required by this division shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding any such revocation.

C. Any hearing held pursuant to this chapter shall be a public hearing. Request for revocation shall be directed to the City Clerk, who shall fix a time and place for the hearing to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City. Said Clerk shall also notify the permittee of the time and place set for said hearing. Any interested person may appear at said hearing and present evidence. At the conclusion of a hearing on a request for revocation said Council may deny the request for revocation, grant the request for revocation, or modify existing conditions of or add new conditions to said permit. The decision of the Council shall be final. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.205)

16.62.060 Modification of watercourse permit by City Council.
A. The Council shall have the power to modify any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter if the Council determines that the modification is in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare. A request that the Council modify a watercourse permit may be made by any City officer. The request for modification shall be in writing, and shall set forth the grounds upon which modification is sought.

B. If the permit is modified by the Council all further work done upon that site shall be consistent with the modified permit. Every agreement shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding any such modification.

C. Any hearing held pursuant to this chapter shall be a public hearing. Request for modification shall be directed to the City Clerk, who shall fix a time and place for the hearing to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City. Said Clerk shall also notify the permittee of the time and place set for said hearing. Any interested person may appear at said hearing and present evidence. At the conclusion of a hearing on a request for modification said Council may deny the request for modification or grant the request for modification by modifying existing conditions or adding new conditions to said permit. The decision of the Council shall be final. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.205)

Chapter 16.64
PERMITS – CONDITIONS AND BONDS
Sections:

16.64.010    Permit – When issued – Conditions.

16.64.020    Permit – Term – Beginning work.

16.64.030    Permit – Term – Completion of work.

16.64.040    Civil engineer field supervision.

16.64.050    Changes.

16.64.060    Transfer of permits.

16.64.070    Bond required.

16.64.010 Permit – When issued – Conditions.
After the applicant has paid the required fees and complied with all conditions precedent, the Director shall issue the permit unless it appears to him that the work proposed would significantly restrict the carrying capacity of a watercourse or would create an unreasonable hazard of flood or inundation to persons or property; provided, however, that the Director shall issue the permit subject to conditions, which shall be specifically set forth in the permit, if the Director determines that by doing so there would be created no such restriction of carrying capacity or unreasonable hazard. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.300)

16.64.020 Permit – Term – Beginning work.
The permittee shall begin the work authorized by the permit within 60 days from the date of issuance, unless a different date for commencement of work is set forth in the permit. The engineer or permittee shall notify the Director at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of work. Should the work not be commenced as specified in this chapter, then the permit shall become void; provided, however, that if prior to or within 30 days after the date established for commencement of work the permittee makes written request to the Director for an extension of time, setting forth the reasons for the required extension, the Director may grant additional time if in his opinion such an extension is warranted. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.301)

16.64.030 Permit – Term – Completion of work.
The permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time specified in the permit; provided, that if he is unable to do so he may make written request to the Director for an extension of time. The Director shall grant an extension of time to complete the work, if in his opinion such extension is warranted and would create an unreasonable hazard of flood or inundation to persons or property. The permittee shall notify the Director in writing of completion of the work authorized, and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until approved in writing by the Director following such written notification. The Director may cause inspections of the work to be made periodically during the course thereof and may make a final inspection following the completion of work; the permittee shall cooperate with the Director in making such inspections. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.303)

16.64.040 Civil engineer field supervision.
All work under the provisions of this division shall be performed under the general supervision and coordination of a Civil Engineer unless waived by the Director for small projects (or minor work) or the work is supervised by an agency of the Federal or State government. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.302)

16.64.050 Changes.
No changes may be made in the location, dimensions, materials or character of the work authorized in a permit, except upon written authorization of the Director unless said change relates to work being performed pursuant to plans prepared or approved by an agency of the Federal or State government and such change has been approved by said agency. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.304)

16.64.060 Transfer of permits.
A permit issued pursuant to this division is not transferable from property to property for any reason or in any manner whatsoever. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.305)

16.64.070 Bond required.
A. A permit shall not be issued where the value of the work is estimated by the Director to be $3,000 or more, unless the permittee first posts with the Director a bond executed by the permittee and a corporate surety authorized to do business in this State as a surety. The bond shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and in an amount of 30 percent of the estimated value of the work authorized by the permit, except that the Director may waive all or part of the amount to the extent that he determines that the hazard or danger created by the work does not justify the full amount. The bond shall include penalty provisions for failure to complete the work on schedule.

B. In lieu of a surety bond the applicant may file with the City a cash bond or an instrument of credit approved by the City Attorney in an amount equal to that which would be required for the surety bond.

C. Every bond and instrument of credit shall include, and every cash deposit shall be made on, the conditions that the permittee shall:

1. Comply with the applicable laws, ordinances and provisions of this code;

2. Comply with all terms and conditions of the permit, to the satisfaction of the Director; and

3. Complete all work contemplated under the permit within the time limit therein specified, or if no time limit is therein specified, then within the time limit specified in this division.

D. Each bond, instrument of credit and cash deposit shall be made on and subject to the condition that no change, extension of time, alteration or addition to the terms of the permit or to the work contemplated thereunder, or the plans and specifications submitted in connection with the same, shall in any way affect the obligation of the surety on said bond, instrument of credit or cash deposit and; further, that the surety waives notice on any such change, extension of time, alteration or addition.

E. Each bond and instrument of credit shall remain in effect until the completion of the work to the satisfaction of the Director.

F. In the event of failure to complete the work, or failure to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit, the Director may order such work as in his opinion is necessary to eliminate any dangerous condition and to leave the site in a safe condition, or may order that the work authorized by the permit be completed to a safe condition, to his satisfaction. The permittee, and the surety on the bond or the person issuing the instrument of credit or making the cash deposit, shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the City in causing any and all work to be done. In case of a cash deposit, any unused portion thereof shall be refunded to the person posting the same following completion of the work.

G. If the permit so provides, there may be a partial acceptance of the work by the Director from time to time, and a concomitant partial release of the security. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 88.306)

Chapter 16.68
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE
(Repealed by Ord. 827)

Chapter 16.72
DRAINAGE FEES
Sections:

16.72.010    Title.

16.72.020    Purpose.

16.72.030    Findings.

16.72.040    Applicability.

16.72.050    Definitions.

16.72.060    Drainage areas established.

16.72.070    Planned local drainage facilities.

16.72.080    Estimated costs.

16.72.090    Drainage fees established.

16.72.092    Drainage fees established for Midland Road Drainage Basin.

16.72.100    Payment of fees or security therefor.

16.72.110    Construction credit.

16.72.120    Adjustment of fees.

16.72.130    Use of drainage fees.

16.72.140    Reimbursement.

16.72.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as “the drainage fee ordinance” and may be cited as such. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.201)

16.72.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to make provision for assessing and collecting drainage fees as a condition of issuance of building permits subsequent to approval of a final subdivision map, parcel map or development review to defray the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and stormwaters from local or neighborhood drainage areas as provided by Section 66483 of the Government Code (Subdivision Map Act). (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.202)

16.72.030 Findings.
The City Council, pursuant to Section 66483 of the Subdivision Map Act, finds that:

A. The further development of property within designated planned local drainage (PLD) areas as detailed on the local drainage area fee map will require the construction of the facilities on that fee map.

B. The fees established in this chapter are based upon estimated costs of these facilities which costs are fairly apportioned within each PLD area on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for development or on the need for the designated facilities created by the development of property within the PLD area. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.203)

16.72.040 Applicability.
This chapter shall not be applicable to any tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map filed prior to the thirty-first day after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter the filing of a tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map shall occur on the date that the application therefor is filed and the tentative map or tentative parcel map application fees are paid to the City. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.214)

16.72.050 Definitions.
Whenever the following words are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Local drainage area fee map” means a map showing the boundaries of each planned local drainage area and the location of all planned facilities within each area and containing a description and estimated cost of each facility and a schedule of fees for each local drainage area. The “local drainage area fee map” constitutes the plan and map referred to in Government Code Section 66483. The local drainage area fee map may be changed from time to time by action of the City Council. The local drainage area fee map is on file in the office of the City Clerk as Document No. 608735.

B. “Planned local drainage area” (PLD area) means a local or neighborhood drainage area within the meaning of Section 66483 of the Subdivision Map Act and includes the land lying within the boundaries designated on the local drainage area fee map. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.204)

16.72.060 Drainage areas established.
PLD areas for the City are hereby established. Said PLD areas are depicted upon the local drainage area fee map and any amendments thereto. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.205)

16.72.070 Planned local drainage facilities.
The City Council finds that the subdivision and/or development of land within the meaning of the Subdivision Map Act will require the construction of those drainage facilities described in the local drainage area fee map. Said facilities shall hereinafter be referred to as planned local drainage facilities or PLDF. The City Council further finds that all properties within each of said PLD areas will be benefited by construction of the PLDF proposed for each of said areas. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.206)

16.72.080 Estimated costs.
A. The City Council also finds that the total estimated costs effective through December 31, 1981, for all PLDF within each said PLD area are as set out in the local drainage area fee map.

B. It further finds that if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a per acre basis, the pro rata share in each local drainage area would be as set out in the local drainage area fee map. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.207)

16.72.090 Drainage fees established.
A. Pursuant to Section 66483 of the Subdivision Map Act, the drainage fees set out in said local area drainage fee map adopted by action of the City Council shall be paid for development of land subsequent to approval of subdivisions, parcel maps, or development reviews within the PLD areas established in this chapter.

B. The drainage fee shall be the lesser of the following:

1. The product of the gross area of the subdivided land, less open space, in acres and the fee rate (dollars per acre) for the particular local drainage area as set forth in the local drainage area and the fee for each area; or

2. In the case of residential development only, the product of the fee rate and the number of approved dwelling units. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.208)

16.72.092 Drainage fees established for Midland Road Drainage Basin.
Pursuant to Section 66483 of the Subdivision Map Act, the drainage fees for the Midland Road Drainage Basin shall be $2,168.19 per dwelling unit, and $23,850.09 per acre of commercially zoned property. The fees for dwelling units shall be paid in accordance with Government Code Section 53077. The fees for commercial projects shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit, or the finaling of a subdivision map, whichever comes first. The costs for master plan drainage improvements installed as a condition of development shall be credited toward the payment of fees, but not to exceed 100 percent of the fees. The fees for residential development shall be secured or paid prior to issuance of a building permit. If secured, the fees must be paid prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy at the rate in effect at the time of final payment. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 247 § 1, 1988)

16.72.100 Payment of fees or security therefor.
The fees required pursuant to this chapter shall be paid as a condition of and prior to the issuance of building permits.

In the case of residential development, the fee may be deferred by posting of a security satisfactory to the City Attorney. If the fee is secured for a residential project prior to building permit issuance, then the fee shall be paid prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy at the rate in effect at the time of final payment. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.209)

16.72.110 Construction credit.
A. When, as a requirement of the issuance of building permits subsequent to approval of a subdivision map, parcel maps or development review, the conditions require the construction of any facility described on the local drainage area fee map, or any portion of these facilities, the cost of the required improvements shall be credited to the developer based upon the length, capacity and type of facility to be constructed.

B. Credit for construction of planned facilities shall be the estimated cost as set out in Document No. 608735 on file with the City Clerk. Credit will be limited to the cost associated with 100 percent of the estimated cost of off-site improvements and a maximum of 50 percent of the estimated cost of on-site improvements. The estimated costs shall be valid through December, 1981, and shall be adjusted thereafter concurrent with the adjustment of fees as under PMC 16.72.120.

C. If, upon construction of the facilities, the costs associated with such construction are less than estimated, the developer shall pay to the City the difference between the actual costs and the estimated costs to the extent that credit was granted therefor. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost, the developer may be eligible for reimbursement pursuant to PMC 16.72.140. Total credit, however, shall not exceed 50 percent of the on-site improvements and 100 percent of off-site improvements.

D. The construction credit shall be reduced by the actual cost of any portion of a previously constructed master planned facility which is situated within the boundaries of the property being developed. In no case, however, shall the construction credit for any development be less than zero dollars. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.210)

16.72.120 Adjustment of fees.
A. The fees established by PMC 16.72.090 have been established in part on estimated costs to construct PLDF in the calendar years 1980 and 1981. In December of each calendar year, beginning with December, 1981, the City Council shall review and adjust the fees. Said adjustment to be based upon any increase or decrease in costs of construction as determined by the Engineering News Record Cost of Construction Index published by McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, or any successor thereof. The index for the month of November shall be used for such adjustment.

B. Fees adjusted in accordance with this chapter shall become effective as of January 1, 1982, and on each January 1st thereafter. However, the maximum amount of fee payable by a developer shall be calculated based on the fee rate in effect on the date of final payment of fees.

C. If the City Council does not review and adjust fees in December of 1981 or any subsequent December, the previously established fees shall remain in effect until such review has been conducted. (Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.211)

16.72.130 Use of drainage fees.
Fees collected under this chapter shall be segregated into a planned local drainage facilities fund established for each PLD area and the funds therein and interest accruing thereto shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of PLDF within the PLD area from which the fees comprising the fund were collected. (Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.212)

16.72.140 Reimbursement.
A. If the construction credit calculated in accordance with PMC 16.72.110 exceeds the drainage fee, the City shall reimburse the developer from the appropriate planned local drainage facilities fund in accordance with this section.

B. Reimbursement shall be made annually to persons entitled to reimbursement as of July 1st in accordance with the terms of this section, provided that fees are collected during the prior fiscal year of the City in connection with the subdivision or development of other property in the same PLD area in which the developer is entitled to reimbursement facilities. The amount of the reimbursement shall be limited to the difference between the construction credit and the drainage fee.

C. To be eligible for reimbursement, a developer shall make written application therefor following City Council acceptance of the improvements. The application shall be deemed complete upon the written determination of the Director of Development Services/City Engineer that the application has been timely filed, together with all data necessary to determine the validity and appropriate amount of reimbursement. The Director of Development Services/City Engineer shall determine the appropriate amount of reimbursement and submit a recommendation to the City Council for approval. The City Council shall approve, disapprove or modify the request for reimbursement by resolution without the necessity of a public hearing.

D. In the event that the developer wishes to enter into a reimbursement agreement with the City, the developer’s application for reimbursement shall include a request for such an agreement. Such an agreement shall incorporate by reference the terms of this chapter, shall provide that the developer shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from liability for failure to collect drainage fees which would fund reimbursement, and shall expire not more than 10 years after its execution date, without right of renewal or reapplication. The developer shall submit a draft agreement and shall pay the reimbursement agreement processing fee in effect at the time that the application for reimbursement is made.

E. In the event that two or more developers in the same planned local drainage area apply for reimbursement, payment priority shall be established as follows:

1. A developer with an approved reimbursement agreement shall be paid in full prior to payment of developers who have no reimbursement agreement with the City, regardless of the time at which the respective applications became complete.

2. In the event that two or more developers have fully executed reimbursement agreements with the City, such developers shall be reimbursed pro rata in accordance with the percentage that the total amount initially approved for reimbursement to the developer bears to the total amounts initially approved for all developers having fully executed reimbursement agreements at the time any reimbursement payment is made.

3. In the event that two or more developers are entitled to reimbursement but have not signed reimbursement agreements with the City, the developer whose application is complete first shall be entitled to reimbursement in full prior to any reimbursement being paid to any other developer who does not have a fully executed reimbursement agreement.

4. This subsection shall be applied to all reimbursements, pursuant to an agreement or otherwise, paid to any developer after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, except that as between two (or more) developers both (all) of whom have signed reimbursement agreements before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, any developer who has not received pro rata reimbursement (as that term is described in subsection (E)(2) of this section) as of that date, shall receive 100 percent of the next moneys reimbursed after said date until such developer has received pro rata reimbursement; thereafter, each such developer shall receive pro rata reimbursement until reimbursed in full or until that developer’s right to receive reimbursement expires. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 358 § 3, 1992; Ord. 285 § 1, 1989; Ord. 29 § 1, 1981; CC § 810.213)

Chapter 16.80
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
Sections:

16.80.010    Statutory authorization.

16.80.020    Findings of fact.

16.80.030    Statement of purpose.

16.80.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

16.80.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Poway does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.80.020 Findings of fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Poway are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B. These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.80.030 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this division to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.80.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this division includes methods and provisions to:

A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

D. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

Chapter 16.82
DEFINITIONS*
Sections:

16.82.005    Generally.

16.82.010    Accessory use.

16.82.020    Alluvial fan.

16.82.030    Apex.

16.82.040    Appeal.

16.82.050    Area of shallow flooding.

16.82.051    Area of special flood hazard.

16.82.053    Area of special flood-related erosion hazard.

16.82.055    Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard.

16.82.060    Base flood.

16.82.070    Basement.

16.82.080    Breakaway walls.

16.82.090    Building.

16.82.100    Development.

16.82.110    Encroachment.

16.82.115    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision.

16.82.120    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.

16.82.130    Flood, flooding or floodwater.

16.82.140    Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM).

16.82.150    Flood Hazard Boundary Map.

16.82.160    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

16.82.170    Flood Insurance Study.

16.82.180    Flood-related erosion.

16.82.190    Flood-related erosion area or flood-related erosion prone area.

16.82.200    Flood-related erosion area management.

16.82.210    Floodplain or flood-prone area.

16.82.220    Floodplain Administrator.

16.82.230    Floodplain management.

16.82.240    Floodplain management regulations.

16.82.250    Floodproofing.

16.82.260    Floodway.

16.82.270    Floodway fringe.

16.82.280    Fraud and victimization.

16.82.290    Functionally dependent use.

16.82.300    Governing body.

16.82.310    Hardship.

16.82.320    Highest adjacent grade.

16.82.330    Historic structure.

16.82.340    Levee.

16.82.350    Levee system.

16.82.360    Lowest floor.

16.82.370    Manufactured home.

16.82.380    Manufactured home park or subdivision.

16.82.390    Market value.

16.82.400    Mean sea level.

16.82.410    Mudslide.

16.82.420    Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area.

16.82.430    New construction.

16.82.440    New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.

16.82.450    Obstruction.

16.82.460    One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood.

16.82.470    Public safety and nuisance.

16.82.480    Recreational vehicle.

16.82.490    Regulatory floodway.

16.82.500    Remedy a violation.

16.82.510    Riverine.

16.82.520    Sheet flow area.

16.82.530    Special flood hazard area (SFHA).

16.82.540    Start of construction.

16.82.550    Structure.

16.82.560    Substantial damage.

16.82.570    Substantial improvement.

16.82.580    Variance.

16.82.590    Violation.

16.82.600    Water surface elevation.

16.82.610    Watercourse.

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 245.

16.82.005 Generally.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this division shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this division its most reasonable application. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.010 Accessory use.
“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.020 Alluvial fan.
“Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone- or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high-velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.030 Apex.
“Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.040 Appeal.
“Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this division. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.050 Area of shallow flooding.
“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.051 Area of special flood hazard.
For “area of special flood hazard” see “special flood hazard area.” (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.053 Area of special flood-related erosion hazard.
“Area of special flood-related erosion hazard” is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.055 Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard.
“Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard” is the area most likely to be subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.060 Base flood.
“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). “Base flood” is the term used throughout this division. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.070 Basement.
“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade – i.e., below ground level – on all sides. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.080 Breakaway walls.
“Breakaway walls” are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormal wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

A. Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

B. The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.090 Building.
For “building” see “structure.” (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.100 Development.
“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.110 Encroachment.
“Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.115 Existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.120 Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision” is the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets). (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.130 Flood, flooding or floodwater.
“Flood, flooding or floodwater” is:

A. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides, (i.e., mudflows).

B. The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.140 Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM).
“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.150 Flood Hazard Boundary Map.
“Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.160 Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.170 Flood Insurance Study.
“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.180 Flood-related erosion.
“Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.190 Flood-related erosion area or flood-related erosion prone area.
“Flood-related erosion area” or “flood-related erosion prone area” means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water which, due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.200 Flood-related erosion area management.
“Flood-related erosion area management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.210 Floodplain or flood-prone area.
“Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flood, flooding or floodwater”). (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.220 Floodplain Administrator.
“Floodplain Administrator” is the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.230 Floodplain management.
“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.240 Floodplain management regulations.
“Floodplain management regulations” means this division and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes Federal, State or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.250 Floodproofing.
“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing.) (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.260 Floodway.
“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot; also referred to as “regulatory floodway.” (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.270 Floodway fringe.
“Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.280 Fraud and victimization.
“Fraud and victimization,” as related to Chapter 16.90 PMC, Variances, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City of Poway will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.290 Functionally dependent use.
“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.300 Governing body.
“Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.310 Hardship.
“Hardship,” as related to Chapter 16.90 PMC, Variances, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City of Poway requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.320 Highest adjacent grade.
“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.330 Historic structure.
“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

C. Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.340 Levee.
“Levee” means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.350 Levee system.
“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.360 Lowest floor.
“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “basement” definition).

A. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

1. The wet floodproofing standard in PMC 16.88.010(C)(3);

2. The anchoring standards in PMC 16.88.010(A);

3. The construction materials and methods standards in PMC 16.88.010(B); and

4. The standards for utilities in PMC 16.88.020.

B. For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.370 Manufactured home.
“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.” (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.380 Manufactured home park or subdivision.
“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.390 Market value.
“Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square-foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.400 Mean sea level.
“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or others to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.410 Mudslide.
“Mudslide” describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover, and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.420 Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area.
“Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area” means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a potential for mudflow. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.430 New construction.
“New construction” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.440 New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
“New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.450 Obstruction.
“Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across, or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.460 One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood.
For “one-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood” see “base flood.” (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.470 Public safety and nuisance.
“Public safety and nuisance,” as related to Chapter 16.90 PMC, Variances, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.480 Recreational vehicle.
“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

A. Built on a single chassis;

B. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.490 Regulatory floodway.
“Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.500 Remedy a violation.
“Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this division or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.510 Riverine.
“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.520 Sheet flow area.
For “sheet flow area” see “area of shallow flooding.” (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.530 Special flood hazard area (SFHA).
“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1 – A30, AE, A99 or AH. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.540 Start of construction.
“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.550 Structure.
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.560 Substantial damage.
“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.570 Substantial improvement.
“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

B. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.580 Variance.
“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this division which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this division. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.590 Violation.
“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this division. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this division, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.82.600 Water surface elevation.
“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.82.610 Watercourse.
“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 16.84
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.84.010    Lands to which this division applies.

16.84.020    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

16.84.030    Compliance.

16.84.040    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

16.84.050    Interpretation.

16.84.060    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

16.84.070    Severability.

16.84.010 Lands to which this division applies.
This division shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Poway. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.84.020 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the 2012 Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and accompanying 2012 Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this division. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this division and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this division and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at 13325 Civic Center Drive, Poway, California. (Ord. 743 § 3, 2012)

16.84.030 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Poway from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.84.040 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this division and/or other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.84.050 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be:

A. Considered as minimum requirements;

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.84.060 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This division shall not create liability on the part of the City of Poway, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.84.070 Severability.
This division and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this division be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the division as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 16.86
ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

16.86.010    Establishment of development permit.

16.86.020    Designation of the Administrator.

16.86.030    Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator.

16.86.040    Appeals.

16.86.010 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction, encroachments, obstructions or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in PMC 16.84.020. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A. Site plan, including but not limited to:

1. For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site;

2. Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities;

3. If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and

4. If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and

B. Foundation design detail, including, but not limited to:

1. Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

2. For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in PMC 16.88.010(C)(3) and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93;

3. For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to 95 percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and

C. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in PMC 16.88.010(C)(2) and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and

D. All appropriate certifications listed in PMC 16.86.030(D); and

E. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 686 § 2, 2009; Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 245 § 3, 1987; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.86.020 Designation of the Administrator.
The Director of Development Services is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this division by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.86.030 Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A. Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

1. The permit requirements of this division have been satisfied;

2. All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained;

3. The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

4. The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this division, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

B. Review, Use, and Development of Other Base Flood Data.

1. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with PMC 16.84.020, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer Chapter 16.88 PMC. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption; or

2. If no base flood elevation data is available from a Federal or State agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995, in order to administer Chapter 16.88 PMC:

a. Simplified Method.

i. One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and

ii. Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or

b. Detailed Method. The 100-year or base flood discharge and the base flood elevation shall be obtained using detailed methods identified in FEMA Publication 265, published in July 1995 and titled: “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations.”

C. Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

1. Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

2. Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

3. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained;

4. Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations.

a. Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR);

b. All LOMRs for flood-control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition. Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data;

5. Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

D. Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

1. Certification required by PMC 16.88.010(C)(1) and 16.88.040 (lowest floor elevations);

2. Certification required by PMC 16.88.010(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

3. Certification required by PMC 16.88.010(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

4. Certification of elevation required by PMC 16.88.030(B) (subdivision standards);

5. Certification required by PMC 16.88.060 (floodway encroachments);

6. Reports required by PMC 16.88.070 (mudflow standards).

E. Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area pursuant to the process outlined in subsection B of this section. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Chapter 16.90 PMC.

F. Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this division as specified in PMC 16.84.030. (Ord. 743 § 3, 2012)

16.86.040 Appeals.
The City Council of the City of Poway shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this division. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 16.88
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sections:

16.88.010    Standards of construction.

16.88.020    Standards for utilities.

16.88.030    Standards for subdivisions.

16.88.040    Standards for manufactured homes.

16.88.050    Standards for recreational vehicles.

16.88.060    Floodways.

16.88.070    Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone areas.

16.88.080    Flood-related erosion-prone area.

16.88.010 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:

A. Anchoring.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2. All manufactured home units shall meet the anchoring standards of PMC 16.88.040.

B. Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

1. With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

2. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

3. With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

4. Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

C. Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Chapter 16.82 PMC definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement.”)

1. Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

a. In an AO zone, elevated at least one foot above the highest adjacent grade of the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified, or as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.

b. In an A zone, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in PMC 16.86.030(B), or as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.

c. In all other zones, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.

2. Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (C)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

a. Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this chapter are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

3. All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria:

a. Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or

b. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.

4. Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in PMC 16.88.040. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 245 § 3, 1987; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.88.020 Standards for utilities.
A. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1. Infiltration of floodwaters into the system; and

2. Discharge from systems into floodwaters.

B. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.88.030 Standards for subdivisions.
A. All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

B. All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

C. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E. All subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.88.040 Standards for manufactured homes.
A. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A1 – 30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

1. Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

2. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

3. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

4. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least one above the base flood elevation, or as determined by the Floodplain Administrator, and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

C. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1 – 30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

1. Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or as determined by the Floodplain Administrator; or

2. Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade.

Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 245 § 3, 1987; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.88.050 Standards for recreational vehicles.
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1 – 30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use – a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

B. Meet the permit requirements of Chapter 16.86 PMC and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in PMC 16.88.040(A). (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.88.060 Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in PMC 16.84.020 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in (the base) flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B. If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1998; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.88.070 Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone areas.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall review permits for proposed construction to determine if it is proposed within a mudslide area.

B. Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include but are not limited to the:

1. Type and quality of soils;

2. Evidence of ground water or surface water problems;

3. Depth and quality of any fill;

4. Overall slope of the site; and

5. Weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope.

C. Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the Floodplain Administrator shall require that:

1. A site investigation and further review be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering;

2. The proposed grading, excavation, new construction, and substantial improvement be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages;

3. The proposed grading, excavations, new construction, and substantial improvement do not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or off-site disturbances; and

4. Drainage, planting, watering, and maintenance do not endanger slope stability. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 503, 1998)

16.88.080 Flood-related erosion-prone area.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community.

B. Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.

C. If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.

D. Within zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated “useful life” of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 16.90
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
Sections:

16.90.010    Nature of variances.

16.90.020    Appeal board.

16.90.030    Conditions for variances.

16.90.010 Nature of variances.
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.

The variance criteria set forth in this chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this division would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this division are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004)

16.90.020 Appeal board.
In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this division, and the:

A. Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

B. Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

C. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

D. Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

E. Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

F. Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

G. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

H. Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

I. Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

J. Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

K. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 503, 1994; Ord. 174, 1985)

16.90.030 Conditions for variances.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Chapters 16.86 and 16.88 PMC have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Chapter 16.82 PMC) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

C. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this division. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

E. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the Floodplain Administrator that:

1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and

2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the San Diego County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

F. The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

G. Variances shall only be issued upon a:

1. Showing of good and sufficient cause;

2. Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Chapter 16.82 PMC) to the applicant; and

3. Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Chapter 16.82 PMC – see “Public safety or nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Chapter 16.82 PMC) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

H. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections (A) through (E) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

I. Upon consideration of the factors of PMC 16.90.020(A) and the purposes of this division, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this division. (Ord. 599 § 2, 2004; Ord. 503, 1994; Ord. 174, 1985)

Chapter 16.92
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT
(Repealed by Ord. 599)

Chapter 16.100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.100.010    Title.

16.100.020    Statutory authority.

16.100.030    Purpose.

16.100.040    Applicability of division.

16.100.050    Limited exclusion.

16.100.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) Ordinance of the City of Poway.” (Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.100.020 Statutory authority.
A. The municipal stormwater National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit (Order No. R9-2007-0001, NPDES No. CAS0108758, hereinafter referred to as “Municipal Permit”) issued to San Diego County, the Port of San Diego, San Diego County Regional Airport Authority and 18 cities (Copermittees) by the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board (Regional Board) on January 24, 2007, requires the development and implementation of a program addressing urban runoff pollution issues in development planning for public and private projects.

B. The requirement to implement a program for development planning is based on Federal and State statutes including: Section 402(p) of the Clean Water Act, Section 6217 of the Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990 (“CZARA”), and the California Water Code. The Clean Water Act amendments of 1987 established a framework for regulating urban runoff discharges from municipal, industrial, and construction activities under the NPDES program. The Municipal Permit requires the implementation of a Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management Program (JURMP). (Ord. 671 § 28, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.100.030 Purpose.
A. The primary objectives of this division are to:

1. Ensure that discharges from municipal urban runoff conveyance systems do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards;

2. Effectively prohibit nonstormwater discharges in urban runoff; and

3. Reduce the discharge of pollutants from urban runoff conveyance systems to the maximum extent practicable (MEP statutory standard).

B. The regulations of this division were developed to address postconstruction urban runoff pollution from new development and redevelopment applications that fall under “priority project” categories.

C. The goal of this division is to develop and implement practicable policies to ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that development does not increase pollutant loads from a project site. This includes mitigation of urban runoff based on the flow rates and velocities of historical rainfall events. This goal may be achieved through site-specific controls and/or drainage area-based or shared structural treatment controls. This division identifies appropriate best management practices (BMPs) for certain designated project types to achieve this goal. (Ord. 671 § 29, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.100.040 Applicability of division.
A. The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the development plan approval process for discretionary development applications, and prior to issuing development permits for ministerial projects.

B. To allow flexibility in meeting the design standards set forth in this division, structural treatment control best management practices (BMPs) may be located on- or off-site, used singly or in combination, or shared by multiple developments, provided certain conditions are met.

C. All new development and significant redevelopment projects that fall into one of the following priority project categories are subject to the requirements of this division, subject to the lawful prior-approval provisions of the Municipal Permit. In the instance where a project feature, such as a parking lot, falls into a priority project category, the entire project footprint is subject to the requirements of this division. These categories are:

1. Residential development of 10 units or more;

2. Commercial development greater than one acre;

3. Industrial development greater than one acre;

4. Automotive repair shops;

5. Restaurants;

6. Hillside development greater than 5,000 square feet;

7. Projects discharging to receiving waters within environmentally sensitive areas;

8. Parking lots with 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface, or with greater than 15 parking spaces, that are potentially exposed to urban runoff;

9. Streets, roads, driveways, highways, and freeways which would create a new paved impervious surface that is 5,000 square feet or greater;

10. Retail gasoline outlets 5,000 square feet or more or with a projected average daily traffic (ADT) of 100 or more vehicles per day; and

11. Pollutant generating development project that is one acre or more of disturbance. Pollutant generating development projects are those projects that generate pollutants at levels greater than background levels.

Where redevelopment results in an increase of less than 50 percent of the impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to SUSMP requirements, the numeric sizing criteria apply only to the addition and not the entire development. When redevelopment results in an increase of more than 50 percent of the impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, the numeric sizing criteria apply to the entire development. (Ord. 702 § 2, 2010; Ord. 671 § 30, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.100.050 Limited exclusion.
The following activities are not considered priority projects: trenching and resurfacing work associated with utility projects, resurfacing and reconfiguring surface parking lots and existing roadways, construction of new sidewalk, pedestrian ramps, or bike lane on existing roads, and routine replacement of damaged pavement such as pothole repair. Parking lots, buildings and other structures associated with utility projects are subject to the requirements of this division if one or more of the criteria for the above categories are met. (Ord. 671 § 31, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 16.101
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

16.101.010    City of Poway Local SUSMP.

16.101.020    Commercial development.

16.101.030    Commercial development greater than one acre.

16.101.040    Environmentally sensitive areas.

16.101.050    Hillside.

16.101.060    Hillside development greater than 5,000 square feet.

16.101.070    Industrial development greater than one acre.

16.101.080    Low impact development (LID).

16.101.090    Maximum extent practicable (MEP).

16.101.100    New development.

16.101.110    Parking lot.

16.101.120    Projects discharging to receiving waters within environmentally sensitive areas.

16.101.130    Project footprint.

16.101.140    Receiving waters.

16.101.150    Residential development.

16.101.160    Residential development of 10 units or more.

16.101.170    Restaurant.

16.101.180    Significant redevelopment.

16.101.190    Site design BMP.

16.101.200    Source control BMP (both structural and nonstructural).

16.101.210    Stormwater best management practice (BMP).

16.101.220    Stormwater conveyance system.

16.101.230    Streets, roads, highways, and freeways.

16.101.240    Treatment control (structural) BMP.

16.101.010 City of Poway Local SUSMP.
“City of Poway Local SUSMP” means the most recent guidelines concerning the Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan Requirements for Development Applications, as adopted by the City Council by resolution, which is incorporated by reference into this division. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010)

16.101.020 Commercial development.
“Commercial development” means any development on private land that is not exclusively heavy industrial or residential uses. The category includes, but is not limited to: mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses, hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities, automotive dealerships, commercial airfields, and other light industrial complexes. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.030)

16.101.030 Commercial development greater than one acre.
“Commercial development greater than one acre” means any commercial development that results in the disturbance of one acre or more of land. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.040)

16.101.040 Environmentally sensitive areas.
“Environmentally sensitive areas” means areas that include, but are not limited to, all Clean Water Act 303(d) impaired water bodies (“303(d) listed water bodies”); areas designated as an “Area of Special Biological Significance (ASBS)” by the State Water Resources Control Board (Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin (1994) and amendments); water bodies designated as having a RARE beneficial use by the State Water Resources Control Board (Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin (1994) and amendments), or areas designated as preserves or their equivalent under the Multiple Species Conservation Program (MSCP) within the Cities and County of San Diego. The limits of Areas of Special Biological Significance are those defined in the Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin (1994 and amendments). Environmentally sensitive area is defined for the purposes of implementing SUSMP requirements, and does not replace or supplement other environmental resource-based terms, such as “environmentally sensitive lands,” employed by the City in their land development review processes. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.070)

16.101.050 Hillside.
“Hillside” means lands that have a natural gradient of 25 percent (four feet of horizontal distance for every one foot of vertical distance) or greater and a minimum elevation differential of 50 feet, or a natural gradient of 200 percent (one foot of horizontal distance for every two feet of vertical distance) or greater and a minimum elevation differential of 10 feet. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.080)

16.101.060 Hillside development greater than 5,000 square feet.
“Hillside development greater than 5,000 square feet” means any development that would create more than 5,000 square feet of impervious surfaces in hillsides with known erosive soil conditions. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.090)

16.101.070 Industrial development greater than one acre.
“Industrial development greater than one acre” means development of industrial facilities that results in the disturbance of over one acre of land. Industrial facilities include those defined at 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14) including those subject to the general industrial permit or other individual NPDES permit, operating and closed landfills, facilities subject to SARA Title III, and hazardous waste treatment, disposal, storage and recovery facilities. Examples of industrial facilities include manufacturing plants, food processing plants, metal working facilities, printing plants, and fleet storage areas (bus, truck, or other vehicles). (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008. Formerly 16.101.110)

16.101.080 Low impact development (LID).
“Low impact development (LID)” means a stormwater management and land development strategy that emphasizes conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect predevelopment hydrologic features. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008. Formerly 16.101.140)

16.101.090 Maximum extent practicable (MEP).
“Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” means the technology-based standard established by Congress in the Clean Water Act Section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) that municipal dischargers of urban runoff must meet. MEP generally emphasizes pollution prevention and source control BMPs primarily (as the first line of defense) in combination with treatment methods serving as a backup (additional lines of defense). (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.150)

16.101.100 New development.
“New development” means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure; the creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.170)

16.101.110 Parking lot.
“Parking lot” means land area or facility for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles used personally, or for business or commerce. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.180)

16.101.120 Projects discharging to receiving waters within environmentally sensitive areas.
“Projects discharging to receiving waters within environmentally sensitive areas” means all development and significant redevelopment that (1) would create 2,500 square feet of impervious surfaces or increase the area of imperviousness of a project site to 10 percent or more of its naturally occurring condition, and (2) is located within or directly adjacent to (where any portion of the project footprint is located within 200 feet of the environmentally sensitive area) an environmentally sensitive area (where discharges from the development or redevelopment will enter receiving waters within the environmentally sensitive area) or discharges to a receiving water within an environmentally sensitive area without mixing with flows from adjacent lands (where the project footprint is located more than 200 feet from the environmentally sensitive area). (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.190)

16.101.130 Project footprint.
“Project footprint” means the limits of all grading and ground disturbance, including landscaping, associated with a project. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.200)

16.101.140 Receiving waters.
“Receiving waters” means surface bodies of water that directly or indirectly receive discharges from urban runoff conveyance systems, including naturally occurring wetlands, streams (perennial, intermittent, and ephemeral (exhibiting bed, bank, and ordinary high water mark)), creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, lagoons, estuaries, harbors, bays and the Pacific Ocean. The Director of Development Services shall determine the definition for wetlands and the limits thereof for the purposes of this definition, provided this definition is as protective as the Federal definition utilized by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Constructed wetlands are not considered wetlands under this definition, unless the wetlands were constructed as mitigation for habitat loss. Other constructed BMPs are not considered receiving waters under this definition, unless the BMP was originally constructed in receiving waters. Construction of treatment control BMPs in receiving waters is prohibited and therefore may not be used to satisfy SUSMP requirements. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.210)

16.101.150 Residential development.
“Residential development” means any development on private land that provides living accommodations for one or more persons. This category includes, but is not limited to: single-family homes, multifamily homes, condominiums, and apartments. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.220)

16.101.160 Residential development of 10 units or more.
“Residential development of 10 units or more” means any development that provides 10 or more residential units. Residential units can be attached or detached. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008. Formerly 16.101.230)

16.101.170 Restaurant.
“Restaurant” means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (Standard Industrial Classification code 5812). Restaurants where the land area for development is greater than 5,000 square feet shall meet all SUSMP requirements. Restaurants where the land development is less than 5,000 square feet shall meet all SUSMP requirements except for the structural treatment BMP and numeric sizing criteria requirement and the hydromodification requirement. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.240)

16.101.180 Significant redevelopment.
“Significant redevelopment” means development that would create, add, or replace at least 5,000 square feet of impervious surfaces on an already developed site that falls under one or more priority development project categories. Significant redevelopment includes, but is not limited to, the expansion of a building footprint; addition to or replacement of a structure; replacement of an impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related with structural or impervious surfaces. Replacement of impervious surfaces includes any activity that is not part of a routine maintenance activity where impervious material(s) are removed, exposing underlying soil during construction. Significant redevelopment does not include trenching and resurfacing associated with utility work; resurfacing and reconfiguring surface parking lots; new sidewalk construction, pedestrian ramps, or bike lane on existing roads; and replacement of damaged pavement. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.260)

16.101.190 Site design BMP.
“Site design BMP,” also known as a significant part of low impact development (LID), means any project design feature that reduces the amount of impervious surfaces, disconnects impervious surfaces, reduces creation or severity of potential pollutant sources, and/or reduces the alteration of the project site’s natural flow regime. Redevelopment projects that are undertaken to remove pollutant sources (such as existing surface parking lots and other impervious surfaces) or to reduce the need for new roads and other impervious surfaces (as compared to conventional or low-density new development) by incorporating higher densities and/or mixed land uses into the project design, are also considered site design BMPs. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.270)

16.101.200 Source control BMP (both structural and nonstructural).
“Source control BMP (both structural and nonstructural)” means land use or site planning practices or structures that aim to prevent urban runoff pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. Source control BMPs minimize the contact between pollutants and urban runoff. Examples include roof structures over trash or material storage areas, and berms around fuel dispensing areas. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.280)

16.101.210 Stormwater best management practice (BMP).
“Stormwater best management practice (BMP)” means any schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, structural treatment BMPs, and other management practices to prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to receiving waters. It is any procedure or device designed to minimize the quantity of pollutants that enter the storm drain system. Stormwater BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. This SUSMP groups stormwater BMPs into the following categories: site design, source control, and treatment control (pollutant removal) BMPs. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.290)

16.101.220 Stormwater conveyance system.
“Stormwater conveyance system” shall have the same meaning as set forth in PMC 8.68.020. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.300)

16.101.230 Streets, roads, highways, and freeways.
“Streets, roads, highways, and freeways” means any project that is not part of a routine maintenance activity, and would create a new paved surface that is 5,000 square feet or greater used for the transportation of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and other vehicles. This category includes commercial and residential driveways. For the purposes of SUSMP requirements, streets, roads, highways and freeways do not include trenching and resurfacing associated with utility work; applying asphalt overlay to existing pavement; new sidewalk, pedestrian ramps, or bike lane construction on existing roads; and replacement of damaged pavement. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.310)

16.101.240 Treatment control (structural) BMP.
“Treatment control (structural) BMP” means any engineered system designed and constructed to remove pollutants from urban runoff. Pollutant removal is achieved by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. (Ord. 702 § 3, 2010; Ord. 671 § 32, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.101.320)

Chapter 16.102
ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

16.102.010    Limitations.

16.102.020    Provisions for SUSMP requirements.

16.102.030    Implementation.

16.102.040    Site design stormwater treatment credits.

16.102.050    Alternative methods for achieving treatment requirements.

16.102.010 Limitations.
Where requirements of this division conflict with established local codes (e.g., specific language of signage used on storm drain stenciling), the City Council may continue the local practice and modify this division to be consistent with the code, except to the extent that the standards in this division are more stringent than those under local codes, such more stringent standards shall apply. (Ord. 671 § 33, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.102.020 Provisions for SUSMP requirements.
A. The requirements of this division shall be incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans prior to approval of discretionary permits.

B. For projects requiring only ministerial permits, the requirements of this division shall be incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans prior to the issuance of any ministerial permits.

C. City departments carrying out public projects that are not required to obtain permits shall be responsible for ensuring the requirements of this division are incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans prior to bidding for construction contracts, or equivalent. For public projects the requirements of this division must be incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans before allowing the project to commence.

D. City departments responsible for implementing this division and the respective roles and responsibilities of these departments are identified in the City’s Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management Plan. (Ord. 671 § 34, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.102.030 Implementation.
A. All priority projects shall implement stormwater BMPs according to the provisions of the City of Poway Local SUSMP, including:

1. LID and site design BMPs;

2. Source control BMPs; and

3. Structural treatment BMPs after the pollutants and conditions of concern have been identified.

B. Stormwater BMPs shall be considered and implemented where expressly required by this division and, if not so required, where determined applicable and feasible by the Director of Development Services. The stormwater BMPs shall adhere to the requirements of this division and the City of Poway Local SUSMP, and shall be correctly designed, implemented, and maintained so as to remove pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. A flow chart summarizing the stormwater BMP selection procedure is provided in Figure 1. (Ord. 702 § 4, 2010; Ord. 671 §§ 35, 36, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.102.040 Site design stormwater treatment credits.
The Copermittees may develop and submit for public review and comment and Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) approval a regional model site design stormwater treatment credits program that allows reductions in the volume or flow of stormwater that must be captured or treated on a project in return for the inclusion of specified project design features in the project. The model site design stormwater treatment credits program shall be deemed to be a part of this division following RWQCB and City Council approval. Any such model program shall specify the conditions under which project proponents can be credited for the use of site design features and low impact development techniques that can reduce the volume of stormwater runoff, preserve natural areas, and minimize the pollutant loads generated and potentially discharged from the site. Any site design stormwater treatment credits program implemented shall be consistent and compliant with this division and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 671 § 37, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.102.050 Alternative methods for achieving treatment requirements.
The City may choose to implement the Local Equivalent Area Drainage (LEAD) Method as proposed by the City of San Diego to meet treatment BMP requirements. Any alternative treatment must meet the following criteria:

A. The alternative treatment area shall be located within the proximity of the project;

B. The alternative treatment area shall discharge to the same receiving water as the project;

C. The alternative treatment area shall be equivalent to or greater than the project footprint;

D. The alternative treatment area shall have an equivalent or greater impervious surface area than the project;

E. The alternative treatment area shall have an equivalent or greater pollutant load than the project;

F. LID and source control BMPs shall be required in the project design; and

G. Alternative treatments shall be limited to redevelopment or infill projects. (Ord. 702 § 5, 2010; Ord. 671 § 38, 2008)


Chapter 16.103
CITY OF POWAY LOCAL SUSMP
Sections:

16.103.010    Compliance with City of Poway Local SUSMP.

16.103.020    General categories of water pollution.

16.103.030    Identifying pollutants from the project area.

16.103.040    Identifying pollutants of concern in receiving waters.

16.103.050    Identifying conditions of concern in receiving waters.

16.103.010 Compliance with City of Poway Local SUSMP.
All priority development projects, as defined by PMC 16.100.040, shall comply with the provisions of the City of Poway Local SUSMP, as adopted by the City Council by resolution, and incorporated by reference into this division. Compliance with the City of Poway Local SUSMP includes, but is not limited to:

A. Identifying pollutants and conditions of concern.

B. Establishing stormwater BMPs.

C. LID and site design BMPs including LID integrated management practices.

D. Source control BMPs.

E. Treatment control BMPs.

F. Hydromodification.

G. Operations and maintenance of stormwater facilities. (Ord. 702 § 7, 2010; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.103.020 General categories of water pollution.
Urban runoff from a developed site has the potential to contribute pollutants, including oil and grease, suspended solids, metals, gasoline, pesticides, and pathogens, to the stormwater conveyance system and receiving waters. For the purposes of identifying pollutants of concern and associated stormwater BMPs, pollutants are grouped in nine general categories as follows:

A. Sediments. Sediments are soils or other surficial materials eroded and then transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. Sediments can increase turbidity, clog fish gills, reduce spawning habitat, lower young aquatic organisms survival rates, smother bottom dwelling organisms, and suppress aquatic vegetation growth.

B. Nutrients. Nutrients are inorganic substances, such as nitrogen and phosphorus. They commonly exist in the form of mineral salts that are either dissolved or suspended in water. Primary sources of nutrients in urban runoff are fertilizers and eroded soils. Excessive discharge of nutrients to water bodies and streams can cause excessive aquatic algae and plant growth. Such excessive production, referred to as cultural eutrophication, may lead to excessive decay of organic matter in the water body, loss of oxygen in the water, release of toxins in sediment, and the eventual death of aquatic organisms.

C. Metals. Metals are raw material components in nonmetal products such as fuels, adhesives, paints, and other coatings. The primary sources of metal pollution in stormwater are typically commercially available metals and metal products. Metals of concern include cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, and zinc. Lead and chromium have been used as corrosion inhibitors in primer coatings and cooling tower systems. At low concentrations naturally occurring in soil, metals are not toxic. However, at higher concentrations, certain metals can be toxic to aquatic life. Humans can be impacted from contaminated groundwater resources and bioaccumulation of metals in fish and shellfish. Environmental concerns, regarding the potential for release of metals to the environment, have already led to restricted metal usage in certain applications.

D. Organic Compounds. Organic compounds are carbon-based. Commercially available or naturally occurring organic compounds are found in pesticides, solvents, and hydrocarbons. Organic compounds can, at certain concentrations, indirectly or directly constitute a hazard to life or health. When rinsing off objects, toxic levels of solvents and cleaning compounds can be discharged to storm drains. Dirt, grease, and grime retained in the cleaning fluid or rinse water may also adsorb levels of organic compounds that are harmful or hazardous to aquatic life.

E. Trash and Debris. Trash (such as paper, plastic, polystyrene packing foam, and aluminum materials) and biodegradable organic matter (such as leaves, grass cuttings, and food waste) are general waste products on the landscape. The presence of trash and debris may have a significant impact on the recreational value of a water body and aquatic habitat. Excess organic matter can create a high biochemical oxygen demand in a stream and thereby lower its water quality. Also, in areas where stagnant water exists, the presence of excess organic matter can promote septic conditions resulting in the growth of undesirable organisms and the release of odorous and hazardous compounds such as hydrogen sulfides.

F. Oxygen-Demanding Substances. This category includes biodegradable organic material as well as chemicals that react with dissolved oxygen in water to form other compounds. Proteins, carbohydrates, and fats are examples of biodegradable organic compounds. Compounds such as ammonia and hydrogen sulfide are examples of oxygen-demanding compounds. The oxygen demand of a substance can lead to depletion of dissolved oxygen in a water body and possibly the development of septic conditions.

G. Oil and Grease. Oil and grease are characterized as high-molecular-weight organic compounds. Primary sources of oil and grease are petroleum hydrocarbon products, motor products from leaking vehicles, esters, oils, fats, waxes, and high-molecular-weight fatty acids. Introduction of these pollutants to the water bodies is very possible due to the wide uses and applications of some of these products in municipal, residential, commercial, industrial, and construction areas. Elevated oil and grease content can decrease the aesthetic value of the water body, as well as the water quality.

H. Bacteria and Viruses. Bacteria and viruses are ubiquitous microorganisms that thrive under certain environmental conditions. Their proliferation is typically caused by the transport of animal or human fecal wastes from the watershed. Water containing excessive bacteria and viruses can alter the aquatic habitat and create a harmful environment for humans and aquatic life. Also, the decomposition of excess organic waste causes increased growth of undesirable organisms in the water.

I. Pesticides. Pesticides (including herbicides) are chemical compounds commonly used to control nuisance growth or prevalence of organisms. Excessive application of a pesticide may result in runoff containing toxic levels of its active component. (Ord. 671 §§ 39 – 42, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.103.030 Identifying pollutants from the project area.
Using Table 1, pollutants shall be identified that are anticipated to be generated from the proposed priority project categories. Pollutants associated with any hazardous material sites that have been remediated or are not threatened by the proposed project are not considered a pollutant of concern.

Table 1. Anticipated and Potential Pollutants Generated by Land Use Type 

General Pollutant Categories

Priority Project Categories

Sediments

Nutrients

Heavy Metals

Organic Compounds

Trash and Debris

Oxygen-Demanding Substances

Oil and Grease

Bacteria and Viruses

Pesticides

Detached Residential Development

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Attached Residential Development

X

X

X

P(1)

P(2)

P

X

Commercial Development > One Acre

P(1)

P(1)

P(2)

X

P(5)

X

P(3)

P(5)

Industrial Development > One Acre

X

X

X

X

X

X

Automotive Repair Shops

X

X(4)(5)

X

X

Restaurants

X

X

X

X

Hillside Development >5,000 ft.2

X

X

X

X

X

X

Parking Lots

P(1)

P(1)

X

X

P(1)

X

P(1)

Retail Gasoline

X

X

X

X

X

Streets, Highways and Freeways

X

P(1)

X

X(4)

X

P(5)

X

X = anticipated

P = potential

(1) A potential pollutant if landscaping exists on site.

(2) A potential pollutant if the project includes uncovered parking areas.

(3) A potential pollutant if land use involves food or animal waste products.

(4) Including petroleum hydrocarbons.

(5) Including solvents.

(Ord. 671 § 43, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.103.040 Identifying pollutants of concern in receiving waters.
A. Pollutants generated by the proposed priority project that exhibit one or more of the following characteristics are considered primary pollutants of concern:

1. Current loadings or historical deposits of the pollutant are impairing the beneficial uses of a receiving water;

2. Elevated levels of the pollutant are found in water or sediments of a receiving water and/or have the potential to be toxic to or bioaccumulate in organisms therein; and

3. Inputs of the pollutant are at a level high enough to be considered potentially toxic.

B. To identify primary pollutants of concern in receiving waters, each priority project shall, at a minimum, do the following:

1. For each of the proposed project’s discharge points, identify the receiving water(s) that each discharge point proposes to discharge to, including hydrologic unit basin number(s), as identified in the most recent version of the Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin, prepared by the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board.

2. Identify any receiving waters, into which the developed area would discharge, listed on the most recent list of Clean Water Act Section 303(d) impaired water bodies. List any and all pollutants for which the receiving waters are impaired.

3. Compare the list of pollutants for which the receiving waters are impaired with the pollutants anticipated to be generated by the project (as identified in Table 1). Any pollutants identified by Table 1 which are also causing impairment of receiving waters shall be considered primary pollutants of concern.

C. For projects where no primary pollutants of concern exist, those pollutants identified through the use of Table 1 shall be considered secondary pollutants of concern. (Ord. 671 § 44, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

16.103.050 Identifying conditions of concern in receiving waters.
A. Common impacts to the hydrologic regime resulting from development typically include increased runoff volume and velocity; reduced infiltration; increased flow frequency, duration, and peaks; faster time to reach peak flow; and water quality degradation. These changes have the potential to permanently impact downstream channels and habitat integrity. A change to a priority project site’s hydrologic regime would be considered a condition of concern if the change would impact downstream channels and habitat integrity. Because of these potential impacts, the following steps shall be followed by each priority project:

1. Evaluate the project’s conditions of concern in a drainage study report prepared by a registered civil engineer in the State of California with experience in fluvial geomorphology and water resources management.

The report shall consider the project area’s location (from the larger watershed perspective), topography, soil and vegetation conditions, percent impervious area, natural and infrastructure drainage features, and any other relevant hydrologic and environmental factors to be protected specific to the project area’s watershed.

2. As part of the drainage study, a qualified, licensed professional shall provide a report on proposed infiltration techniques (trenches, basins, dry wells, permeable pavements with underground reservoir for infiltration) regarding any potential adverse geotechnical concerns. Geotechnical conditions such as slope stability, expansive soils, compressible soils, seepage, groundwater depth, and loss of foundation or pavement subgrade strength should be addressed, and mitigation measures provided.

3. As part of the drainage study, the civil engineer shall conduct a field reconnaissance to observe and report on downstream conditions, including undercutting erosion, slope stability, vegetative stress (due to flooding, erosion, water quality degradation, or loss of water supplies) and the area’s susceptibility to erosion or habitat alteration as a result of an altered flow regime.

4. The drainage study shall compute rainfall runoff characteristics from the project area including, at a minimum, peak flow rate, flow velocity, runoff volume, time of concentration, and retention volume. These characteristics shall be developed for the two-year and 10-year frequency, Type I storm, of six-hour or 24-hour duration (whichever is the closer approximation of the site’s time of concentration), during critical hydrologic conditions for soil and vegetative cover. The drainage study shall report the project’s conditions of concern based on the hydrologic and downstream conditions discussed above. Where downstream conditions of concern have been identified, the drainage study shall establish that pre-project hydrologic conditions affecting downstream conditions of concern would be maintained by the proposed project, satisfactory to the Director of Development Services, by incorporating the site design, source control, and treatment control requirements identified in this division.

B. Priority development projects are subject to the City’s Hydromodification Management Plan (HMP) as incorporated in the Poway Local SUSMP. The HMP shall demonstrate how priority projects will manage increases in runoff discharge rates and durations where such increased rates and durations are likely to cause increased erosion of channel beds and banks, sediment pollutant generation, or other impacts to beneficial uses and stream habitat due to increased erosive force. Projects will be required to utilize a continuous hydrological simulation and the results of a hydromodification management analysis must adhere to the following criteria:

1. For flow rates between the pre-project lower flow threshold and the pre-project 10-year runoff event, the post-project discharge rates and durations may not deviate above the pre-project discharge rates and durations by more than 10 percent over more than 10 percent of the length of the flow duration curve.

2. Lower flow thresholds may be determined using the tools provided in the local SUSMP along with a critical flow calculator and channel screening tools developed by the Southern California Coastal Water Research Project (SCCWRP). These methods identify lower flow thresholds for a range of channel conditions. The critical flow calculator recommends a lower flow value of 0.1Q2, 0.3Q2 or 0.5Q2 dependent on the receiving channel material and dimensions, where Q2 is defined as the two-year runoff event. This value will be compared to channel susceptibility rating (High, Medium or Low) as determined from the most recent SCCWRP screening tools to determine the final lower flow threshold.

3. The lower flow threshold may alternately be determined as 10 percent of the pre-project two-year runoff event or 0.1Q2. This approach is available if the project applicant chooses not to complete the channel screening analysis.

C. Priority Development Projects are required to implement hydromodification mitigation measures so that post-project runoff flow rates and durations do not exceed pre-project flow rates and durations. Hydromodification mitigation can be provided as follows:

1. Demonstrate no post-project increase in impervious area and resultant peak flow rates as compared to pre-project conditions.

2. Installation of LID BMPs such as bioretention facilities to control runoff flows and durations from new impervious areas.

3. Mitigation of flow and durations through implementation of extended detention flow duration control basins.

4. Preparation of continuous simulation hydrologic models and comparison of the pre-project and mitigated post-project runoff peaks and durations (with hydromodification flow controls) until compliance is achieved.

5. Implementation of in-stream rehabilitation controls to demonstrate that projected increases in runoff peaks and/or durations would not accelerate erosion to the rehabilitated receiving stream reach.

D. Priority development projects shall be exempt from the HMP criteria under the following conditions.

1. If the proposed project does not increase the impervious area or peak flows to any discharge location.

2. If the proposed project discharges runoff directly to an exempt receiving water such as the Pacific Ocean, an exempt river reach, an exempt reservoir, or a tidally influenced area.

3. If the proposed project discharges to a stabilized conveyance system that extends to the Pacific Ocean, a tidally influenced area, an exempt river reach or reservoir.

4. If the contributing watershed area to which the project discharges has an impervious area percentage greater than 70 percent.

5. If an urban infill project discharges to an existing hardened or rehabilitated conveyance system that extends beyond the domain of analysis, the potential for cumulative impacts in the watershed is low, and the ultimate receiving channel has a low susceptibility to erosion as defined in the SCCWRP channel assessment tool.

E. LID facilities must be designed to be practically built and maintained within the urban environment. Projects are encouraged to use LID design approaches to provide both treatment for the 85th percentile water quality event as well as flow control to meet hydromodification criteria. To assure compliance with hydromodification flow control requirements, design criteria, specifications, and long-term operations and maintenance requirements have been provided in the local SUSMP for a variety of LID-based flow control methods including bioretention basins, flow-through planter boxes, and bioretention systems in combination with cisterns and vaults. Sizing factor development shall include the use of continuous simulation of runoff from the long-term rainfall record.

F. Proof of a long-term maintenance responsibility and mechanism will be required for all post-construction BMP and flow control facilities. If not properly designed or maintained, hydromodification flow control devices may create a habitat for vectors such as mosquitoes or rodents. Maintenance activities for flow control and LID devices shall be specified in the proposed Project Submittal.

G. The local SUSMP outlines the monitoring program to assess the effectiveness of hydromodification management facilities. Monitoring activities will include inflow and outflow monitoring from BMPs, baseline cross section monitoring, and flow-based sediment monitoring. (Ord. 712 § 2, 2010; Ord. 671 § 45, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 16.104
PROVIDING PROOF OF ONGOING BMP MAINTENANCE
Sections:

16.104.010    Maintenance mechanism to be in place before acceptance.

16.104.020    Maintenance mechanisms.

16.104.030    Verification mechanisms.

16.104.040    Maintenance requirements.

16.104.010 Maintenance mechanism to be in place before acceptance.
Structural BMPs shall not be considered “effective,” and shall not be accepted as meeting the MEP standard, unless a mechanism is in place that will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural BMPs. As part of project review, if a project proponent is required to include interim or permanent structural BMPs in project plans, and if the Director of Development Services does not provide a mechanism for BMP maintenance, the project proponent shall provide verification of maintenance requirements through such means as may be appropriate, at the discretion of the Director of Development Services, including, but not limited to covenants, legal agreements, maintenance agreements, and/or conditional use permits. (Ord. 702 § 12, 2010; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.108.010)

16.104.020 Maintenance mechanisms.
A. Public Entity Maintenance. The City Council may approve a public or acceptable quasi-public entity (e.g., the County Flood Control District, or annex to an existing assessment district, an existing utility district, a State or Federal resource agency, or a conservation conservancy) to assume responsibility for maintenance, repair and replacement of the BMP. Unless acceptable to the City Council, public entity maintenance agreements shall ensure estimated costs are front-funded or reliably guaranteed (for example, through a trust fund, assessment district fees, bond, letter of credit or similar means). In addition, the City Council may seek protection from liability by appropriate releases and indemnities. The City Council shall have the authority to approve stormwater BMPs proposed for transfer to any other public entity within its jurisdiction before installation. The City Council shall be involved in the negotiation of maintenance requirements with any other public entities accepting maintenance responsibilities within their respective jurisdictions, and in negotiations with the resource agencies responsible for issuing permits for the construction and/or maintenance of the facilities. The City Council must be identified as a third party beneficiary empowered to enforce any such maintenance agreement within their respective jurisdictions.

B. Project Proponent Agreement to Maintain Stormwater BMPs. The City Council may enter into a contract with the project proponent obliging the project proponent to maintain, repair and replace the stormwater BMP as necessary into perpetuity. Security may be required.

C. Assessment Districts. The City Council may approve an Assessment District or other funding mechanism created by the project proponent to provide funds for stormwater BMP maintenance, repair and replacement on an ongoing basis. Any agreement with such a district shall be subject to the public entity maintenance provisions above.

D. Lease Provisions. In those cases where the City holds title to the land in question, and the land is being leased to another party for private or public use, the City Council may assure stormwater BMP maintenance, repair and replacement through conditions in the lease.

E. Conditional Use Permits. For discretionary projects only, the City Council may assure maintenance of stormwater BMPs through the inclusion of maintenance conditions in the conditional use permit. Security may be required.

F. Alternative Mechanisms. The City Council may accept alternative maintenance mechanisms, if such mechanisms are as protective those listed above. (Ord. 702 § 12, 2010; Ord. 671 § 66, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.108.020)

16.104.030 Verification mechanisms.
A. For discretionary projects, the City approved method of stormwater BMP maintenance shall be incorporated into the project’s permit, and shall be consistent with permits issued by resource agencies, before City approval of discretionary permits.

B. For projects requiring only ministerial permits, the approved method of stormwater BMP maintenance shall be incorporated into the permit conditions before the issuance of any ministerial permits.

C. In all instances, the project proponent shall provide proof of execution of an approved method of maintenance repair and replacement before the issuance of construction approvals.

D. Public projects that are not required to obtain permits shall be responsible for ensuring that an approved method of stormwater BMP maintenance repair and replacement is executed prior to the commencement of construction.

E. For all properties, the verification mechanism will include the project proponent’s signed statement, as part of the project application, accepting responsibility for all structural BMP maintenance, repair and replacement, until a City approved entity agrees to assume responsibility for structural BMP maintenance, repair and replacement.

F. The party responsible for the structural BMP maintenance shall provide to the City annual written verification of effective operation and maintenance of each approved treatment control BMP. (Ord. 702 § 12, 2010; Ord. 671 § 67, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.108.030)

16.104.040 Maintenance requirements.
A. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan. A copy of an operation and maintenance (O&M) plan, prepared by the project proponent and satisfactory to the Director of Development Services, shall be attached to the approved maintenance agreement, which describes the designated responsible party to manage the stormwater BMP(s), employees’ training program and duties, operating schedule, maintenance frequency, routine service schedule, specific maintenance activities, copies of resource agency permits, and any other necessary activities. At a minimum, maintenance agreements shall require the inspection and servicing of all structural BMPs on an annual basis. The project proponent maintenance entity shall complete and maintain O&M forms to document all maintenance requirements. Parties responsible for the O&M plan shall retain records for at least five years. These documents shall be made available to the City for inspection upon request at any time.

B. Access Easement/Agreement. As part of the maintenance mechanism selected above, it shall include a copy of an executed access easement that shall be binding on the land throughout the life of the project, until such time that the stormwater BMP requiring access is replaced, satisfactory to the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 702 § 12, 2010; Ord. 671 § 68, 2008; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.108.040)

Chapter 16.105
WAIVER OF STRUCTURAL TREATMENT BMP REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

16.105.010    Waiver of structural treatment BMP requirements.

16.105.010 Waiver of structural treatment BMP requirements.
A. The requirement of implementing structural treatment BMPs may be waived if infeasibility can be established. A waiver of infeasibility shall be granted only when all available structural treatment BMPs have been considered and rejected as infeasible.

B. Waivers may only be granted from structural treatment BMP and structural treatment BMP sizing requirements. Priority development projects, whether or not granted a waiver may not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality objectives. Pollutants in runoff from projects granted a waiver must still be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 702 § 13, 2010; Ord. 569 § 2, 2002. Formerly 16.109.010)

Title 17
ZONING* Amended Ord. 831
Chapters:

17.02    General Provisions

17.04    Definitions

17.06    Establishment of Zones – Zoning Maps

17.07    Repealed

17.08    Residential Zones Amended Ord. 831

17.10    Commercial Zones Amended Ord. 831

17.16    MHP Mobile Home Park Zone

17.18    PRD Planned Residential Development Zone

17.20    PC Planned Community Zone

17.21    HC Hospital Campus Zone

17.22    PF Public Facilities Zone

17.23    OS-R Open Space-Recreation Zone

17.24    OS-RM Open Space-Resource Management Zone

17.26    Special Uses and Conditions

17.27    Pawn Shops

17.28    Home Occupations

17.30    Recreational Courts

17.31    Amateur Radio Antenna Installations

17.32    Keeping of Animals

17.33    Stables

17.34    Kennels

17.35    Teen Clubs and Centers

17.36    Arcades

17.37    Satellite Dish Antennas

17.38    Adult-Oriented Businesses

17.39    Residential Senior Citizen Standards

17.40    Comprehensive Sign Regulations

17.41    Landscape Efficiency Standards

17.42    Off-Street Parking

17.44    Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Performance Standards

17.45    Historical Structures

17.46    Amendments

17.47    Specific Plan Regulations

17.48    Conditional Use Permit Regulations

17.50    Variances

17.52    Development Review Procedure

17.53    Development Agreement Regulations for Consideration

17.54    Enforcement

17.56    Wireless Communication Facilities

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 11, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 38, 42, 43, 45, 58 and 59; CC Ord. 5281.

Chapter 17.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

17.02.010    Purpose and scope.

17.02.020    Private agreements.

17.02.030    Conflicting provisions.

17.02.040    Clarification of ambiguity.

17.02.050    Effects of zoning.

17.02.010 Purpose and scope.
For the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the City, to safeguard and enhance the appearance and quantity of development of the City, and to provide for the social, physical and economic advantages resulting from comprehensive and orderly planned use of land resources, a zoning development code defining classifications of zones and regulations within those zones is established and adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.0), 1983)

17.02.020 Private agreements.
The provisions of this title are not intended to abrogate any easements, covenants or other existing agreements which are more restrictive than the provisions of this title. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.1), 1983)

17.02.030 Conflicting provisions.
Whenever the provisions of this title impose more restrictive regulations upon the construction or use of buildings or structures or the use of lands or premises than are imposed or required by other ordinances, previously adopted, the provisions of this title or rules and regulations promulgated thereunder shall govern. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.2), 1983)

17.02.040 Clarification of ambiguity.
If ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title, or if ambiguity exists with respect to matters of height, yard requirements, area requirements or zone boundaries as set forth in this title, it shall be the duty of the Development Services Director to ascertain all pertinent facts and forward said findings and interpretations to the Council, and, if approved by the Council, thereafter such interpretations shall govern. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.4), 1983)

17.02.050 Effects of zoning.
A. Application of Provisions. The provisions of this title governing the use of land, buildings and structures, the size of yards abutting buildings and structures, the height and bulk of buildings, the density of population, the number of dwelling units per acre, standards of performance, and other provisions are declared by this title to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every zone established by this title.

B. Buildings Under Construction. Any building for which a building permit has been issued under the provisions of earlier ordinances of the City which are in conflict with the ordinance codified in this title, and on which substantial construction has been performed by integration of materials on the site before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, may nevertheless be continued and completed in accordance with the plans and specifications upon which the permit was issued.

C. Approved Tentative Tract Maps or Tentative Parcel Maps. Any approved tentative map or tentative parcel map which has been approved pursuant to the provisions of earlier ordinances of the City and which is in conflict with this title may nevertheless be continued and completed in accordance with the provisions of its approval, provided it is completed within the time limit in effect at the time of its approval without extension of time thereof, and provided it complies with all other ordinances and laws in effect at the time of its approval. Final tract maps may be approved pursuant to this section and building and other permits may be issued for any lots created pursuant to this section consistent with such approval. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.5), 1983)

Chapter 17.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

17.04.005    Grammatical interpretation.

17.04.010    Definitions generally.

17.04.015    Abut.

17.04.020    Access or access way.

17.04.023    Accessory apartment.

17.04.025    Accessory building.

17.04.030    Accessory dwelling unit.

17.04.035    Accessory use.

17.04.090    Advertise.

17.04.093    Agricultural worker housing.

17.04.097    Alteration.

17.04.100    Ambient level.

17.04.105    Anatomical areas.

17.04.106    Animal enclosure.

17.04.110    Animal hospital.

17.04.116    Antique.

17.04.117    Antique shop.

17.04.125    Apartment.

17.04.130    Arcades.

17.04.132    Attic.

17.04.135    Automobile service station.

17.04.145    Basement.

17.04.153    Board and care.

17.04.155    Boardinghouse or roominghouse.

17.04.157    Body piercing.

17.04.160    Building.

17.04.170    Building height.

17.04.172    Building, main.

17.04.175    Building site.

17.04.180    Business center.

17.04.195    Canopy.

17.04.202    Caretaker’s living quarters.

17.04.205    Carport.

17.04.210    Clinic.

17.04.215    Club.

17.04.220    Coffeeshop.

17.04.225    Community apartment.

17.04.235    Condominium.

17.04.240    Condominium conversion.

17.04.250    Convalescent home.

17.04.251    Cottage food business.

17.04.265    County Recorder.

17.04.268    Crawl space.

17.04.270    Day nursery.

17.04.275    Density.

17.04.280    Development.

17.04.290    Director of Development Services.

17.04.295    Dormitory.

17.04.300    Drive-in or drive-through restaurant.

17.04.305    Dwelling.

17.04.310    Repealed.

17.04.315    Dwelling, multiple.

17.04.320    Dwelling, single-family.

17.04.325    Dwelling unit.

17.04.327    Eating and drinking establishments.

17.04.330    Educational institutions.

17.04.333    Exotic, wild or nondomestic animal.

17.04.335    Family.

17.04.337    Fence.

17.04.355    Garage.

17.04.357    Garage, private.

17.04.360    General plan.

17.04.365    Grade.

17.04.370    Grand opening.

17.04.375    Gross area.

17.04.378    Repealed.

17.04.380    Guestroom.

17.04.390    Highway.

17.04.392    Home occupation.

17.04.395    Hospital.

17.04.400    Hotel.

17.04.401    Household pet.

17.04.403    Independent living.

17.04.405    Inoperative activity.

17.04.411    Junk.

17.04.415    Kennel.

17.04.420    Large animals.

17.04.425    Legal.

17.04.430    Legal lot.

17.04.432    Live entertainment.

17.04.433    Living unit.

17.04.434    Lodge.

17.04.440    Lot.

17.04.445    Lot, corner.

17.04.450    Lot coverage.

17.04.455    Lot depth.

17.04.460    Lot, flag.

17.04.465    Lot, interior.

17.04.470    Lot line.

17.04.475    Lot line, front.

17.04.480    Lot line, interior.

17.04.485    Lot line, rear.

17.04.490    Lot, reverse corner.

17.04.495    Lot line, side.

17.04.500    Lot, through.

17.04.505    Lot width.

17.04.510    Major review.

17.04.513    Masonry wall.

17.04.514    Marijuana cultivation – Marijuana delivery – Marijuana dispensaries, cooperatives, and collectives – Marijuana manufacturing – Marijuana storage.

17.04.515    Minor review.

17.04.520    Mobile home.

17.04.525    Mobile home unit space.

17.04.530    Motel.

17.04.540    Net area.

17.04.545    Nonconforming building.

17.04.550    Nonconforming lot.

17.04.560    Nonconforming use.

17.04.573    Open fence.

17.04.575    Other habitable accessory building.

17.04.576    Outdoor display.

17.04.577    Outdoor storage and/or sales area.

17.04.585    Parkway.

17.04.595    Planned residential development.

17.04.612    Poultry.

17.04.615    Public right-of-way.

17.04.628    Recreational courts, public and semipublic.

17.04.629    Recycling center.

17.04.630    Remodel.

17.04.631    Residence, main.

17.04.635    Roof.

17.04.640    Roofline.

17.04.648    Repealed.

17.04.650    Service stations.

17.04.655    Setback, front yard.

17.04.660    Setback, rear yard or side yard.

17.04.670    Single-family zone.

17.04.672    Single housekeeping unit.

17.04.673    Single room occupancy, SRO.

17.04.675    Site plan.

17.04.680    Small animals.

17.04.690    Special promotional parking lot sales event.

17.04.700    Stable.

17.04.715    Statuary.

17.04.720    Story.

17.04.725    Street.

17.04.730    Structure.

17.04.735    Structural alteration.

17.04.736    Supportive housing.

17.04.740    Temporary outdoor sales.

17.04.743    Tobacco shops.

17.04.744    Transitional housing.

17.04.745    Use.

17.04.747    Use, principal.

17.04.750    Useful life.

17.04.765    Wholesaling.

17.04.775    Yard.

17.04.780    Yard, front.

17.04.785    Yard, rear.

17.04.790    Yard, side.

17.04.795    Zoning development code and/or ordinance.

17.04.005 Grammatical interpretation.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; and those in the plural number include the singular.

B. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)), 1983)

17.04.010 Definitions generally.
For the purposes of this title, certain words, phrases, and terms used in this title shall have the meaning assigned to them by this chapter. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(1)), 1983)

17.04.015 Abut.
“Abut” means two adjoining parcels of property with a common property line, including two or more lots adjoining only at a corner, except where such common property line is located on a public street right-of-way. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(1)), 1983)

17.04.020 Access or access way.
“Access” or “access way” means the place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this title. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(2)), 1983)

17.04.023 Accessory apartment.
“Accessory apartment” means a second dwelling unit located on the same lot as an existing single-family dwelling. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 225 § 1, 1987)

17.04.025 Accessory building.
“Accessory building” means a building, part of a building, or structure, which is incidental or subordinate to the main building or use on the same building site. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(3)), 1983)

17.04.030 Accessory dwelling unit.
“Accessory dwelling unit” (ADU) shall have the meaning defined in Section 65852.2 of the California Government Code, which may be an attached or detached residential dwelling unit, which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. An ADU may or may not include cooking or kitchen facilities separate from the main dwelling and must provide for living, sleeping and sanitation on the same parcel as the primary single-family dwelling unit. (Ord. 820 § 3, 2018; Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 225 § 1, 1987; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(4)), 1983)

17.04.035 Accessory use.
“Accessory use” means a use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which accessory use does not alter the principal use of such lot or building. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(5)), 1983)

17.04.090 Advertise.
“Advertise” means any notice to the public for the purpose of increasing sales or business, announcing the availability of a service or product, or making claims as to the value or quality of any service or product. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(16)), 1983)

17.04.093 Agricultural worker housing.
“Agricultural worker housing” means any portion of any house or housing accommodation that is maintained in connection with any agricultural work or place where agricultural work is being performed, whether rent is involved or not, and shall be deemed a residential use if it exists in structures that are single-family houses or apartment houses. (Ord. 805 § 2, 2017)

17.04.097 Alteration.
“Alteration” means any change to the exterior surfaces of a building including but not limited to renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, restoration, replacement, or rearrangement of structural parts or elements, or any changes that affect the plan configuration of walls, spaces or bulk of a building. Alteration does not include painting. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 679 § 2, 2008)

17.04.100 Ambient level.
“Ambient level” means that general noise level in the area at a given time. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(18)), 1983)

17.04.105 Anatomical areas.
For “anatomical areas,” see PMC 17.38.020, “specified anatomical areas.” (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7 (A)(19)), 1983)

17.04.106 Animal enclosure.
An “animal enclosure” is a corral, paddock or stall used to house large animals. A riding arena, or similar exercise or training area, is not an animal enclosure. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 438 § 2, 1994)

17.04.110 Animal hospital.
“Animal hospital” means a place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(20)), 1983)

17.04.116 Antique.
“Antique” means any collectible, object of art, bric-a-brac, curio, household furniture or furnishing offered for sale upon the basis, express or implied, that the value of the property, in whole or substantial part, is derived from its age or from its historical associations. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 540 § 2, 2001)

17.04.117 Antique shop.
“Antique shop” means any place of business engaged in the business of buying and selling, trading or accepting for sale on consignment antiques. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 540 § 2, 2001)

17.04.125 Apartment.
“Apartment” means a building or portion thereof designed and used for occupancy by two or more individual persons or families living independently of each other. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(23)), 1983)

17.04.130 Arcades.
“Arcades” means places of business where five or more electronic or electrical coin-operated games are operated for compensation. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(24)), 1983)

17.04.132 Attic.
“Attic” means the area between the roof framing and the ceiling of the rooms below, that is not habitable, but may be reached by ladder from the interior of the building and used for storage. Improvement of an attic to habitable status shall make it a story. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 679 § 2, 2008)

17.04.135 Automobile service station.
“Automobile service station” means a lot or portion of a lot used for the servicing of motor vehicles. Such servicing may include sale of motor fuel and oils, lubrication, incidental carwashing, waxing and polishing, sales and service of tires, tubes, batteries, and service of auto accessories. Such servicing does not include tire recapping, sale of major auto accessories, wheel repair or parts, sale or rebuilding of engines, battery manufacturing or rebuilding, radiator repair or steamcleaning, body repair, painting or upholstery, or installation of auto glass. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(25)), 1983)

17.04.145 Basement.
“Basement” means a story partly or wholly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement where more than one-half of its height is above grade. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(27)), 1983)

17.04.153 Board and care.
“Board and care” means a facility licensed by the State Department of Social Services, which provides room, board, minor medical care and cleaning services for ambulatory senior citizens. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 144 § 5, 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. 1.7, 1983)

17.04.155 Boardinghouse or roominghouse.
“Boardinghouse” or “roominghouse” means a building where lodging is provided for compensation, with or without meals, where the residents do not live as a single housekeeping unit. The terms “boardinghouse” and “roominghouse” shall specifically include, but are not limited to, a single-family dwelling where at least three rooms are rented under separate agreements, whether written or oral. A licensed “residential facility,” as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 1502(a)(1), which services six or fewer persons, including the licensee, the members of the licensee’s family, and persons employed as facility staff, is not considered a boardinghouse or roominghouse. (Ord. 821 § 2, 2018; Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(29)), 1983)

17.04.157 Body piercing.
“Body piercing” means the creation of an opening in the body of a human being for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. This includes, but is not limited to, piercing of a lip, tongue, nose, or eyebrow. “Body piercing” does not include the piercing of an ear. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 483 § 1, 1997)

17.04.160 Building.
“Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7 (A)(30)), 1983)

17.04.170 Building height.
“Building height” means the vertical distance from the average grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the highest point of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof, but exclusive of vents, air conditioners, chimneys, or other such incidental appurtenances.



(Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(32)), 1983)

17.04.172 Building, main.
“Building, main” means a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot as provided in this title. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 679 § 2, 2008)

17.04.175 Building site.
“Building site” means a legally created parcel or contiguous parcels of land in single or joint ownership, which provides the area and the open spaces required by this title, exclusive of all vehicular and pedestrian rights-of-way and all other easements that prohibit the surface use of the property by the owner thereof. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(33)), 1983)

17.04.180 Business center.
“Business center” means a development in which businesses and structures are designed as an architecturally integrated and interrelated development. Such design is independent of the number of structures, lots, or parcels making up the center. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(34)), 1983)

17.04.195 Canopy.
“Canopy” means a permanent rooflike structure extending from part or all of a building face and constructed of durable material which may not project over a public right-of-way. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(37)), 1983)

17.04.202 Caretaker’s living quarters.
“Caretaker’s living quarters” means living quarters accessory to a principal use on a site and intended for occupancy on the same site, as a caretaker, security guard, or similar position generally requiring residence on the site. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 2(D), 2008)

17.04.205 Carport.
“Carport” means a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides used or intended to be used for vehicle storage for the occupants of the premises. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(39)), 1983)

17.04.210 Clinic.
“Clinic” means a place for medical services to patients human or animal not involving the overnight housing of patients. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(41)), 1983)

17.04.215 Club.
“Club” means an association of persons, whether or not incorporated, for a common purpose, but not including groups organized solely or primarily to render a service as a business for profit. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(42)), 1983)

17.04.220 Coffeeshop.
“Coffeeshop” means a completely enclosed restaurant facility wherein the customers are served as a business for profit. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7 (A)(43)), 1983)

17.04.225 Community apartment.
“Community apartment” means a development in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment located thereon. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(44)), 1983)

17.04.235 Condominium.
“Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(46)), 1983)

17.04.240 Condominium conversion.
“Condominium conversion” means the conversion of rental units, residential or commercial, into a condominium project. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(47)), 1983)

17.04.250 Convalescent home.
“Convalescent home” means a facility licensed by the State Department of Public Health, the State Department of Social Welfare, or the County, which provides bed and ambulatory care for patients with post-operative convalescent, chronically ill or dietary problems, and persons aged or infirm unable to care for themselves; but not including, alcoholics, drug addicts, or persons with mental or contagious diseases or afflictions. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(49)), 1983)

17.04.251 Cottage food business.
“Cottage food business” means an enterprise that is operated as a cottage food operation as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 113758, and has not more than one full-time equivalent cottage food employee, not including a family member or household member of the cottage food operator, within the registered or permitted area of a private home where the cottage food operator resides and where cottage food products are prepared or packaged for direct, indirect, or direct and indirect sale to consumers pursuant to this title. (Ord. 773 § 1, 2015)

17.04.265 County Recorder.
“County Recorder” means the County Recorder of San Diego County. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(54)), 1983)

17.04.268 Crawl space.
“Crawl space” means an enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for limited access for plumbing and electrical utilities. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 679 § 2, 2008)

17.04.270 Day nursery.
“Day nursery (including pre-school and nursery schools)” means any building, buildings or portion thereof used for the daytime care of children. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(55)), 1983)

17.04.275 Density.
“Density” means the total number of dwelling units permitted on a net acre of land exclusive of all existing public or private streets and rights-of-way. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(56)), 1983)

17.04.280 Development.
“Development” means the total number of dwelling units permitted on a net acre of land exclusive of all existing public or private streets and rights-of-way. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(57)), 1983)

17.04.290 Director of Development Services.
“Director of Development Services” means the Director of Development Services of the City. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(59)), 1983)

17.04.295 Dormitory.
“Dormitory” means a building intended or used principally for sleeping accommodations, where such building is related to an educational institution. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(60)), 1983)

17.04.300 Drive-in or drive-through restaurant.
“Drive-in or drive-through restaurant” means a place of business which sells food products and/or beverages and which:

A. Delivers such food products and/or beverages to customers outside of the building in which they are prepared by means of service, a window, counter, or similar method or device; or

B. Delivers such food products and/or beverages to customers within a building which is designed in such a manner that a majority of the customers will remove such food products and/or beverages from the building for consumption either on the premises or in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(61)), 1983)

17.04.305 Dwelling.
“Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(62)), 1983)

17.04.310 Dwelling, guest.
Repealed by Ord. 820. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(63)), 1983)

17.04.315 Dwelling, multiple.
“Multiple dwelling” means a building containing two or more dwelling units or a combination of two or more separate single-family dwelling units on one lot. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(64)), 1983)

17.04.320 Dwelling, single-family.
“Single-family dwelling” means a detached building designed exclusively for residential occupancy by a single housekeeping unit. (Ord. 821 § 3, 2018; Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(65)), 1983)

17.04.325 Dwelling unit.
“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms and a single kitchen in a single-family dwelling, apartment house or hotel designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 235 § 1, 1987; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7 (A)(66)), 1983)

17.04.327 Eating and drinking establishments.
“Eating and drinking establishments” means bars, nightclubs, restaurants, coffee shops, delicatessens and private clubs which may offer food, alcoholic beverages and/or entertainment. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 626 § 3, 2005; Ord. 235 § 1, 1987)

17.04.330 Educational institutions.
“Educational institutions” means public and other nonprofit institutions conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary, secondary, collegiate levels, and including graduate schools, universities, nonprofit research institutions and religious institutions. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 235 § 1, 1987; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(67)), 1983)

17.04.333 Exotic, wild or nondomestic animal.
“Exotic, wild or nondomestic animal” means any animal not normally domesticated in the United States such as, but not limited to, a reptile, fox, raccoon or similar animal, including predatory or poisonous animals. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 2(A), 2008)

17.04.335 Family.
“Family” means one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit within a dwelling unit. “Family” also means the persons living together in a licensed “residential facility” as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 1502(a)(1), which services six or fewer persons, including the licensee, the members of the licensee’s family, and persons employed as facility staff. (Ord. 821 § 4, 2018; Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 232 § 1, 1987; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(68)), 1983)

17.04.337 Fence.
“Fence” means a vertical barrier or enclosure constructed of any material which supports no load other than its own weight. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 232 § 1, 1987)

17.04.355 Garage.
“Garage” means a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot for the parking and temporary storage of vehicles of the occupants of the premises. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(72)), 1983)

17.04.357 Garage, private.
“Garage, private” means an accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles of the occupants of the main building. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 679 § 2, 2008)

17.04.360 General plan.
“General plan” means the general plan of the City and shall consist of the general plan maps adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(73)), 1983)

17.04.365 Grade.
“Grade” means the average level of the finished ground surfaces within a 20-foot area surrounding a building. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(74)), 1983)

17.04.370 Grand opening.
“Grand opening” means a promotional activity not exceeding 30 calendar days used by newly established businesses, within six months after occupancy, to inform the public of their location and service available to the community. Grand opening does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales by a business. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(75)), 1983)

17.04.375 Gross area.
“Gross area” means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land before public streets, easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or parcel. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(76)), 1983)

17.04.378 Guest house.
Repealed by Ord. 820. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 225 § 1, 1987)

17.04.380 Guestroom.
“Guestroom” means a room which is designed to be occupied by one or more guests for sleeping purposes, and having no kitchen facilities. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(77)), 1983)

17.04.390 Highway.
“Highway” means a street shown as a freeway, major, primary, or secondary highway on the general plan of the City. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(79)), 1983)

17.04.392 Home occupation.
“Home occupation” means any occupation or profession conducted or carried on entirely within a dwelling by the occupants thereof which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which does not change the character thereof and does not adversely affect other uses in the zone of which it is a part. Home occupations shall be evaluated in accordance with the provisions and criteria in Chapter 17.28 PMC. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 2(E), 2008)

17.04.395 Hospital.
“Hospital” means an institution for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness, including surgery and primary treatment. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(80)), 1983)

17.04.400 Hotel.
“Hotel” means a structure or portion thereof or a group of attached guestrooms or suites occupied on a transient basis for compensation. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(81)), 1983)

17.04.401 Household pet.
“Household pet” means any animal customarily permitted and kept in a dwelling and kept only for the company or pleasure provided to the occupants of the dwelling, to include dogs, cats, rabbits, parakeets, tropical fish, and hamsters or other similar domesticated animals. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 2(C), 2008)

17.04.403 Independent living.
“Independent living” means a facility which provides housing and recreation for active ambulatory senior citizens. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 144 § 5, 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. 1.7, 1983)

17.04.405 Inoperative activity.
“Inoperative activity” means a business or activity that has ceased operation, except for temporary closures for repairs, alterations, or other similar situations at any given location for a period of at least 30 days. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(82)), 1983)

17.04.411 Junk.
“Junk” means any combustible or noncombustible waste including, but not limited to, trash, refuse, paper, glass, cans, bottles, rags, fabrics, bedding, ashes, trimmings from lawns, shrubbery or trees, except when used for mulch or like agricultural purposes; household refuse other than garbage; used lumber, metal, plumbing fixtures, bricks, building stones, plaster, wire or like materials from the demolition, alteration or construction of buildings or structures; used tires or inner tubes, auto, aircraft or boat parts; plastic or metal parts or scraps; damaged or defective machinery, whether or not repairable; and damaged or defective toys, recreational equipment or household appliances or furnishings, whether or not repairable. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 540 § 2, 2001)

17.04.415 Kennel.
“Kennel” means any property or premises on which seven or more dogs, seven or more cats, or any combination thereof, over the age of four months, are kept. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 3, 2008; Ord. 232 § 1, 1987; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(84)), 1983)

17.04.420 Large animals.
“Large animals” include equine and bovine animals and other such animals described and assumed by their size, weight, and/or appearance to be large animals. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(85)), 1983)

17.04.425 Legal.
“Legal” means authorized or permitted in accordance with defined procedures by ordinance or law. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(86)), 1983)

17.04.430 Legal lot.
“Legal lot” means:

A. A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of land with a number or letter designation, or a subdivision map, or parcel map recorded in the office of the County Recorder and created in conformance with the State Subdivision Map Act;

B. A parcel of real property shown on a recorded record of survey map, lot division plat, or other official map filed in the office of the County Recorder or County Engineer, when such map or plat was filed as the result of and was made a condition of a lot division approved by the County under the authority of prior or existing County ordinances;

C. Any parcel of real property which existed as a separate parcel on or before February 1, 1972, as evidenced by a valid deed recorded on or before that date;

D. A parcel of real property described in a recorded certificate of compliance, approved and filed by the County or City in accordance with the State Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(87)), 1983)

17.04.432 Live entertainment.
“Live entertainment” means any single event or series of events conducted for guests or patrons, including, but not limited to:

A. Presentations by single or multiple performers, such as singers, musicians, hypnotists, pantomimes, comedians, musical song and dance acts, plays, concerts, or other demonstration of talent which may be attended by members of the public;

B. Dancing to recorded or live music by paid performers;

C. The presentation of recorded music played on equipment, which is operated by an agent or contractor of the establishment, commonly known as “DJ” or disc jockey.

Live entertainment does not include entertainment provided by a patron or dancing between patrons, including, without limitation, singing by patrons (karaoke); or television, radio, close circuit or Internet broadcasts of live entertainment; or recorded music broadcast over a general area without a “DJ” or disc jockey. Also excluded from this definition are adult-oriented businesses as defined in Chapter 17.38 PMC. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 626 § 2, 2005)

17.04.433 Living unit.
“Living unit” means a unit that provides the basic amenities for everyday living and includes but is not limited to a sleeping area, closet space, restroom, sitting/entertainment area, incidental kitchen facilities and/or common dining and recreational facilities. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 235 § 1, 1987; Ord. 144 § 5, 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. 1.7, 1983)

17.04.434 Lodge.
“Lodge” means an association of persons (whether or not incorporated) for a common purpose, by not including groups organized solely or primarily to render a service as a business for profit. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 235 § 1, 1987)

17.04.440 Lot.
“Lot” means:

A. A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County Recorder; or

B. A parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, parcel map or subdivision map as filed in the office of the County Recorder or in the office of the Development Services Department, and abutting at least one public street or right-of-way, or easement determined by the City Engineer to be adequate for the purpose of access; or

C. A parcel of real property abutting at least one public street or right-of-way or easement determined by the City Engineer to be adequate for the purpose of access and held under separate ownership from abutting property prior to February 1, 1972. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(89)), 1983)

17.04.445 Lot, corner.
“Corner lot” means a lot located at the intersection or interception of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an “interior lot.” (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(90)), 1983)

17.04.450 Lot coverage.
“Lot coverage” means the ratio between the ground floor area of the building or buildings and the net area of the lot, exclusive of the ultimate street right-of-way. For master planned commercial, industrial, or institutional projects that may encompass multiple lots, the lot coverage standard may be calculated over the entire area of the master planned site. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 628 § 3, 2005; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(91)), 1983)

17.04.455 Lot depth.
“Lot depth” means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(92)), 1983)

17.04.460 Lot, flag.
“Flag lot” means a lot which utilizes a narrow strip as its means of providing frontage on a street and/or providing vehicular access to the lot. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(93)), 1983)

17.04.465 Lot, interior.
“Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(94)), 1983)

17.04.470 Lot line.
“Lot line” means any line bounding a lot as defined in PMC 17.04.440. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(95)), 1983)

17.04.475 Lot line, front.
“Front lot line” means on an interior lot, the front lot line is the property line abutting the street. On a corner or reverse corner lot, the front lot line is the shorter property line abutting a street, except in those cases where the subdivision or parcel map specifies another line as the front lot line. On a through lot or a lot with three or more sides abutting a street or a corner or reverse corner lot with lot lines of equal length, the Director shall determine which property line shall be the front lot line for the purposes of compliance with yard and setback provisions of this title. On a private street or easement, the front lot line shall be designated as the edge of the easement. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(96)), 1983)

17.04.480 Lot line, interior.
“Interior lot line” means a lot line not abutting a street. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(97)), 1983)

17.04.485 Lot line, rear.
“Rear lot line” means a lot line not abutting a street which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular-shaped lot, a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than 10 feet. A lot which is bounded on all sides by streets may have no rear lot line. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(98)), 1983)

17.04.490 Lot, reverse corner.
“Reverse corner lot” means a corner lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the lot to its rear, whether across an alley or not. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(99)), 1983)

17.04.495 Lot line, side.
“Side lot line” means any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(100)), 1983)

17.04.500 Lot, through.
“Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(101)), 1983)

17.04.505 Lot width.
“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.



(Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(102)), 1983)

17.04.510 Major review.
“Major review” means a method of review by the City Council to determine conformance with applicable ordinances. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(103)), 1983)

17.04.513 Masonry wall.
“Masonry wall” means a solid wall composed of stone, brick, concrete, gypsum, hollow clay tile, concrete block or tile or other similar building units or materials or a combination of these materials laid up unit by unit and set in mortar. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 204 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986)

17.04.514 Marijuana cultivation – Marijuana delivery – Marijuana dispensaries, cooperatives, and collectives – Marijuana manufacturing – Marijuana storage.
“Marijuana cultivation,” whether medical or otherwise, shall mean the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof, and any and all associated business and/or operational activities. Marijuana cultivation by any person or entity, including clinics, collectives, cooperatives and dispensaries, is prohibited in all zones within the City’s jurisdictional limits. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. Marijuana cultivation shall not include the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof by any “qualified patient,” or “person with an identification card,” as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. Marijuana cultivation shall also not include the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof indoors at a single residence, where the marijuana plants and products are for personal use and consumption by adult residents therein and are otherwise permitted by State or Federal laws. Outdoor cultivation shall be strictly prohibited in all zones.

“Marijuana delivery,” whether medical or otherwise, shall mean the commercial delivery, transfer or transport, or arranging for the delivery, transfer or transport, or the use of any technology platform to arrange for facilities for the commercial delivery, transfer or transport of marijuana, edible marijuana products, or any marijuana products to or from any location within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Poway, and any and all associated business or operational activities. Marijuana delivery by any person or entity, including clinics, collectives, cooperatives and dispensaries, is prohibited in the City. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. Marijuana delivery shall not include the delivery, transfer or transport of marijuana, edible marijuana products, or any marijuana products to any “qualified patient,” or “person with an identification card,” in the City, by any “primary caregiver,” as each of those terms is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, not to exceed eight ounces of dried marijuana for each “qualified patient” and “person with an identification card” residing in the City.

“Marijuana dispensaries, cooperatives, and collectives,” whether medical or otherwise, shall mean any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana is made available to three or more of any of the following persons: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a patient with an identification card. Each of these terms is identified in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq. as such sections may be amended from time to time. A “marijuana dispensary” shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses is otherwise regulated by this code and applicable State or Federal law:

A. A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

B. A healthcare facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

C. A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;

D. A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; and

E. A residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as such use complies strictly with applicable law, including but not limited to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq.

“Marijuana manufacturing,” whether medical or otherwise, shall mean the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis products, including extraction processes; infusion processes; the packaging or repackaging of manufactured cannabis or cannabis products; or the labeling or relabeling of packages of manufactured cannabis or cannabis products. Marijuana manufacturing shall include all aspects of the extraction and/or infusion processes, including processing, preparing, holding, storing, packaging, or labeling of cannabis products as well as any processing, preparing, holding, or storing of components and ingredients. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. Marijuana manufacturing shall not include the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis products, including extraction processes, infusion processes or any part thereof by any “qualified patient,” or “person with an identification card,” as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. Marijuana manufacturing shall also not include the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis products, including extraction processes, infusion processes or any part thereof indoors at a single residence, where the marijuana plants and products are for personal use and consumption by adult residents therein and are otherwise permitted by State or Federal laws. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity.

“Marijuana storage” shall mean any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana, whether medical or otherwise, is stored either temporarily or permanently. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. Marijuana storage shall not include the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof by any “qualified patient,” or “person with an identification card,” as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 so long as it is located at the residence of the qualified patient or person with identification card. Marijuana storage shall also not include the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof indoors at a single residence, where the marijuana plants and products are for personal use and consumption by adult residents therein and are otherwise permitted by State or Federal laws. (Ord. 808 § 4, 2017; Ord. 785 § 4, 2016; Ord. 751 § 2, 2013; Ord. 736 § 4, 2012)

17.04.515 Minor review.
“Minor review” means a method of review by the Director of Development Services to determine conformance with applicable ordinances. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(104)), 1983)

17.04.520 Mobile home.
“Mobile home” means a movable or transportable vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed as a permanent structure intended for occupancy for one family and having no foundation other than jacks, piers, wheels, or skirtings. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(105)), 1983)

17.04.525 Mobile home unit space.
“Mobile home unit space” means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home unit. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(106)), 1983)

17.04.530 Motel.
“Motel” means the same as “hotel.” (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(107)), 1983)

17.04.540 Net area.
“Net area” means all land, utility easements and trails within a given area or project including residential lots, and other open space which directly serves the residents of the net acre; but exclusive of all public or private streets and other easements such as a floodway or flood-control channel. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7 (A)(109)), 1983)

17.04.545 Nonconforming building.
“Nonconforming building” means a building or portion thereof which was lawful when established but which does not conform to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(110)), 1983)

17.04.550 Nonconforming lot.
“Nonconforming lot” means a lot, the area, frontage or dimensions of which do not conform to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(111)), 1983)

17.04.560 Nonconforming use.
“Nonconforming use” means a use lawful when established but which does not conform to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(113)), 1983)

17.04.573 Open fence.
“Open fence” means a fence with openings which represent at least 50 percent of the total surface of each five-foot linear section when viewed perpendicular to the face of the fence. (See exhibit under PMC 17.08.220(A).) (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 232 § 1, 1987)

17.04.575 Other habitable accessory building.
“Other habitable accessory building” means an attached or detached building located on the same site as a primary dwelling, designed for use by the resident(s) of the primary dwelling, having heating and/or air conditioning but having no cooking or kitchen facilities, and may not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. (Ord. 820 § 6, 2018)

17.04.576 Outdoor display.
“Outdoor display” means the display of goods or merchandise for sale on private property outside of a building in a manner that is incidental to and a part of the operation of the adjacent indoor use. Excluded from this definition is the accessory display of vehicles for a vehicle sales or rental business for which a business certificate has been issued. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 540 § 2, 2001)

17.04.577 Outdoor storage and/or sales area.
“Outdoor storage and/or sales area” means a legally established permanent storage and/or sales area that is not intended to be visible for advertising purposes. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 540 § 2, 2001)

17.04.585 Parkway.
“Parkway” means that area of a public street that lies between the curb and sidewalk or between the sidewalk and the property line of the adjacent property owner, which is used for planting purposes. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(118)), 1983)

17.04.595 Planned residential development.
“Planned residential development” means two or more dwelling units, including dwelling units in developments commonly known as town or row-housing, condominiums and cluster housing, together with related land, buildings and structures, planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or a programmed series of operations in accordance with detailed, comprehensive plans encompassing such elements as the circulation pattern and parking facilities, open space, utilities, and lots or building sites, together with a program for provision, operation and maintenance of all areas, improvements, facilities and services provided for common use of the residents thereof. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(120)), 1983)

17.04.612 Poultry.
“Poultry” includes chickens, hens, roosters, turkeys, ducks, geese, game birds, and other animals similar in size, weight, or appearance. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 2(B), 2008)

17.04.615 Public right-of-way.
“Public right-of-way” means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other public uses. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(124)), 1983)

17.04.628 Recreational courts, public and semipublic.
“Recreational courts, public and semipublic” means tennis courts, paddle tennis courts, and other similar uses as determined by the Development Services Director, which are available for use by persons who do not reside in the project (includes membership clubs). (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 206 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986)

17.04.629 Recycling center.
“Recycling center” means a facility intended to collect used beverage containers, including glass, aluminum or steel and plastic. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 236 § 1, 1987)

17.04.630 Remodel.
“Remodel” means any improvement to the exterior or interior of a building that requires a building permit. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 679 § 2, 2008)

17.04.631 Residence, main.
“Residence, main” means a building within which is conducted the principal residential use permitted on the lot as provided in this title. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 679 § 2, 2008)

17.04.635 Roof.
“Roof” means the external covering of a building or structure above or covering any exterior or interior vertical wall height. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(128)), 1983)

17.04.640 Roofline.
“Roofline” means the top edge of the roof or top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(129)), 1983)

17.04.648 Second dwelling unit.
Repealed by Ord. 820. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 2(F), 2008)

17.04.650 Service stations.
“Service stations” means the same as “automobile service station.” (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(131)), 1983)

17.04.655 Setback, front yard.
“Front yard setback” means the area which defines the depth of the required front yard. Said setback shall be measured from the street line or the line established by the general plan and be removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the front yard setback of the zone in which the property is located. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(132)), 1983)

17.04.660 Setback, rear yard or side yard.
“Rear yard or side yard setback” means the area which defines the width or depth of the required rear or side yard setbacks. Said setbacks shall be measured from the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard setback in the zone. Where the side or rear yard abuts a street, the distance shall be measured as set forth in the “setback front yard,” using the prescribed distance for rear yard and exterior side yard setbacks. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(133)), 1983)

17.04.670 Single-family zone.
“Single-family zone” means any zone designed primarily for detached single-family dwellings including the residential single-family (RS) zones and the residential rural (RR) zones. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 481 § 1, 1997)

17.04.672 Single housekeeping unit.
“Single housekeeping unit” means the functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are an interactive group of persons jointly occupying a single dwelling unit, including the joint use of and responsibility for common areas, and sharing household activities and responsibilities, such as meals, chores, household maintenance and expenses; and where, if the dwelling unit is rented, all adult (18 years or older) residents have chosen to jointly occupy the entire premises of the dwelling unit, under a single written lease with joint use and responsibility for the premises, and the makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by the residents of the dwelling unit rather than the landlord or property manager. (Ord. 821 § 5, 2018)

17.04.673 Single room occupancy, SRO.
“Single room occupancy,” or “SRO,” means a residential facility where individual secure rooms are intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out, to be occupied by a one- or two-person household for sleeping purposes. Rooms generally include a sink, closet and toilet, with shower and kitchen facilities typically shared. SRO units may be rented on a weekly or monthly basis. (Ord. 805 § 2, 2017)

17.04.675 Site plan.
“Site plan” means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of the buildings, structures and uses and the exact manner of development proposed for a specific parcel of land. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(136)), 1983)

17.04.680 Small animals.
“Small animals” means pigmy goats, pigs, goats, sheep, poultry, rabbits, miniature horses, domestic animals and other such comparably sized animals distinguished from those described as large animals. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(137)), 1983)

17.04.690 Special promotional parking lot sales event.
“Special promotional parking lot sales event” means a parking lot sale promoting a single product sold nationwide that is part of a regional or national sales campaign required by the parent corporation of a business operating in the City. Excluded are businesses that are not nationwide and the product is not sold nationwide. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 661 § 2, 2007)

17.04.700 Stable.
“Stable” means the use of land for the quartering of 10 or more equines. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 432 § 2, 1994; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A. 1.7(A)(141)), 1983)

17.04.715 Statuary.
“Statuary” means statues and sculptures that depict products, features, items, or logos of a business excluding those items that are considered design features or complements of the overall site such as wagons, benches, hand water pumps, troughs, and other like items. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(145)), 1983)

17.04.720 Story.
“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(146)), 1983)

17.04.725 Street.
“Street” means a public thoroughfare or right-of-way or approved private thoroughfare or right-of-way determined by the City Engineer to be adequate for the purpose of access, which affords the principal means of access for abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, land, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare, except as excluded in this title. The word “street” includes all major and secondary highways, traffic collector streets, and local streets. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(147)), 1983)

17.04.730 Structure.
“Structure” means a mobile home or anything constructed or erected, building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on or in the ground or is attached to something having a location on or in the ground, including swimming and wading pools and covered patios, excepting paved areas, walks, tennis courts, and similar outdoor areas, and further excepting fences or walls 48 inches or less in height. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(148)), 1983)

17.04.735 Structural alteration.
“Structural alteration” means any change in or alteration to a structure involving a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, retaining walls, or similar components. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(149)), 1983)

17.04.736 Supportive housing.
“Supportive housing” means housing occupied by a specified target population defined in Section 50675.14 of the California Health and Safety Code that has no limit on length of stay, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, maximizing his or her ability to live, and – when possible – work in the community. Supportive housing with up to six tenants is a residential use subject to the same regulations and procedures that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. (Ord. 805 § 2, 2017)

17.04.740 Temporary outdoor sales.
“Temporary outdoor sales” means outdoor sales events or promotions of a limited duration or frequency. Such events include, but are not limited to, parking lot sales, tent sales and seasonal promotional events. These events are subject to the temporary use permit requirements of PMC 17.26.030(E). (Ord. 805 § 2, 2017)

17.04.743 Tobacco shops.
“Tobacco shops” means any business whose main intention is the sale, be it retail or wholesale, of tobacco products and their accessories. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 472, 1997)

17.04.744 Transitional housing.
“Transitional housing” is defined as rental housing operated under program requirements that terminate assistance to residents and recirculate the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which is not less than six months from the initial occupancy date of the recipient. Transitional housing with up to six tenants is a residential use subject to the same regulations and procedures that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. (Ord. 805 § 2, 2017)

17.04.745 Use.
“Use” means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(151)), 1983)

17.04.747 Use, principal.
“Use, principal” means the primary purpose for which a building, structure or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it may be used, occupied or maintained under this title. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 679 § 2, 2008)

17.04.750 Useful life.
“Useful life” means the period of time in which a sign and all its parts, portions, and materials are maintained and kept in proper repair as specified in PMC 17.40.130(B). (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(152)), 1983)

17.04.765 Wholesaling.
“Wholesaling” means the selling of any type of goods for purpose of resale. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(155)), 1983)

17.04.775 Yard.
“Yard” means any open space on the same lot with a building or dwelling group, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed except for the projections permitted by this title. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(157)), 1983)

17.04.780 Yard, front.
“Front yard” means a space between the front yard setback and the front lot line or future street line, and extending the full width of the lot. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(158)), 1983)

17.04.785 Yard, rear.
“Rear yard” means a space between the rear yard setback and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(159)), 1983)

17.04.790 Yard, side.
“Side yard” means a space extending from the front yard, or from the front yard lot where no front yard is required by this title, to the rear yard, or rear lot. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(160)), 1983)

17.04.795 Zoning development code and/or ordinance.
“Zoning development code and/or ordinance” means the zoning regulations of the City. (Ord. 738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.7(A)(161)), 1983)

Chapter 17.06
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES – ZONING MAPS
Sections:

17.06.010    Establishment of zones.

17.06.020    Adoption of zones – Zoning map.

17.06.010 Establishment of zones.
Division of City into Zones. In order to classify, regulate, restrict, and separate the use of land, buildings and structures and to regulate and limit the type, height, and bulk of buildings and structures in the various districts and to regulate the areas of yards and other open areas abutting and between buildings and structures and to regulate the density of population, the City is divided into the following zones:

A. Residential zones shall be as follows:

RR-A through

RR-C

residential rural zone;

RS-1

residential single-family 1 zone;

RS-2

residential single-family 2 zone;

RS-3

residential single-family 3 zone;

RS-4

residential single-family 4 zone;

RS-7

residential single-family 7 zone;

RC

residential condominium zone;

RA

residential apartment zone.

B. Commercial zones shall be as follows:

CO

commercial office zone;

CN

commercial neighborhood zone;

CB

community business zone;

CG

commercial general zone.

C. Special purpose zones shall be as follows:

MHP

mobile home park zone;

PRD

planned residential development zone;

PC

planned community zone;

HC

hospital campus zone;

PF

public facilities zone;

OS-R

open space – recreation zone;

OS-RM

open space – resource management zone.

(Ord. 815 § 3, 2018; Ord. 814 § 3, 2017; Ord. 481 § 2, 1997; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.3(A)), 1983)

17.06.020 Adoption of zones – Zoning map.
A. Adoption of Zones. The several zones and boundaries of the zones set out in this chapter are established and adopted by this title as shown, are delineated and designated on the “official zoning map” of the City, which map, together with all notations, references, data, zone boundaries, and other information thereon, is made a part of this title and is adopted concurrently with this title.

B. Filing. A copy of the zoning map shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and shall constitute the official record.

C. Changes to Zoning Map. Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance and shall be reflected on the official zoning map. (Ord. 481 § 2, 1997; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.3(B – D)), 1983)

Chapter 17.07
WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
(Repealed by Ord. 781)

Chapter 17.08
RESIDENTIAL ZONES Amended Ord. 831
Sections:

17.08.010    Purposes.

17.08.020    RR-A through RR-C residential rural zone.

17.08.025    RS-1 residential single-family 1 zone.

17.08.030    RS-2 residential single-family 2 zone.

17.08.040    RS-3 residential single-family 3 zone.

17.08.050    RS-4 residential single-family 4 zone.

17.08.060    RS-7 residential single-family 7 zone.

17.08.070    RC residential condominium zone.

17.08.080    RA residential apartment zone.

17.08.090    Permitted and conditional uses – R zones.

17.08.100    Permitted and conditional uses – Residential uses.

17.08.110    Permitted and conditional uses – Animal and agricultural uses.

17.08.120    Permitted and conditional uses – Public and semipublic uses.

17.08.130    Permitted and conditional uses – Home occupations.

17.08.140    Permitted and conditional uses – Accessory uses.

17.08.150    Permitted and conditional uses – Temporary uses.

17.08.160    Property development standards – General requirements.

17.08.170    Property development standards – Additional requirements. Amended Ord. 831

17.08.180    Accessory buildings and structures.

17.08.185    Repealed.

17.08.190    Tract subdivision construction.

17.08.200    Repealed.

17.08.210    Manufactured housing development standards.

17.08.220    Property development standards – Special requirements for RC and RA zones.

17.08.230    Performance standards in residential zones.

17.08.240    Walls and fences. Amended Ord. 831

17.08.010 Purposes.
In addition to the objectives outlined in PMC 17.02.010, the residential zones are included in the zoning development regulations to achieve the following purposes:

A. To reserve appropriately located areas for family living at a broad range of dwelling unit densities consistent with the general plan and with sound standards of public health, safety and welfare;

B. To ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling;

C. To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of public services and utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive bulk or number in relation to the land area around them;

D. To protect residential properties from noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, smoke and other objectionable influences;

E. To facilitate the provision of utility services and other public facilities commensurate with anticipated population, dwelling unit densities, and service requirements. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.0), 1983)

17.08.020 RR-A through RR-C residential rural zone.
The RR-A through RR-C residential rural zone is intended as an area for very low density residential uses with minimum lot sizes of one acre and maximum densities of one unit per acre. Additional uses are permitted that are complimentary to, and can exist in harmony with, a rural residential neighborhood. Specific slope criteria shall be applied in the determination of the maximum allowable densities to achieve compatibility with the topography and public service constraints.

In order to preserve the very low density residential character of such property, no property zoned RR-A, RR-B or RR-C shall be rezoned to a zone, nor shall any amendment to this title be adopted, which would increase the residential density on property so zoned or change the uses permitted thereon to allow commercial or manufacturing uses until and unless such rezoning or amendment is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election.* (Ord. 283 § 2(B), 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.0), 1983)

 

*    Editor’s Note: The second paragraph of PMC 17.08.020 was added by Ord. 283 and was approved by the voters at a general municipal election November 8, 1988. The language added shall not be modified or rescinded without the approval of a simple majority of the City voting at a special or general election.

17.08.025 RS-1 residential single-family 1 zone.
This zone is intended for low density single-family residential land uses with a minimum lot size of one acre and maximum densities of 1.0 unit per net acre. Additional uses are permitted that are complimentary to, and can exist in harmony with, low density neighborhoods. (Ord. 275 § 2, 1988)

17.08.030 RS-2 residential single-family 2 zone.
The RS-2 residential single-family 2 zone is intended as an area for low density residential uses with minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet and maximum density of two units per net acre. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, low density neighborhoods. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.0), 1983)

17.08.040 RS-3 residential single-family 3 zone.
The RS-3 residential single-family 3 zone is intended as an area for single-family residential development with minimum lot sizes of 15,000 square feet and maximum densities of three units per acre. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary to, and exist in harmony with, a residential neighborhood. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.0), 1983)

17.08.050 RS-4 residential single-family 4 zone.
The RS-4 residential single-family 4 zone is intended as an area for single-family residential development on minimum lot sizes of 10,000 square feet and maximum densities of four units per acre. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, a residential neighborhood. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.0), 1983)

17.08.060 RS-7 residential single-family 7 zone.
The RS-7 residential single-family 7 zone is intended as an area for single-family residential development on minimum lot sizes of 4,500 square feet and maximum densities of eight units per acre. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, a residential neighborhood. (Ord. 423 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.0), 1983)

17.08.070 RC residential condominium zone.
The RC residential condominium zone is intended as an area for the development of residential condominiums with provisions for adequate light, air, open space and landscaped areas at a maximum density of 12 units per net acre. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, a residential condominium development. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.0), 1983)

17.08.080 RA residential apartment zone.
The RA residential apartment zone is intended as an area for the development of residential apartments with provisions for adequate light, air, open space and landscaped areas at a maximum density of 20 units per net acre. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, a residential apartment development. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.0), 1983)

17.08.090 Permitted and conditional uses – R zones.
The uses set out in PMC 17.08.100 through 17.08.150 shall be permitted where the symbol “P” appears and subject to a conditional use permit where the symbol “C” appears, and subject to a minor conditional use permit where the symbol “M” appears in the column beneath each zone designation. Where the symbol “X” appears the use is prohibited. A use that is not listed is prohibited. Land uses identified for the zone may be further limited by the presence of a specific plan or other applicable provision of the PMC. (Ord. 773 § 4, 2015; Ord. 481 § 3, 1997; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.1), 1983)

17.08.100 Permitted and conditional uses – Residential uses.
Residential uses in residential zones shall be as follows:

Residential Uses

RR-A through C, RS-1

RS-2

RS-3

RS-4

RS-7

RC

RA

A. Single-family dwellings

P

P

P

P

P

X

X

B. Accessory dwelling unit on the same lot as an existing single-family dwelling (see PMC 17.08.180)

P

P

P

P

P

X

X

C. Manufactured homes certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) installed, on a foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code, on individual lots in accordance with PMC 17.08.210

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

D. Mobile home parks (maximum density shall not exceed eight dwelling units per net acre or that permitted by the applicable zone, whichever is less) subject to standards described in Chapter 17.16 PMC

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

E. Group residential, including, but not limited to, boardinghouses, roominghouses, dormitories, independent living, board and care (see Chapter 17.39 PMC) (maximum living units for group residential shall not exceed 20 per acre)

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

F. Residential care facilities licensed by the State for seven to 15 residents

X

C

X

X

X

C

C

G. Multiple Dwellings:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Rental

2. Individual unit ownership

3. Condominium conversions

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

C

P

X

X

H. Family day care home, as defined in Section 1596.78 of the California Health and Safety Code, in single-family detached dwellings:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Small family day care home

2. Large family day care home

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

I. Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

J.  Homeless shelters

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

(Ord. 821 § 6, 2018; Ord. 820 § 8, 2018; Ord. 808 § 5, 2017; Ord. 805 § 4, 2017; Ord. 785 § 5, 2016; Ord. 736 § 5, 2012; Ord. 674 § 4, 2008; Ord. 578 § 3, 2003; Ord. 307 § 2, 1989; Ord. 293 § 1, 1989; Ord. 292 § 1, 1989; Ord. 288 § 1, 1989; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 225 § 1, 1987; Ord. 164 § 1, 1985; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 144 § 3, 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.1(A)), 1983)

17.08.110 Permitted and conditional uses – Animal and agricultural uses.
Animal and agricultural uses in residential zones shall be as follows:

Animal and Agricultural Uses

RR-A through C, RS-1

RS-2

RS-3

RS-4

RS-7

RC

RA

A. All types of horticulture

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

B. 4-H or FFA animal raising and/or keeping in accordance with PMC 17.26.030(I)

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C. The wholesaling of products raised on the premises, only when said property is two acres or greater in size

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

D. Keeping of large animals in accordance with Chapters 17.32 and 17.33 PMC land must be vacant in zones RC and RA):

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. At densities specified in 17.32.010(B):

a. Fewer than 10 animals total

b. Ten to 19 animals total

c. Twenty or more animals total

 

P

M

C

 

P

M

C

 

P

M

C

 

P

M

C

 

P

M

C

 

P

M

C

 

P

M

C

2. On parcels greater than one acre, at densities greater than specified in 17.32.010(B)

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

3. After 90 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection, no minor conditional use permit nor conditional use permit shall be granted for the keeping of 10 or more animals except in the RR-A and RR-B zones or where an application for such a minor conditional use permit or conditional use permit had been submitted and found to be complete prior to 90 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. For purposes of determining the need for a minor conditional use permit or conditional use permit, the total shall include all animals kept on contiguous parcels, where the parcels are owned in whole or in part by the same person or persons, or, where the animals, or any of the facilities for the animals, are maintained or operated in whole or in part by the same person or persons

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E. Keeping of small animals in accordance with PMC 17.32.020 (land must be vacant in zones RC and RA)

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

F. Keeping of dogs and cats over the age of four months as follows:

1. Up to three dogs and up to three cats

2. Up to six dogs and up to six cats

 

 

P

P

 

 

P

P

 

 

P

X

 

 

P

X

 

 

P

X

 

 

P

X

 

 

P

X

G. Kennels (in accordance with Chapter 17.34 PMC)

C

C

C

X

X

X

X

H. The keeping of wild, exotic or nondomestic animals

M

X

X

X

X

X

X

I. Large animal hospital

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

J. Keeping of beehives:

1. One to three beehives

2. Four or more beehives

 

P

M

 

M

M

 

X

X

 

X

X

 

X

X

 

X

X

 

X

X

K. The raising of earthworms provided:

1. The area devoted to the raising of earthworms shall not exceed 10 percent of the minimum lot size permitted in the zone;

2. The area devoted to the raising of earthworms shall be no closer than 50 feet from any adjoining residential dwelling; and

3. The operation shall be fully enclosed or in an enclosed structure

P

P

M

M

X

X

X

L. Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

(Ord. 808 § 6, 2017; Ord. 785 § 6, 2016; Ord. 736 § 6, 2012; Ord. 674 § 5, 2008; Ord. 438 § 2, 1994; Ord. 432 § 2, 1994; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.1(B)), 1983)

17.08.120 Permitted and conditional uses – Public and semipublic uses.
Public and semipublic uses in residential zones shall be as follows:

Public and Semipublic Uses

RR-A through C, RS-1

RS-2

RS-3

RS-4

RS-7

RC

RA

A. Child care centers other than family day care homes

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

B. Convalescent homes on sites two net acres or greater in size (see PMC 17.08.180(I)) (requires compliance with Titles 22 and 24 of the Uniform Building Code)

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C. Churches, convents, monasteries and other religious institutions

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

D. Essential public services including but not limited to libraries, museums, public parks and recreational facilities, safety services facilities, clubs, lodges, and other civic uses

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

E. Educational institutions, public or private schools not including art, business or trade schools and colleges

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

F. Public utility and public service substations, reservoirs, pumping plants, and similar installations, not including public utility offices

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

G. Private recreational facilities including but not limited to country clubs, tennis and swim clubs, golf courses and racquetball and handball, YMCA, YWCA, and other uses determined to be similar by the Director of Development Services. (See Chapter 17.35 PMC.) Limited commercial uses which are commonly associated and directly related to these primary uses may be permitted

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

H. Recreational courts, including but not limited to, tennis, paddle tennis and other similar uses determined by the Development Services Director (see Chapter 17.30 PMC)

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

I. Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

(Ord. 808 § 7, 2017; Ord. 785 § 7, 2016; Ord. 736 § 7, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 292 § 2, 1989; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 232 § 1, 1987; Ord. 221 § 1, 1987; Ord. 206 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 144 § 4, 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.1(C)), 1983)

17.08.130 Permitted and conditional uses – Home occupations.
Home occupation uses in residential zones shall be as follows:

Home Occupations

RR-A through C, RS-1

RS-2

RS-3

RS-4

RS-7

RC

RA

A. Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.28 PMC

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

B. Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

(Ord. 808 § 8, 2017; Ord. 785 § 8, 2016; Ord. 736 § 8, 2012; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.1(D)), 1983)

17.08.140 Permitted and conditional uses – Accessory uses.
Accessory uses in residential zones shall be as follows:

Accessory Uses

RR-A through C, RS-1

RS-2

RS-3

RS-4

RS-7

RC

RA

A. Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

B. Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

C. Unlighted private recreational courts including but not limited to tennis, paddle tennis, and other uses determined to be similar by the Development Services Director (see Chapter 17.30 PMC)

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

D. Private recreational courts with exterior lighting including but not limited to tennis, paddle tennis and other uses determined to be similar by the Development Services Director (see Chapter 17.30 PMC)

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

E. “Seatainers”

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

F. Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

G. Amateur radio antenna installations

P*

P*

P*

P*

P*

P*

P*

H. Agricultural worker housing

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

*    Subject to the regulations contained in Chapter 17.31 PMC.

(Ord. 808 § 9, 2017; Ord. 805 § 5, 2017; Ord. 785 § 9, 2016; Ord. 771 § 1, 2014; Ord. 736 § 9, 2012; Ord. 674 § 6, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 490 § 2(1), 1997; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 206 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.1(E)), 1983)

17.08.150 Permitted and conditional uses – Temporary uses.
Temporary uses in the residential zones shall be as follows:

Temporary Uses

RR-A through C, RS-1

RS-2

RS-3

RS-4

RS-7

RC

RA

A. Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.26 PMC

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

B. Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

(Ord. 808 § 10, 2017; Ord. 785 § 10, 2016; Ord. 736 § 10, 2012; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.1(F)), 1983)

17.08.160 Property development standards – General requirements.
The following requirements in residential zones are the minimum unless otherwise stated:

General Requirements

RR-A 

RS-1

RS-2

RS-3

RS-4

RS-7

RC

RA

A. Density – Maximum dwelling units per acre

0.025 

2.0

3.0

4.0

8.0

12.0

20.0

B. Net lot area (in square feet, unless otherwise noted)

40 acres

20,000

15,000

10,000

4,500

2 acres

3 acres

C.  Lot width (in feet)

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Unless otherwise specified below

110

100

80

70

50

135 corner 165 interior

135 corner 165 interior

2. Cul-de-sac or unusually shaped lot

30

30

30

30

30

–

–

3. Flag lot

20

20

20

20

20

–

–

D. Lot depth (in feet)

150

150

100

100

80

135 corner 165 interior

135 corner 165 interior

E. Front yard setback (in feet)

40

30

25

25

18

20

20

F. Side yard setback, interior, each side (in feet)

20/20

15/15

10/10

10/10

5/51

0/102

15/15

15/15

G. Side yard setback, street side (in feet)

20

15

10

10

10

20

20

H. Rear yard setback (in feet)

50

40

40

25

20

15

15

I. Lot coverage, maximum (in percentage)

35

35

35

35

50

50

50

J. Building and structure height (maximum in feet)

35 feet or 2 stories, whichever is less, or as expressly authorized pursuant to an adopted specific plan. Amateur radio antenna installations are subject to the height and other regulations contained in Chapter 17.31 PMC.

K. Parking spaces per unit (garages are required in all residential zones except the RA zone)

2

2

2

2

2

3

4

L. Distance between buildings that do not exceed 15 feet in height (in feet)

–

–

–

–

–

15

15

M. Distance between buildings, where one or more exceeds 15 feet in height (in feet)

–

–

–

–

–

25

15

1    The 5/5 interior side yard setback in the RS-7 zone shall only apply to properties that are not part of a planned development approved with a 0/10 or zero lot line interior side setback development standard.

2    The 0/10 interior side yard setback in the RS-7 zone shall only apply to planned developments that are approved with a 0/10 or zero lot line interior side setback development standard.

3    1.75 spaces (1 garage)/1 bedroom unit; 2.25 spaces (1 carport)/2 bedroom unit; 3.00 spaces (2 garages)/3 bedroom or larger unit.

4    1.5 spaces (1 carport)/1 bedroom unit; 2.25 spaces (1 carport)/2 bedroom unit; 2.75 spaces (1 carport)/3 bedroom or larger unit.

(Ord. 771 § 2, 2014; Ord. 674 § 7, 2008; Ord. 481 § 3, 1997; Ord. 423 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 267 § 2(1), 1988; Ord. 232 § 1, 1987; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.2(A)), 1983)

17.08.170 Property development standards – Additional requirements. Amended Ord. 831
A. Minimum Lot Size and Dimensions.

1. Any legal lot may be used as a building site if the proposed use is permitted in the zone and all grading requirements set forth in the comprehensive plan and the Poway Municipal Code are strictly satisfied without variance, provided that no building permit shall be issued for a lot of a size less than 4,000 square feet.

2. Flag lots shall meet the minimum lot dimension requirements in the “flag” portion of the lot. The flag pole portion of a flag lot shall not be counted toward the minimum lot area requirement.

3. Slope calculations and the density potential which results from such calculations under the provisions of this title are matters requiring technical engineering expertise and are ministerial, not discretionary, in nature. In the RR-A through RR-C and RS-1 zones, slope calculations shall be based on the measured rise over run calculations of a topographic map of the property prepared in accordance with the standards set forth in this section by a registered civil engineer retained by the applicant. The standards and procedures for slope calculation shall be adopted by resolution and contained in the public counter handout titled: “City of Poway Slope Calculation Standards and Procedures,” a copy of which shall be available at the City of Poway Development Services Department. The standards and procedures shall be subject to amendment by further resolution. A violation of the standards and procedures for slope calculation adopted by resolution shall be deemed a violation of the ordinance codified in this subsection. To compute slope, the following formula shall be used:

(CL x I x S)

NA

Where:

CL

=

Length of contours

I

=

Contour interval

S

=

Scale of map

NA

=

Net area in square feet

The average slope of each parcel shall be consistent with the slope requirement for the total site.

The City may retain, at the applicant’s cost, a registered civil engineer to verify the calculations of the applicant’s engineer and to ascertain whether or not the calculations were made in accordance with the standards set forth in this section. In the event that the civil engineer retained by the City determines that the calculations were made in accordance with the standards set forth in this section, the City shall accept the calculations as accurate. In the event that the civil engineer retained by the City determines that the calculations were not made in accordance with the standards set forth in this section, the City shall not accept the calculations as accurate. No application for development of property which requires slope calculations shall be deemed complete until the Director of Development Services has accepted the slope calculation.

The slope criteria and minimum parcel sizes for property zoned RR-A, RR-B and RR-C shall not be modified to permit increased density or rescinded unless and until such modification or rescission is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election.*

Lot sizes for properties zoned RR-A, RR-B, RR-B2, RR-C or RS-1 shall be as follows:

Slope Criteria and Minimum Parcel Size for Properties Zoned RR-A, RR-B, RR-B
2, RR-C and RS-1

ZONE

SLOPE (Percent)

DENSITY

Parcels served by City water1

Parcels not served by City water

RR-A

0 – 15

1 parcel per four net acres

1 parcel per 20 net acres

15 – 25

1 parcel per eight net acres

1 parcel per 20 net acres

25 – 45

1 parcel per 20 net acres

1 parcel per 40 net acres

45 +

No credit

No credit

RR-B

0 – 15

1 parcel per two net acres

Requires City water

15 – 25

1 parcel per four net acres

25 – 45

1 parcel per eight net acres

45 +

No credit

No credit

RR-B2 (Within High Valley Area)

No slope criteria

1 parcel per two net acres2

City water not required

RR-C

RS-1

0 – 15

1 parcel per one net acre

Requires City water

15 – 25

1 parcel per two net acres

25 – 45

1 parcel per four net acres

45 +

No credit

No credit

1    City water is defined as water provided through the City’s public water system.

2    Within the High Valley Area, all lots prepared for division less than eight net acres in size shall include a minimum of one contiguous net acre building site with an average slope of less than 25 percent. The building site shall be logically located in regard to access consistent with City ordinances and policies and the preservation of significant natural resources such as watercourses, significant tree stands, rock outcroppings or ridgelines.

4. The ratio of the depth of a lot to the width of a lot shall not exceed a maximum ratio of 3:1. If that ratio is exceeded, the lot shall be deemed an unusually shaped lot. Unusually shaped lots may only be allowed within the RR-A through RR-C and RS-1 zones and only where the City Council, in its discretion, finds that unusually shaped lots are necessary to ensure the preservation of unique topographic features, riparian woodland areas and other areas of significant community importance as open space. This development standard shall apply to all lots proposed to be created by the subdivision or parcel map process.

5. Lot averaging in the RR-A through RR-C and RS-1 zones may be utilized at the time of subdivision consideration. The purpose of lot averaging is to ensure the preservation of unique topographic features, riparian woodland areas and other features of significant community importance as open space. The words “This is a lot-averaged subdivision” shall appear on the face of the map. The method of design for a lot-averaging subdivision is as follows:

a. The density of development (number of available lots) is calculated as described in subsection (A)(3) of this section;

b. The area(s) to be left as open space is determined;

c. The available lots are distributed within the remaining area of the property with no lot to have an area less than the minimum lot size permitted within that zone;

d. None of the lots, including the open space lot(s), can be further divided, and a covenant to that effect shall be recorded against the property and in favor of the City;

e. Submittal of an acceptable standard subdivision design.

6. The lot averaging provisions of the Poway Municipal Code shall not be modified to permit increased density or rescinded unless and until such modification or rescission is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election.*

B. Required Setbacks.

1. Street setbacks shall be measured from the ultimate street right-of-way or the maximum required street width if said street is proposed to be private or is now a private street.

2. Each lot or parcel on a cul-de-sac, curved street or dead-end street shall meet the minimum lot width requirement at the required front setback of the zone except for the RC and RA zones (see example below).



3. Public and Semipublic Buildings and Uses. For public and semipublic buildings and uses, a minimum 50-foot setback shall be maintained from any adjacent single-family residential zone. In addition, a six-foot-high fence is required along an interior side or rear yard that is adjacent to a single-family residential zone, unless a parking lot is located within 75 feet of said property lines. In those instances, a six-foot-high decorative masonry wall shall be provided. Fifteen-gallon trees planted 20 feet on-center and shrubbery shall be installed and maintained along the inside of the required fence or wall in a five-foot-wide landscape planter to provide a dense landscape screen. The City Council may waive or modify the fence or wall requirement if both properties contain a public or semipublic use or building.

4. Where a portion of a residential building is nonconforming in terms of current rear yard and/or side yard setbacks, the existing distance from the side or rear lot line established by the nonconforming portion of the building shall be used as the required setback distance for any additions to that building in the side yard and rear yard areas.

5. In situations where a rural residential or single-family residential lot is so irregular, as to prohibit or unduly restrict the construction of a single-family home, within the required setbacks noted in this title, the Director of Development Services shall have the authority to alter the setback locations, i.e., front, side and rear yards, to enable the property owner to enjoy the same privileges as those enjoyed by other property owners in the same area.

6. Additions to the Main Building. Additions to the main building shall be allowed to encroach into the rear yard setback up to one-half the distance but shall otherwise comply with the development standards contained in PMC 17.08.160.

C. Lot Coverage.

1. Lot coverage shall include all buildings, carports, structures and accessory buildings and structures except that patio covers, open on three sides, pools, spas and freestanding open air gazebos and patios shall not be counted.

D. Driveway Requirements.

1. Each building site shall have a minimum 20-foot-wide vehicular access to a street.

2. Driveway and other concrete or asphalt concrete areas available for parking shall not exceed 50 percent of the required front yard area.

3. Driveways serving one or two parcels in residential zones shall be constructed subject to the following standards:

Zones

Max. Grade Break*

Max. Slope

Min.

0 – 15%

Surfacing

15 – 25%

Width

RS-3

RS-4

RS-7

RC

RA

14%

(minimum tangent length – 10')

20%***

6" P.C.C.

6" P.C.C.

Min. 12 feet

Max. 30 feet

RS-1

RS-2

RR-A

RR-B

RR-C

14%

20%***

2" A.C.**

6" P.C.C.

Min. 12 feet

Max. 30 feet

*    Vertical curve (min. 50 feet long) can be utilized with approval of the City Engineer.

**    For slopes between 1% and 10%, gravel may be used based upon the following specifications:

a. The native soil must have a minimum R-value of 50 and minimum sand equivalency of 20.

b. Scarify and compact the top 12" of subgrade to 95% relative compaction. Over subgrade, compact the specified amount of Class II base to 95%, based upon the following table:

R-Value

Inches of Base

50

6"

60

5"

68

4"

75

3"

80 and over

None

c. Drainage improvements and culverts must be installed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

***    Slopes in excess of 20% may be approved for very limited distances where topographic or geologic constraints prohibit compliance with the standard. In no case shall road and driveway slopes exceed 25%. Modification of the slope standard is subject to the approval of the Fire Marshal and the Director of Development Services.

    Additional grading required to meet the 20% slope road and driveway standard shall not count against the maximum graded area permitted by the general plan. To achieve a grading allowance, the applicant will be required to prepare two concept grading plans, one denoting the 25% or less driveway and the other a 20% or less driveway slope. The difference in the amount of graded area between the two concept grading plans would not be counted toward the maximum graded area. If the quantity of material graded to achieve the 20% slope exceeds the maximum allowable graded area for the lot by less than 20%, the Director of Development Services may approve the additional grading. If the quantity of material graded to achieve the 20% slope exceeds the maximum allowable graded area for the lot by 20% or more, approval by the City Council is required. In either case, the quantity of material that may exceed the maximum graded area is limited to only the quantity of material necessary to reduce the road or driveway slope from a maximum of 25% to 20%.

E. Miscellaneous.

1. All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad-mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with any appropriate screening treatment. All new and existing utility connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other facilities may be placed above ground. The requirement for undergrounding existing utilities shall not apply to any overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34.5 kV and long distance and main trunk communication facilities. The requirement for undergrounding existing utility connections may be waived or modified by the City Council in accordance with criteria and provisions for such as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

2. Energy Conservation. Buildings shall be located on the site to provide adjacent buildings adequate sunlight for solar access. The location of a solar collector shall comply with the accessory building setback regulations. All new construction and remodeling shall be pre-plumbed for solar hot water heating. Buildings shall be designed to minimize energy consumption requirements, including, but not limited to, the following conservation measures:

a. Cogeneration;

b. South-facing windows;

c. Eave coverage for windows;

d. Double-glazed windows;

e. Earth berming against exterior walls;

f. Greenhouses; and

g. Deciduous shade trees.

3. All convalescent homes and/or hospitals shall be limited to areas with natural slopes of 10 percent of less.

4. All development in the floodplain shall be in accordance with the National Flood Insurance requirements and local ordinance.

5. Architectural appurtenances to churches and other religious institutions involving a steeple, or cross, or the combination thereof, and clock towers and similar design elements on commercial structures, may exceed the maximum height of 35 feet. Proposals for such appurtenances, however, shall be evaluated through the development review application process on a case-by-case basis so that architectural compatibility and appropriate building scale is achieved and maintained.

6. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios, and special development requirements.

7. Conversions of existing garages into habitable space is permitted only when replaced with the equivalent covered parking as required by PMC 17.08.160(K) or such that was provided at the time the dwelling was constructed, whichever is less. (Ord. 685 § 2, 2009; Ord. 679 § 3, 2008; Ord. 674 §§ 8, 9, 10, 2008; Ord. 621 § 2, 2005; Ord. 549 § 2, 2001; Ord. 538 §§ 2, 3, 2001; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 481 § 3, 1997; Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 283 § 2(C), (D), 1988; Ord. 280 § 2, 1988; Ord. 275 § 2, 1988; Ord. 272 § 2, 1988; Ord. 267 § 2(8), 1988; Ord. 232 § 1, 1987; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 136, 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.2(B), 2.4), 1983)

*    Editor’s Note: This paragraph of PMC 17.08.170(A) was added by Ordinance No. 283 and was approved by the voters at a general municipal election November 8, 1988. The language added shall not be modified or rescinded without the approval of a simple majority of the City voting at a special or general election.

17.08.180 Accessory buildings and structures.
An accessory building or structure, attached to or detached from the main residence, shall be located on a lot that contains a primary dwelling and shall comply with the setback, height and lot coverage requirements as contained in PMC 17.08.160 except as provided in this section. A minor development review application shall be required for an accessory building or structure that results in new habitable space that is 750 square feet or larger.

A. Accessory Dwelling Unit. The purpose of this subsection is to provide regulations for the establishment of accessory dwelling units in residential zones and to define an approval process for such accessory dwelling units. The intent of this subsection is to provide opportunities for more affordable housing options in areas where adequate public facilities and services are available.

1. No ADU shall be constructed or maintained without the approval of a building permit in accordance with PMC Title 15 and full compliance with the performance standards identified within this section.

2. No more than one ADU shall be permitted per single-family lot.

3. An ADU may be rented separate from the primary dwelling but may not be sold or otherwise conveyed separate from the primary dwelling.

4. Lots which contain an ADU shall not be further subdivided if the subdivision will result in a detached ADU or primary dwelling being located on a lot containing less than the minimum net area required by the zoning of the property.

5. The ADU may be either detached or attached to the primary dwelling. A detached ADU shall be located at least 10 feet from the primary dwelling or other detached accessory building.

6. The ADU shall comply with the setback, height and lot coverage requirements as contained in PMC 17.08.160, except that a detached ADU shall be limited to one story and shall not exceed the height of the primary dwelling.

7. The ADU shall be similar to the primary dwelling in architectural style and materials.

8. The floor area of the ADU shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area contained in the primary dwelling (not including garage area) or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less. An ADU, however, shall not be required to contain less than 500 square feet unless this is necessary to meet lot coverage or setback requirements.

9. An existing garage may be converted to an ADU regardless of its location on the lot. A setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an ADU that is constructed above a garage.

10. One off-street parking space shall be provided for the ADU, which may be provided as tandem parking on a driveway and shall be permitted in setback areas unless the Director of Development Services or the Director’s designee makes specific findings that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site topography or fire and life safety conditions. No off-street parking shall be required in any of the following instances:

a. The ADU is located within one-half mile of a public transit stop.

b. The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

c. The ADU is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure.

d. The ADU is located in an area of the City where on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU.

e. The ADU is located within one block of a car-share vehicle’s pick-up location, as established by the City.

11. If an existing garage is converted to an ADU, the parking spaces (up to two) shall be replaced on site, but are not required to be within a garage.

12. Either the main residence or the ADU must be occupied by the owner of the property at all times that either unit is held out for rent.

13. The main dwelling or ADU shall only be used for rental of terms longer than 30 days.

14. Development impact fees required for an ADU shall not exceed 50 percent of the total development impact fees applicable to a new single-family dwelling.

15. An ADU shall not be considered a new residential unit for purposes of calculating water and sewer connection fees or capacity charges. However, the property owner may request a new or separate utility connection directly between the ADU and the utility. The connection shall be subject to a connection fee or capacity charge as established by the City Council for other residential service connections; provided, however, that this fee or charge shall not exceed the reasonable cost of providing this service.

16. ADUs shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence.

17. The City may offer incentives to encourage development of accessory dwelling units. If an owner of an ADU elects to file a 30-year deed restriction to rent the unit to a lower-income household, the City may consider waiving fees (including waiving the inclusionary housing in-lieu fee), reducing parking or other development standards, or approving other forms of assistance. Receipt of such incentives shall require the owner to:

a. Rent the accessory dwelling unit to a lower-income household, as defined annually by the State Department of Housing and Community Development at a rate that shall not exceed an amount which is equal to 30 percent of the gross monthly income of a low-income household, at 80 percent of the San Diego County median income, adjusted for household size.

b. File an agreement with the City’s Development Services Department documenting the household’s eligibility to occupy the accessory unit.

c. Record a deed restriction specifying the property restrictions on the accessory dwelling unit for the 30-year term.

d. Assign the deed restriction using a form of assignment and assumption approved by the Director of Development Services in the event that the property is transferred or sold.

This subsection shall not be considered in the application of any local ordinance, policy or program to limit residential growth.

B. Other Habitable Accessory Buildings. Habitable accessory buildings, excluding accessory dwelling units, may be located on the same lot as an existing single-family dwelling and shall comply with the following standards:

1. The habitable accessory building may be either attached to or detached from the primary dwelling. A detached habitable accessory building shall be at least 10 feet from the main residence or other detached accessory building.

2. A habitable accessory building may contain a bathroom and/or a bar sink but may not contain cooking or kitchen facilities. A habitable accessory building must have heating and/or air conditioning.

3. The habitable accessory building shall comply with the setback, height and lot coverage requirements of PMC 17.08.160.

4. The habitable accessory building shall be similar to the primary dwelling in architectural style and materials.

5. The floor area of the habitable accessory building shall not exceed 25 percent of the floor area contained in the primary dwelling (not including garage area) or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less. However, a habitable accessory building shall not be required to contain less than 500 square feet unless this is necessary to meet lot coverage or setback requirements.

6. The habitable accessory building shall never be rented or leased as a separate unit. A deed restriction stating these limitations shall be recorded with the County Recorder.

7. The combined total area of all habitable accessory structures on a lot, including an ADU, shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling (not including the garage area) or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less.

C. Detached Nonhabitable Accessory Buildings. Detached nonhabitable accessory buildings with a projected roof area that exceeds 120 square feet shall comply with the following:

1. Size. On lots less than two net acres in size, a detached nonhabitable accessory building shall not be greater than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the living space of the main residence on the lot or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less. A garage with a gross floor area no greater than 600 square feet is permitted regardless of the living space of the main building, if no other garage is located on the lot. A detached nonhabitable accessory building that does not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of the living space of the main residence on the lot but is greater than 1,500 square feet may be approved with a minor development review permit pursuant to Chapter 17.52 PMC. On lots greater than two net acres in size, the size limits for nonhabitable accessory buildings and garages do not apply.

2. Height and Setbacks. A detached nonhabitable accessory building shall meet all of the required setbacks, height and lot coverage requirements contained in PMC 17.08.160, except that a building that is no taller than 15 feet in one story may be allowed to encroach into the required rear and interior side yard setbacks as follows, provided the overall lot coverage is not exceeded:

a. Rear Yard Setback. Located no closer than five feet from the rear property line, excluding eave overhang, and at least 10 feet from the main residence or other detached accessory building.

b. Interior Side Yard Setback. Located no closer than five feet from the interior side property line, excluding eave overhang, and at least 10 feet from the main residence or other detached accessory building and within the rear yard area only.

3. A deed restriction stating that the accessory building will not be rented or leased as a separate unit, and no kitchen facilities will be installed, shall be recorded with the County Recorder.

D. Detached buildings with a projected roof area less than 120 square feet may be located anywhere on a single-family residential lot, except within the front and street side yard areas, provided the eaves do not overhang the adjacent property. These buildings shall not exceed eight feet in height.

E. 1. Canopies, patio covers, carports, breezeways, and other similar accessory buildings and structures as determined by the Director of Development Services, which are attached to the main residence or connecting the main residence with a detached accessory building, may extend into a required rear or interior side yard; provided, that portions of such structures extending into the yard comply with all of the following:

a. Height. Shall not exceed 15 feet in height.

b. Interior and Rear Yard Setback. Shall be located at least five feet from an interior side yard and at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.

c. Front and Street Side Yard Setback. Shall comply with the setbacks of the main residence.

d. Design. Shall be entirely open on at least three sides except for necessary supporting columns. A roof connecting a main residence and an accessory building, such as a breezeway, shall be open on two sides.

e. Eaves. May project one-half the distance into the required side yard setback.

2. Canopies, patio covers, carports, gazebos, breezeways, and other similar accessory buildings and structures as determined by the Director of Development Services which are detached from the main residence may extend into a required rear or interior side yard; provided, that portions of such structures extending into the yard comply with all of the following:

a. Height. Shall not exceed 15 feet in height.

b. Interior and Rear Yard Setback. Shall be located at least five feet from an interior side yard and rear lot lines.

c. Front and Street Side Yard Setback. Shall comply with the setbacks of the main residence.

d. Design. Shall be entirely open on at least three sides for patios and canopies except for necessary supporting columns.

e. Eaves. May project one-half the distance into the required side yard setback.

f. Building Setback. Shall observe a minimum 10 feet from the residence or other detached accessory structure.

F. Porches, steps, architectural features such as eaves, awnings, and chimneys, and balconies, stairways, wing walls or bay windows may project not more than four feet into any required front or rear yard area, nor into any required interior or street side yard setback more than one-half of said required side yard setback.

G. Swimming pools or spas, including mechanical equipment, diving boards, slides and similar devices, shall be located a minimum of three feet from the main residence on the lot and at least five feet from the property line and shall comply with all fencing requirements of PMC 8.52.050. In no instances shall swimming pools or spas be located within the front yard setback. (Ord. 820 §§ 9, 10, 2018; Ord. 773 §§ 2, 3, 2015; Ord. 679 § 4, 2008; Ord. 578 § 2, 2003; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 481 § 3, 1997)

17.08.185 Guest houses.
Repealed by Ord. 679. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 481 § 3, 1997)

17.08.190 Tract subdivision construction.
A. Front yard setbacks in subdivision tract developments may be reduced up to 40 percent on a maximum of one-half of the units however no setbacks shall be less than 18 feet to the garage for front entry and 15 feet to the garage for side entry.

B. A minimum of three floor plans shall be provided up to 50 units; a minimum of four plans shall be provided for between 50 and 100 units; and one additional plan shall be provided for each 50 additional units (or part thereof) over the first 100 units. At least one one-story plan shall be provided.

C. A minimum of three facade treatments which vary entry, window type and treatment, exterior materials, and color shall be provided per plan.

D. Roof style, material, and height shall be varied with each architectural elevation design and floor plan.

E. The use of side entry or rear garages is encouraged. (Ord. 481 § 3, 1997)

17.08.200 Affordable housing development standards.
Repealed by Ord. 701. (Ord. 481 § 3, 1997; Ord. 470 § 2(B), 1996)

17.08.210 Manufactured housing development standards.
For manufactured housing the following additional requirements shall apply:

A. Roofs shall have an eave overhang of at least 12 inches on all sides.

B. A manufactured home may not be installed if more than 10 years have elapsed between the date of manufacture of the manufactured home and the date a complete minor development review application for installation of that home is received. (Ord. 481 § 3, 1997)

17.08.220 Property development standards – Special requirements for RC and RA zones.
In the RC and RA zones, including the conversion of apartments to condominiums where permitted by PMC 17.08.100(H)(3), the following performance standards shall be met:

A. Masonry walls six feet in height, from the highest finished grade, shall be required on the rear and side property lines. Framed stucco walls may be permitted in lieu of a masonry wall upon determination by the City Council that such substituted wall is compatible with the proposed project and surrounding property uses. When adjacent to commercial or single-family residential zones, walls shall be eight feet in height unless the adjacent grade of the property in those zones is four feet or more lower or higher than the project site. When adjacent to another multiple-family (RA or RC), or mobile home park zone, block pilasters connected with solid wood (cedar or redwood) or framed stucco may be used instead of masonry. No walls are required on front or street side yards unless needed for noise attenuation and/or privacy.

B. Where a lot fronts on more than one street it shall be considered to have multiple frontages and be required to meet the front yard setback requirement on all street frontages.

C. In RC and RA zones, any building exceeding 15 feet in height shall maintain a minimum setback of 50 feet from any single-family zone; and buildings less than 15 feet in height shall maintain a minimum setback of 25 feet from any single-family zone. In situations where the adjacent single-family zone property is six feet or greater in height above the RA or RC zoned property, a minimum setback of 25 feet shall be maintained.

D. When an RC and/or RA lot is adjacent to any single-family zone, a minimum 15 feet of landscaping shall be maintained on the RC and/or RA lot between such uses.

E. No less than 10 percent of the floor area shall be provided as private open area per ground floor unit and for units contained wholly on the second story.

F. A minimum of 250 cubic feet of lockable, enclosed storage per unit shall be provided in the garage or carport area, substitutions may be approved by the City Council.

G. The following recreation facilities shall be provided at a minimum unless waived by the City Council:

1. Landscaped park-like quiet area;

2. Children’s play area;

3. Family picnic area; and

4. Swimming pool with cabana or patio cover.

H. A minimum of one clothes washer and one clothes dryer per 10 dwelling units located conveniently throughout the development. In the RC zone, the provision of one clothes washer and one clothes dryer hookup per dwelling unit shall meet this requirement.

I. Individual trash areas, screened from view of the roadway, shall be provided for each dwelling unit in the RC zone; conveniently located trash enclosures, per City standards, shall be provided for dwelling units in the RA zone.

J. A minimum of 50 trees per net acre shall be required as part of the landscaping requirements; 20 percent shall be 24-inch box size or larger, 70 percent shall be 15-gallon size and 10 percent shall be five-gallon size.

K. Recreation vehicle parking areas shall be provided, fully screened from view or the development shall prohibit all parking of recreation vehicles.

L. Lighting.

1. All outdoor light fixtures, including but not limited to illuminated signage, decorative building or landscape lighting, illuminated recreational facilities, and parking lot lighting within multifamily residential zones, shall be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except when used for security purposes, illumination of roadways, sidewalks, and similar safety-related applications. Automatic timing devices shall be integrated into all new or modified lighting systems to turn off lights at 11:00 p.m.

2. All lighting used in parking lots, for security purposes or similar safety-related uses, shall be low pressure sodium, narrow spectrum amber low emitting diode (LED), or other energy efficient light which does not exceed a correlated color temperature (CCT) of 3,000 kelvin and 4,050 lumen except where the City Council has issued an exemption permit to allow alternative lighting. The City Council may issue such exemption permits where the Council finds that unusual circumstances dictate the use of brighter lighting for safety reasons.

3. All exterior lighting shall be scheduled so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the imaginary horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the fixture and in such a manner that the light is directed away from streets and adjoining properties.

4. Illuminators should be integrated with the architecture of the building.

5. Freestanding lamp posts shall be no taller than 18 feet.

6. The intensity of light at the boundary of any multifamily zone shall not exceed 75-foot lamberts from a source of reflected light.

7. Compliance with this section shall be applicable to all new construction and/or the expansion or rehabilitation of any facility or structure by more than 50 percent of its value. (Ord. 788 §§ 2, 3, 2016; Ord. 484 § 2(A), 1997; Ord. 481 § 3, 1997; Ord. 192 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 172 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985; Ord. 125, 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.3(B)), 1983)

17.08.230 Performance standards in residential zones.
A. The noise level emanating from any residential use or operation shall not exceed 60 dBA CNEL for the RR-A through RR-C and RS zones and 65 dBA CNEL for the RC and RA zones, as the acceptable outdoor noise exposure level when measured at the property line. The interior noise levels shall not exceed 45 dBA CNEL for all residential uses.

B. For schools, libraries, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, park and recreation areas, the outdoor acceptable exposure level shall not exceed 70 dBA CNEL when measured at the property line.

C. Air conditioners, antennas (excepting amateur radio antenna installations subject to Chapter 17.31 PMC), heating, cooling, ventilating equipment and all other mechanical, lighting or electrical devices shall be so operated that they do not disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents, and shall be screened, shielded and/or sound buffered from surrounding properties and streets. All equipment shall be installed and operated in accordance with all other applicable ordinances. Heights of said equipment shall not exceed the required height of the zone in which they are located.

D. Required front and street side yards shall be landscaped and shall consist predominantly of trees, plant materials, ground cover and decorative rocks, except for necessary walks, drives and fences. All required landscaping shall be permanently maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, free from weeds, trash and debris.

E. Semi-trucks and trailers, dump trucks, moving vans and other heavy-duty commercial vehicles shall not be parked on any residentially zoned lot for a period of longer than eight hours. (Ord. 771 § 3, 2014; Ord. 674 § 11, 2008; Ord. 481 § 3, 1997; Ord. 456 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1989; Ord. 225 § 1, 1987; Ord.

178 § 1(A), 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.3(A)), 1983)

17.08.240 Walls and fences. Amended Ord. 831
Requirements for walls and fences in residential zones shall be as follows:

A. A wall, fence, retaining wall, or driveway entry gate and associated pilasters including any appurtenances or any combination thereof shall not exceed six feet in height, except as herein provided.

1. When a retaining wall is used to increase usable lot area, the sum total of any combination of fence or wall and retaining wall shall not exceed six feet in height unless a five-foot landscape area is provided between the retaining wall and fence or wall. A series of retaining walls and fence or wall is allowed in conjunction with the five-foot landscape area, provided each individual fence and wall or retaining wall shall not exceed six feet in height as conceptually shown in Figure A below.

2. Within the required front yard area, at a minimum, the top two feet of a six-foot fence or wall shall be constructed of open fencing as conceptually shown in Figure B below, unless the wall is a retaining wall, a driveway entry gate and associated pilasters, or additional height is approved for noise attenuation purposes.

3. The maximum height of driveway entry gates and associated pilasters, on properties that are at least one acre in size and zoned RR-A, RR-B, RR-C, or RS-1, shall not exceed seven feet. A driveway entry gate and associated pilasters shall be located adjacent to a driveway and may be located within the front yard setback area, provided a minimum 20-foot setback is maintained to the edge of the street intersecting the driveway to allow the vehicle entering the property to stop in the driveway during operation of the gate without impacting traffic in the street.



B. A solid wall or fence not more than six feet in height may be maintained along the interior side of rear lot lines, except as required by PMC 17.08.220(A); provided, that such wall or fence does not extend into a required front yard except for noise attenuation as required by the City and as provided in this chapter.

C. A wall or fence adjacent to a driveway or street providing vehicular access to an abutting lot or street shall not exceed three feet in height within 15 feet of the intersection of the driveway and the street right-of-way and/or shall comply with CalTrans’s design standards for site visibility. Corner cut-offs may be required for safety and visibility (see examples following).



D. Fiberglass sheeting, bamboo sheeting or other similar temporary material shall not be permitted as a fencing material on street yard frontages.

E. A wall or fence up to eight feet in height may be allowed by the Director of Development Services where necessary for noise attenuation from arterial streets or other noise sources.

F. Where barbed wire strands, razor wire, or concertina wire (coiled barbed wire) is placed at the top of a wall or fence, such materials shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of six feet above grade, shall extend no more than one foot above the top of the wall or fence, and shall be maintained in a safe condition. Such strands of wire shall not be counted in the overall allowable fence height.

G. It is unlawful to place razor wire or concertina wire on the rooftop of any building.

H. It is unlawful for an owner of a parcel of land within the City to keep barbed wire or any other type of wire fencing in an unsafe, abandoned, or materially dangerous condition. Unmaintained wire fencing, including but not limited to barbed wire, razor wire, and concertina wire (coiled barbed wire), is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to the nuisance abatement procedure, Chapter 8.72 PMC.

I. All fences (including retaining walls) shall be constructed of new or good used material and in accordance with the methods of construction which conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code. Additionally, they shall be maintained in a state of good repair. Any dilapidated, dangerous or unsightly fences or retaining walls shall be repaired or removed.

J. Retaining walls, which have a walking surface adjacent to the top of the retaining wall, shall be equipped with an open and decorative metal railing on the top of the retaining wall for safety as deemed necessary by the City Building Official. The height of the required railing shall not be considered in the overall height measurement of the retaining wall. (Ord. 685 § 3, 2009; Ord. 674 §§ 12 – 15, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 481 § 3, 1997; Ord. 232 § 1, 1987; Ord. 195 § 1, 1986; Ord. 172 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 2.5), 1983)

Chapter 17.10
COMMERCIAL ZONES Amended Ord. 831
Sections:

17.10.010    Purposes.

17.10.020    Repealed.

17.10.025    CO commercial office zone.

17.10.030    CN commercial neighborhood zone.

17.10.035    CB community business zone.

17.10.040    CG commercial general zone.

17.10.045    Repealed.

17.10.050    Repealed.

17.10.060    Permitted and conditional uses – Commercial zones.

17.10.120    Property development standards – Generally.

17.10.140    Property development standards – Special requirements.

17.10.150    Performance standards – In commercial zones.

17.10.160    Accessory structures.

17.10.170    Walls and fences. Amended Ord. 831

17.10.180    Signs.

17.10.190    Outdoor display.

17.10.010 Purposes.
In addition to the objectives outlined in PMC 17.02.010, the commercial zones are included in the zoning development regulations to achieve the following purposes:

A. To provide appropriately located areas for office uses, retail stores, service establishments and wholesale businesses, offering commodities and services required by residents of the City and its surrounding market area;

B. To encourage office and commercial uses to concentrate for the convenience of the public and for a more mutually beneficial relationship to each other;

C. To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial development, including off-street parking and loading areas;

D. To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them;

E. To protect commercial properties from noise, odor, smoke, unsightliness and landscape design for office and commercial developments within the City;

F. To promote high standards of site planning, architecture, and landscape design for office and commercial developments within the City. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.0), 1983)

17.10.020 MU mixed use zone.
Repealed by Ord. 814. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1996)

17.10.025 CO commercial office zone.
The CO commercial office zone is intended as an area primarily for the development of professional, administrative offices and ancillary retail uses. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1996; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.0), 1983)

17.10.030 CN commercial neighborhood zone.
The CN commercial neighborhood zone is intended for neighborhood shopping centers which provide limited retail, business service and office facilities for the convenience of residents of the neighborhood. These shopping centers are intended to be compatible with a residential environment. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1996; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.0), 1983)

17.10.035 CB community business zone.
The CB community business zone is intended to accommodate local and communitywide commercial centers that typically serve large areas of the City. (Ord. 815 § 4, 2018)

17.10.040 CG commercial general zone.
The CG commercial general zone is intended as an area for the location of a broad range of uses and provides locations for major retail and service businesses. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1996; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.0), 1983)

17.10.045 A/GC automotive/general commercial zone.
Repealed by Ord. 814. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1996)

17.10.050 TC town center zone.
Repealed by Ord. 814. (Ord. 463 § 2, 1996; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.0), 1983)

17.10.060 Permitted and conditional uses – Commercial zones.
The uses shall be permitted where the symbol “P” appears and subject to a conditional use permit where the symbol “C” appears, and subject to a minor conditional use permit where the symbol “M” appears in the column beneath each zone designation. Where the symbol “X” appears the use is prohibited. A use that is not listed is prohibited. Land uses identified for the zone may be further limited by the presence of a specific plan or other applicable provision of the PMC.

 

CO

CN

CB

CG

OFFICE AND PROFESSIONAL USES

Professional and administrative offices, including, but not limited to: medical, dental, chiropractic, optical and related health services; investment, accounting, insurance and real estate services; travel agencies; business services such as advertising agencies, direct mail marketing companies, employment agencies, secretarial services, and collection services; engineering services

P

P

P

P

Banks and other financial institutions

P

P

P

P

Veterinary offices and animal hospitals

– Without boarding

– With boarding

(keeping of animals on-site for medical purposes shall not be considered boarding)

 

C

X

 

C

X

 

P

C

 

C

C

RETAIL USES

Apparel and accessory stores, including jewelry stores

X

P

P

P

Art galleries

X

P

P

P

Art supply stores

X

P

P

P

Book stores (both new and used)

X

P

P

P

Camera, photographic and video supply stores

X

P

P

P

Catalog showrooms/stores

X

X

P

P

Coin, stamp, and other collectibles

X

P

P

P

Computer and computer software stores

P

P

P

P

Drug stores and pharmacies

P

P

P

P

Educational materials stores

X

P

P

P

Florists and artificial flower stores

P

P

P

P

Furniture and major appliance stores

X

P

P

P

Floor covering, drapery and upholstery showrooms where no stock is kept on site

X

P

P

P

General merchandise stores including department stores and variety stores

X

P

P

P

Gift, novelty and souvenir shops

X

P

P

P

Hardware and home improvement stores

– With no outside sales lot

– With outside sales lot

 

X

X

 

P

X

 

P

P

 

P

C

Kitchenware, china, bedding, linen and home accessory stores

X

P

P

P

Luggage and leather goods stores

X

P

P

P

Mail order businesses

X

X

X

P

Music stores, including, but not limited to, record stores and musical instrument stores

X

P

P

P

Nursery and garden supply stores (all equipment and supplies must be kept within an enclosed area)

X

P

P

P

Pet and pet supply stores

X

P

P

P

Retail combined with limited distribution and/or warehousing

X

P

C

P

Sewing, needlework and fabric stores

X

P

P

P

Sign stores (may include manufacture of small signs)

X

P

P

P

Sporting goods, bicycle, hobby, toy and game shops

X

P

P

P

Stationery and office supply stores, including news dealers and newsstands

P

P

P

P

Swimming pool supplies

X

X

P

P

Tack and feed stores

X

P

M

P

USED GOODS STORES

Consignment boutiques

X

P

P

P

Pawn shops

X

X

C

X

Thrift stores, antique shops

X

P

P

P

FOOD AND DRINK STORES

Bakeries with on-site retail (may include limited baking for sale elsewhere)

X

M

P

P

Bakeries, retail only

X

P

P

P

Convenience stores

X

P

P

P

Establishments engaged in sale of prepared food primarily for in-store sale but for consumption elsewhere

P

P

P

P

Establishments engaged in sale of prepared food for delivery with no on-site sales or consumption

X

P

X

P

Liquor stores (liquor stores are not permitted within 1,000 feet of any public school)

X

C

C

C

Specialty food stores including: meat and fish markets; fruit and vegetable markets; candy, nut and confectionery stores; bakeries, and health food stores

X

P

P

P

Supermarkets

X

X

P

P

EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS AND LIVE ENTERTAINMENT

Bars (with or without live entertainment)

X

X

X

X

Coffee houses, juice bars, and other similar establishments not involving the sale and/or on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages, and without live entertainment

P

P

P

P

Restaurants with drive-in or drive-through facilities

C

C

C

C

Restaurants and similar establishments engaged primarily in the retail sale of prepared food and alcoholic beverages primarily for on-premises consumption (without drive-in or drive-through), except those serving primarily alcoholic beverages without food

C

C

P

P

Live entertainment as an accessory use to an eating or drinking establishment listed above unless otherwise authorized pursuant to PMC 17.26.020, Temporary Uses

M

X

M

M

SPORT AND ENTERTAINMENT USES

Arcades and electronic games

X

C

C

C

Bowling centers

X

X

C

C

Dance, aerobic exercise, music and martial arts studios

X

M

P

P

Recreation facilities such as billiard parlors, batting cages, skating rinks and other large interior sporting uses

X

X

M

M

Motion picture and live theaters

X

X

P

C

Physical fitness centers

 

 

 

 

a. Within an existing structure, including additions not greater than 50 percent of the existing square footage

M

M

M

M

b. New construction, including additions greater than 50 percent of the existing square footage

C

C

C

C

SERVICE USES

Art and photographic studios

X

P

P

P

Beauty and barber shops

P

P

P

P

Body piercing and/or tattoo

X

X

X

X

Blueprinting and large press printing services

P

X

P

P

Clothing rental shops

X

P

P

P

Drive-in business, excluding theaters and restaurants with drive-in or drive-through facilities

X

X

P

P

Dry cleaner, retail only

P

P

P

P

Ear piercing as an accessory use to a permitted use such as a jewelry store, department store, or a medical office

P

P

P

P

Equipment rental

X

X

C

C

Funeral parlors

C

C

P

P

Furniture repair (not in conjunction with furniture sales)

X

X

C

C

Internet cafe

P

P

P

P

Janitorial services

X

P

X

P

Locksmiths and key shops

P

P

P

P

Newspaper and magazine printing and publishing

X

X

X

P

Party supply and rental

X

X

P

P

Pest control services

X

X

X

X

Photocopying and small off-set printing centers

P

M

P

P

Private post offices

P

P

P

P

Repair shops such as clock repair, electrical and electronic repair, camera repair, and knife and scissor sharpening

X

P

P

P

Recycling centers

X

X

X

C

Recycling drop-off bins sponsored by charitable organization or school

P

P

P

P

Reverse vending machines and recycling stations in conjunction with retail sale of beverages

X

M

M

M

Self-service laundromats

X

P

P

P

Shoe repair shops

P

P

P

P

Small animal boarding kennels

X

X

C

C

Welding and other metal repair services

X

X

X

X

VEHICLE USES

Auto parts stores

X

X

P

P

Car rental (where there is adequate parking to allow the storage of rental vehicles in addition to parking required for other uses on the site)

X

X

P

P

Boat and recreational vehicle sales and rental (except as permitted by TUP)

X

X

X

C

Boat and recreational vehicle repair and service (also when in conjunction with sales)

X

X

C

C

Car washes, except as accessory to gasoline service station

X

X

C

C

Drive-through quick lube facilities

X

X

C

C

Gasoline service stations, including with accessory mini-markets and/or car washes but which do not provide mechanical service

X

C

M

C

Gasoline service stations which provide mechanical service

X

C

C

C

Motor vehicle sales and leasing (new and used) including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks and motorcycles (except as permitted by TUP)

X

X

X

X

Motor vehicle repair and service including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles (also when in conjunction with sales)

X

X

C

C

Tire sales and service as a freestanding use

X

X

C

C

Vehicle towing companies and storage lots

X

X

X

C

PUBLIC, SEMIPUBLIC AND RESIDENTIAL USES

Adult day care center

C

C

C

C

Churches and other religious institutions

C

C

C

C

Convalescent homes and hospitals on sites two net acres or greater in size

C

C

X

C

Day care centers other than family day care

C

C

C

C

Group residential, including, but not limited to, dormitories, independent living, board and care and intermediate care (see Chapter 17.39 PMC; maximum living units for dormitories shall not exceed 20 per acre)

C

X

X

X

Fraternal, service and social clubs and lodges

C

P

P

P

Mixed-use developments which include dwelling units with any other permitted or conditional use

C

X

C

C

Overnight sleeping accommodations in conjunction with any listed semipublic use

C

C

C

C

Hotels, motels and single-room occupancy buildings

X

X

C

C

Private schools and training facilities

C

C

P

C

Public educational institutions such as trade schools and colleges

C

C

C

C

Public facilities including, but not limited to, libraries, museums, post offices, government offices, and fire and police facilities

C

C

C

C

MISCELLANEOUS USES

Adult-oriented businesses

X

X

X

X

Fortune telling

X

X

X

X

Kiosks in parking lots

X

M

M

M

Medical marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives; cultivation; delivery; manufacturing; storage

X

X

X

X

Mini-warehouses

X

C

C

C

Push carts

M

X

X

X

Small animal boarding (see PMC 17.10.140(D) and Chapter 17.34 PMC)

X

X

C

C

Tanning salons

P

P

P

P

Tobacco shops

X

X

X

C

Video rental centers

P

P

P

P

Weight reduction centers

P

P

P

P

Wood lots

X

X

X

X

ACCESSORY USES

Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use

P

P

P

P

Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use

M

M

M

M

Caretaker’s living quarters only when incidental to, and on the same site as, a permitted or conditionally permitted use

X

X

X

X

Massage service when incidental to, or in conjunction with, medical, chiropractic, or similar health services; day spas, beauty parlors or barber shops; or physical fitness centers

P

P

P

P

“Seatainers”

M

M

M

M

TEMPORARY USES

Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.26 PMC

P

P

P

P

(Ord. 815 § 5, 2018; Ord. 814 § 5, 2017; Ord. 808 § 11, 2017; Ord. 785 § 11, 2016; Ord. 773 § 5, 2015; Ord. 736 § 11, 2012; Ord. 674 §§ 16 – 20, 2008; Ord. 662 § 2, 2007; Ord. 626 § 4, 2005; Ord. 490 § 2(2), 1997; Ord. 487 § 2, 1997; Ord. 486 § 2, 1997; Ord. 483 § 2, 1997; Ord. 472, 1997; Ord. 463 §§ 3, 10, 1996; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.1), 1983)

17.10.120 Property development standards – Generally.
A. The following requirements in commercial zones are the minimum unless otherwise stated:

 

CO

CN

CB

CG

Lot area

10,000 sq. ft.

3 ac sq. ft.

10,000 sq. ft.

10,000 sq. ft.

Lot width

100'

300'

60'

60'

Lot depth

100'

300'

100'

100'

Front yard setback

20'

20'

20'

20'

Interior side yard setback (see subsection D of this section)

10'

10'

10'

10'

Street side yard setback

20'

20'

20'

20'

Rear yard (see subsection D of this section)

0

0

0

0

Lot coverage maximum

40%

35%

35%

30%

Building and structure height maximum

35' or two stories, whichever is less, except as permitted by PMC 17.10.140(C) or as expressly authorized pursuant to an adopted specific plan

B. The property development and performance standards set out in this section and PMC 17.10.140 and 17.10.150 shall apply to all land and buildings permitted in their respective commercial zones.

C. Each building site shall have a minimum 25-foot-wide vehicular access to a public street.

D. In any commercial zone, a minimum setback of 25 feet shall be required wherever a lot in the commercial zone abuts a lot in any residential zone. Said setback may be used for required open off-street parking areas. The setback may be increased by the City Council in situations where additional distance would help to mitigate or alleviate potential problems or hazards.

E. All development in the floodplain shall be in accordance with the National Flood Insurance requirements and local ordinance.

F. Driveways in commercial zones shall be constructed subject to the following standards:

Maximum Grade Break

Maximum Slope

Minimum Surfacing

Width

10% (min. tangent length – 15 ft.)

8%

8" P.C.C.

Min. 15 ft. Max. 35 ft. Fire access – 20 ft. min.

G. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios and special development requirements.

H. All structures shall be of a muted scheme, with style and texture which reflect the traditional/rural character of the community and natural environment. They shall not be bright, reflective, metallic or otherwise visually out of character with the community or natural setting. A color palette shall be submitted as part of the site plan. (Ord. 815 § 6, 2018; Ord. 814 § 6, 2017; Ord. 463 § 5, 1996; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.2), 1983)

17.10.140 Property development standards – Special requirements.
A. All convalescent hospitals and all commercial uses shall be limited to areas with natural slopes of 10 percent or less.

B. Theaters may contain game arcades when the following conditions are met:

1. No separate outdoor entrance is provided for the game arcade area;

2. A minimum of two toilets and one washbasin is provided for each gender;

3. The hours of operation shall be the same as for the theater;

4. All gambling is prohibited;

5. All alcoholic beverage sale and/or consumption on-site is prohibited.

C. Architectural appurtenances to churches and other religious institutions involving a steeple, or cross, or the combination thereof, and clock towers and similar design elements on commercial structures, may exceed the maximum height of 35 feet. Proposals for such appurtenances, however, shall be evaluated through the development review application process on a case-by-case basis so that architectural compatibility and appropriate building scale is achieved and maintained.

D. Small animal boarding kennels shall not be established immediately adjacent to parcels of land or properties within residential zones where boarding kennels are not permitted pursuant to the Poway Municipal Code.

E. The commercial and residential components of a mixed use development shall be planned and implemented together. Each residential unit shall be provided with one covered parking space reserved for its use. Additional parking shall be provided on a shared basis with commercial uses on the site on the basis of highest hourly cumulative demand. Residential and commercial uses may be integrated into the same buildings or into the same development in separate buildings or both. In any case, the overall height shall not exceed 35 feet nor two stories.

F. Hotels and motels shall be permitted only on parcels of one net acre or more in size with a minimum lot width of 150 feet. All units shall be 300 square feet or larger in size. A 500-square-foot or larger swimming pool shall be provided. Four hundred square feet of landscaped open space shall be provided per room. Rooms shall be for transient lodging only (30 days or less) with the exception of the on-site manager’s residence. These standards shall also be applicable to development in the planned community (PC) zone.

G. Outdoor food preparation may be allowed in as an accessory activity to an existing restaurant or food store subject to the approval of a minor development review pursuant to PMC 17.52.050. The approval shall be subject to applicable conditions by the Director of Development Services including the following:

1. Any use of an open flame shall comply with all requirements of the Fire Code.

2. The food preparation area shall be arranged in such a way that it does not create a hazard to pedestrians or encroach on a required building exit.

3. The food preparation area shall not be located in any required driveway, parking space, landscaped setback area or required setback.

4. The food preparation area shall be maintained so that it is not unsightly and does not create a condition that is detrimental to the appearance of the premises or surrounding property.

5. Signage shall not be utilized to advertise the business, service or use, or any product, unless otherwise permitted by this title. (Ord. 580 § 2, 2003; Ord. 463 § 7, 1996; Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 426, 1993; Ord. 284 § 2, 1989; Ord. 272 § 2, 1988; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.2(B)), 1983)

17.10.150 Performance standards – In commercial zones.
In all commercial zones, the following performance standards shall be met:

A. Landscaping. In all commercial zones, required front and street side yards shall be landscaped. Said landscaping shall consist predominantly of plant materials except for necessary walks and drives. All planting and irrigation shall be in accordance with the City’s Landscape Manual. All required landscaping shall be permanently maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, free from weeds, trash and debris.

B. Masonry Walls and Landscape Screens. Where a commercial or office use abuts property in any residential zone, a masonry wall eight feet in height from the highest finished grade at the property line shall be erected and maintained between such uses and the residential zone. Where the adjacent grade of the abutting residential property is four feet or more lower or higher than the project site, the masonry wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height. In addition, 15-gallon trees, 20 feet on-center, and shrubbery shall be installed and maintained along the inside of the wall in a five-foot-wide, raised landscaped planter to provide a dense landscape screen.

C. Off-Street Parking Areas – Screening. Wherever off-street parking areas are situated across the street from property in a residential zone, a masonry wall or berm three feet in height shall be erected in the landscaped area between the required landscape area and the parking area to adequately screen said parking areas from the residential properties.

D. Noise Levels. The noise level emanating from any commercial use or operation shall not exceed five decibels (as defined in the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970) above the ambient level of the area measured at the property line.

E. Ground-Mounted Mechanical Equipment – Screening. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, and trash receptacle areas, shall be completely screened from surrounding properties by use of a wall or fence or shall be enclosed within a building. Structural and design plans for any required screening under the provisions of this section shall be approved by the Development Services Director and Building Official.

F. Roof Appurtenances – Screening. All roof appurtenances including, but not limited to, air conditioning units, and mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets and adjacent residentially zoned property.

G. Reciprocal Ingress and Egress. Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation and parking arrangements shall be required to facilitate the ease of vehicular movement between adjoining properties.

H. Lighting. The following standards shall apply to all outdoor light fixtures with the exception of lighting for automated teller machines regulated pursuant to Division 4 of the California Financial Code, Automated Teller Machines – User Safety.

1. All outdoor light fixtures, including but not limited to illuminated signage, decorative building or landscape lighting, illuminated recreational facilities, and parking lot lighting within commercial zones, shall be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except when used for security purposes, illumination of roadways, sidewalks, equipment yards and similar safety-related application, or when business operating hours continue after 11:00 p.m., but only for as long as such business is open.

2. Automatic timing devices shall be integrated into all new or modified lighting systems to turn off lights at 11:00 p.m.

3. During the hours from 11:00 p.m. until dawn, all exterior lighting shall be low pressure sodium, narrow spectrum amber low emitting diode (LED), or other energy efficient light which does not exceed a correlated color temperature (CCT) of 3,000 kelvin and 4,050 lumen except where the City Council has issued an exemption permit to allow alternative lighting. The City Council may issue such exemption permits where the Council finds that unusual circumstances dictate the use of brighter lighting for safety reasons.

4. All exterior lighting shall be scheduled so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the imaginary horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the fixture and in such a manner that the light is directed away from streets and adjoining properties.

5. Illuminators should be integrated with the architecture of the building.

6. Freestanding light posts located on projects which contain less than 15 acres shall be no taller than 18 feet. On projects which are 15 acres or larger in size, freestanding light posts not exceeding 30 feet in height may be permitted; provided, that the property is located in an area which is already lighted by street lights or adjacent development.

7. The intensity of light at the boundary of any commercial zone shall not exceed 75 foot-lamberts from a source of reflected light.

I. Utility Connections. All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad-mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with any appropriate screening treatment.

All new and existing utility connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground. Transformer, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other facilities appurtenant to such underground facilities may be placed above ground. The requirement for undergrounding existing utilities shall not apply to any overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34,500 volts and long-distance and main trunk communication facilities. The requirement for undergrounding existing utility connections may be waived or modified by the City Council in accordance with criteria and provisions for such as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

J. Outdoor Storage and/or Sales Areas. Outdoor storage and/or sales areas shall be entirely enclosed by solid masonry walls not less than six feet in height to adequately screen view of outdoor storage areas from view. Reasonable substitutions such as masonry, wood or metal pilasters with wrought iron or chain link and view-obscuring material may be approved by the City Council. Excluded from this provision is outdoor display, as allowed pursuant to PMC 17.10.190.

K. Air Pollution. There shall be no emission on any site, for more than one minute in any hour, of air contaminants which, at the emission point or within a reasonable distance of the emission point, are as dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart as published in the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7718.

L. Odor. No use shall be permitted which creates odor in such quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the site.

M. Testing. Whenever there is a question of conformance with the performance standards of this section, the Development Director shall require the property owner or operator to engage the services of a certified testing firm. Copies of all such tests shall be furnished to the Director of Development Services.

N. Energy Conservation. Buildings shall be located on the site to provide adjacent buildings adequate sunlight for solar access. All new construction and remodeling shall be preplumbed for solar hot water heating for the common facilities or reasonable alternatives that do not appreciably increase energy demand may be approved by the City. Buildings shall be designed to minimize energy consumption requirements, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following conservation measures:

1. Cogeneration;

2. South-facing windows;

3. Eave coverage for windows;

4. Double-glazed windows;

5. Earth berming against exterior walls;

6. Greenhouses; and

7. Deciduous shade trees.

O. In all commercial zones the conversion of the project to condominium ownership shall meet all requirements of the zone to the maximum extent possible within the constraints of the existing development. In no case shall the requirements of the Fire Code, sign ordinance, and screening standards be waived. Specific City Council waiver shall be required where the zone requirements cannot be met.

P. No outdoor paging systems or telephone bells or similar devices shall be used on commercial properties which abut residentially zoned properties. (Ord. 788 §§ 4, 5, 2016; Ord. 674 § 21, 2008; Ord. 540 § 3, 2001; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 484 § 2(B), 1997; 463 §§ 8, 9, 10, 1996; Ord. 192 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 178 § 1(A), 1985; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.3), 1983)

17.10.160 Accessory structures.
Accessory structures in commercial zones shall be as follows:

A. In any commercial zone, accessory structures shall not be located in front of or on the street side of the main building(s).

B. In any commercial zone, accessory structures shall meet all of the setback requirements for main buildings.

C. In any commercial zone, porches, steps, architectural features such as canopies or eaves, and chimneys, balconies or stairways may project not more than four feet into any required yard area.

D. Swimming pools and spas shall be located a minimum of three feet from the main structure exterior or interior walls and shall comply with all fencing requirements of PMC 8.52.050 et seq. (Ord. 463 § 10, 1996; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985: Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.4), 1983)

17.10.170 Walls and fences. Amended Ord. 831
Wall and fence requirements in commercial zones shall be as follows:

A. In any required front or street side yard area, a wall or fence shall not exceed 48 inches in height. In the required front or exterior side yard, where a retaining wall is used to increase usable lot area, a fence or wall not exceeding 48 inches in height may also be erected; provided, that the fence or wall is set back a minimum of five feet from the retaining wall.

B. In any required rear or interior side yard area, a wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height except as required by PMC 17.10.150(B).

C. Where barbed wire strands, razor wire or concertina wire (coiled barbed wire) is placed at the top of a wall or fence, such material shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of six feet above grade and shall be maintained in a safe condition.

D. It is unlawful for an owner of a parcel of land within the City to keep barbed wire or any other type of wire fencing in an unsafe, abandoned or materially dangerous condition. Unmaintained wire fencing, including but not limited to, barbed wire, razor wire and concertina wire (coiled barbed wire), is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to the nuisance abatement procedure, Chapter 8.72 PMC.

E. It is unlawful to place razor wire or concertina wire on the rooftop of any building.

F. Retaining walls, which have a walking surface adjacent to the top of the retaining wall, shall be equipped with an open and decorative metal railing on the top of the retaining wall for safety as deemed necessary by the City Building Official. The height of the required railing shall not be considered in the overall height measurement of the retaining wall. (Ord. 674 § 27, 2008; Ord. 195 § 1, 1986; Ord. 172 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.5), 1983)

17.10.180 Signs.
Sign requirements in commercial zones shall be as follows: No sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be permitted in any commercial zone except as provided in Chapter 17.40 PMC. (Ord. 463 § 10, 1996; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 3.6), 1983)

17.10.190 Outdoor display.
Requests for outdoor display of limited merchandise in excess of the time limitations of PMC 17.26.030(E) may be considered subject to the approval of an outdoor display permit by the Director of Development Services, or a minor conditional use permit by the City Council as specified below. The intent of this section shall be to provide for the outdoor display of merchandise, where it can be demonstrated that such display can be reasonably integrated into the site and architectural designs at the location, and maintain the City’s goals to provide for quality, attractive, commercial development. The following standards shall apply to any proposed outdoor display located within the CO, CN, CB or CG zoning districts, including areas with those zoning designations within the Poway Road specific plan area, the Old Poway specific plan area, and commercial uses on property designated South Poway commercial within the South Poway specific plan area:

A. Permit Required. Prior to the outdoor display of any goods or merchandise, a permit is required as indicated below.

1. Outdoor Display Permit. An outdoor display permit, issued by the Director pursuant to subsection C of this section for the outdoor display of the following is required unless otherwise specified. The Director is authorized to approve, conditionally approve with reasonable conditions, or to deny such request. The Director may establish conditions and limitations to minimize detrimental effects on surrounding properties. An application for an outdoor display permit shall be made to the Director on such form as may be prescribed.

a. Antiques;

b. Artwork;

c. Bicycles;

d. China and glassware;

e. Clothing;

f. Crafts;

g. Flowers and plants;

h. Produce;

i. Hardware;

j. Jewelry;

k. Newspapers, magazines or books;

l. Propane tank exchange units for barbecues;

m. Sporting goods.

2. If the outdoor display proposed is for goods or merchandise not authorized by subsection (A)(1) of this section, is not a prohibited display item contained in subsection C of this section, or cannot comply with the Display Performance Standards as indicated in subsection B of this section, and the Director determines that unique circumstances exist to warrant its consideration, then a minor conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.48 PMC shall be required.

3. Findings. The following findings shall be made prior to issuance of a permit for outdoor display:

a. The outdoor display is in accordance with the objectives of the ordinance and the purposes of the district where the site is located;

b. The outdoor display will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to the neighborhood of such use and will not be detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity or to the general welfare of the City;

c. The outdoor display assists in creating a quality commercial and public environment due to its visually appealing characteristics.

B. Outdoor Display Performance Standards. The following performance standards shall be applied by the Director to all outdoor displays, unless otherwise approved by the City Council pursuant to a minor conditional use permit in accordance with subsections (B)(1), (7) and (8) of this section.

1. Business Certificate Required. A valid business certificate is required for the business prior to issuance of an outdoor display permit.

2. Location. The outdoor display area shall:

a. Be located on the same portion of the site as the occupant of an existing commercial development and limited to the area adjacent to the front building elevation of the space occupied by the applicant and shall not interfere with automobile or pedestrian circulation. Outdoor displays are not permitted in front of a closed business or on vacant property;

b. Not impede vehicular sight distance as determined by the City Traffic Engineer;

c. Be located on private property only (not within the public right-of-way). Display of goods or merchandise on public property is prohibited except as otherwise authorized by the Poway Municipal Code, State law, or constitutional law;

d. Not obstruct any landscape areas or parking spaces;

e. Not be displayed from cars, trucks, or any other vehicle; and

f. Not obscure or interfere with any official notice or public safety sign or device.

3. Maximum Depth.

a. Outdoor display shall project no more than four feet from the front of the applicant’s space frontage; and

b. Private sidewalks, courtyards or entry areas may be utilized for display providing a minimum 44-inch pedestrian access remains clear and unobstructed at all times, subject to full compliance with the Uniform Fire Code, the Uniform Building Code and Title 24 access requirements.

4. Maximum Length. The display area shall not exceed 10 feet or 25 percent of the linear frontage of the frontage of the applicant’s space, whichever is greater.

5. Maximum Height. The display area shall not exceed five feet in height above adjacent finished grade. The approval authority shall retain the ability to further limit display height on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the standards of this chapter.

6. Use of Outdoor Display Area.

a. The outdoor display shall be temporary and removed at the end of each business day;

b. The outdoor display must be self-supporting, stable and weighted or constructed to withstand overturning by wind or contact. The display shall not be permanently affixed to any object, structure, or anything on the ground, including utility poles, light poles, trees, or any merchandise or products displayed outside permanent buildings;

c. The outdoor display shall be continuously maintained in a state of order, security, safety and repair. The display surface shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free of rust, corrosion, protruding tacks, nails and/or wires. Any cracked, broken surfaces, or other unmaintained or damaged portion of a display shall be repaired or replaced or removed within 30 days of notification by the City;

d. Display merchandise and products shall be limited to those normally associated with the primary retail user making application and shall not be in disrepair or visually unattractive. The display of junk is prohibited;

e. All outdoor displays shall be tasteful and assist in creating a top quality shopping environment. No display shall contain obscene, indecent or immoral matter;

f. Display areas shall not be subleased or otherwise afforded use by other persons;

g. Electricity shall not be utilized nor shall any noise be generated by an outdoor display; and

h. Display areas shall be kept clean and orderly and shall maintain an attractive appearance. No item shall be displayed in a manner that is unsightly or creates any other condition that is detrimental to the appearance of the premises or any surrounding property; or in any other manner that is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or causes a public nuisance.

7. Signage. No additional signage is permitted with an outdoor display permit. All signage shall comply with the City’s sign regulations contained in Chapter 17.40 PMC.

8. Other Applicable Regulations. The outdoor display shall comply with all requirements of the Building Code and Fire Code.

C. Outdoor Display Prohibited. The outdoor display of the following goods and merchandise is prohibited:

1. Junk;

2. Adult materials as described in PMC 17.38.020(2);

3. Alcohol;

4. Tobacco products;

5. Firearms;

6. Hazardous materials other than propane exchange units for barbecues.

D. Expiration and Termination. Outdoor display permits issued by the Director shall be valid for a maximum of one year from the date of issuance except as follows:

1. The permit shall be extended automatically for one additional year annually unless the City provides written notice of termination to the applicant no less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit.

2. An outdoor display permit shall automatically terminate for any business that violates the terms of the permit and this section if a notice of violation has been issued and the applicant fails to comply with said notice. In the event the permit is terminated due to a violation, the applicant may not reapply for an outdoor display permit anywhere in the City for a one-year period following the date of compliance pursuant to the notice of violation.

3. All outdoor display permits issued by the Director shall terminate upon the change of occupancy or failure to renew a business certificate without written notice required.

E. Fees. A nonrefundable processing fee shall be paid prior to the acceptance of an application for an outdoor display permit or a minor conditional use permit. Such fee shall be as established by resolution of the City Council from time to time. (Ord. 815 § 7, 2018; Ord. 814 § 7, 2017; Ord. 540 § 4, 2001)

Chapter 17.16
MHP MOBILE HOME PARK ZONE
Sections:

17.16.010    Purposes.

17.16.020    Permitted and conditional uses – MHP.

17.16.030    Property development standards – Generally.

17.16.040    Property development standards – General requirements.

17.16.050    Property development standards – Special requirements.

17.16.060    Pre-existing mobile home parks.

17.16.070    Signs.

17.16.010 Purposes.
The MHP, mobile home park zone, is intended for the exclusive development of mobile home parks. All mobile home parks shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.1.1), 1983)

17.16.020 Permitted and conditional uses – MHP.
The uses shall be permitted where the symbol “P” appears and subject to a conditional use permit where the symbol “C” appears, and subject to a minor conditional use permit where the symbol “M” appears in the column beneath each zone designation. Where the symbol “X” appears the use is prohibited. A use that is not listed is prohibited. Land uses identified for the zone may be further limited by the presence of a specific plan or other applicable provision of the PMC.

 

MHP

A. Residential Uses.

 

1. Single-family dwelling used for caretakers when located on the same site

P

2. Mobile home condominiums with the filing of a tentative map

C

3. Conversions of existing mobile home parks may be permitted if no low- and moderate-income people, seniors age 62 and older, are displaced from the park and the mobile home park is developed consistent with current standards as noted in this title

C

4. Accessory dwelling unit

X

5. Group residential

X

6. Multiple dwellings

X

B. Agricultural and Animal Uses.

 

1. All types of horticulture

P

2. 4-H or FFA animal raising and/or keeping in accordance with PMC 17.26.030(I)

P

3. Keeping of small animals in accordance with PMC 17.32.020

P

4. Keeping of large animals in accordance with Chapters 17.32 and 17.33 PMC

X

5. Keeping of up to three dogs and up to three cats over the age of four months

P

6. The keeping of wild, exotic or nondomestic animals

X

7. Keeping of beehives

X

8. Raising of earthworms

X

C. Home Occupations.

 

1. Home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.28 PMC

P

D. Accessory Uses.

 

1. Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use

P

2. “Seatainers”

M

E. Temporary Uses.

 

1. Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.26 PMC

P

F.  Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

(Ord. 820 § 12, 2018; Ord. 808 § 12, 2017; Ord. 785 § 12, 2016; Ord. 773 § 6, 2015; Ord. 736 § 12, 2012; Ord. 674 § 22, 2008; Ord. 490 § 2(3), 1997; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.1.2), 1983)

17.16.030 Property development standards – Generally.
The following regulations shall apply to the site of a mobile home park. Additional regulations may be specified as conditions of approval through development review by the City Council. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.1.3), 1983)

17.16.040 Property development standards – General requirements.
The following requirements are minimum unless otherwise stated:

A.    Maximum density

8 dwelling units per net acre

B.    Site area

20 acres

C.    Site frontage

250 feet, continuous frontage

D.    Area per unit space

4,000 square feet

E.    Depth per unit space

75 feet

F.    Width per unit space

50 feet

G.    Coverage per unit space

55 percent (maximum)

H.    Front yard setback per unit space

15 feet

I.    Side yard setback per unit space (each side)

5 feet/5 feet

J.    Site side yard setbacks (each side)

15 feet/5 feet

K.    Site street side yard setback

25 feet

L.    Building and structure height (maximum in feet)

14 feet or 1 story, whichever is less, or as expressly authorized pursuant to an adopted specific plan

M.    Recreation area per unit space

150 square feet of open, private unit recreation area for each mobile home space. This requirement shall be increased to 200 square feet per mobile home space if children under the age of 18 are permitted within the development

N.    Parking per unit

Two tandem 10' x 20' each plus space one parking space per each four units for guest parking

(Ord. 267 § 2(4), 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.1.3(A)), 1983)

17.16.050 Property development standards – Special requirements.
The following special requirements shall apply to development of mobile home spaces and to facilities within a mobile home park. Additional requirements may be specified as conditions of development review.

A. Mobile Home Space and Units. Each space shall have dimensions capable of accommodating a rectangle with minimum dimensions of 28 feet by 55 feet. All mobile homes shall be at least double wide coaches.

B. Accessory Structures. Carports, patio covers, storage buildings, and similar structures accessory to a mobile home may be located no closer than five feet to the boundary of a mobile home space.

C. Access and Access Drives. All mobile home access shall be from a publicly maintained street, however, access drives within a mobile home park shall be privately owned, and shall be at least 28 feet wide exclusive of adjoining parking areas.

D. Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks at least four and one-half feet in width shall be provided to serve each mobile home space and to serve all central or common facilities within the mobile home park. Sidewalks need not adjoin access drives.

E. Landscaping. Not less than 20 percent of each mobile home space shall be landscaped with plant materials, including at least one 15-gallon size tree on each space.

F. Screening and Landscaping. Required yards shall be landscaped in accord with a site development plan to be approved in accordance with the procedures of development review. Screening of the mobile homes shall be provided around the entire site by a wall and landscaping.

G. Mobile Home Park Accessory Buildings and Use. Accessory buildings and uses serving the entire mobile home park, including recreation facilities, laundry areas, mobile home park offices, and maintenance or storage buildings, shall be located at least 50 feet from the exterior boundaries of the mobile home park site. All exterior maintenance or storage areas shall be enclosed by a six-foot masonry wall.

H. Cable television service shall be provided to each mobile home space.

I. Common recreation facilities shall be provided commensurate with the proposed or intended residents including, a meeting room, pool and spa and one of the following:

1. Putting green;

2. Pitch and putt golf course;

3. Children’s play area;

4. Lawn/open space general recreation areas; and

5. Recreation lakes.

J. Recreation vehicle storage areas, fully screened from view of the public and private streets shall be provided in addition to the CC&R’s prohibiting the storage of recreational vehicles on the unit space.

K. All unit spaces plus the caretaker’s unit and any recreation buildings shall be provided with City water and sewer service.

L. Skirting or screening of the unit wheels shall be required.

M. All exterior lighting shall be constructed in accordance with PMC 17.08.220(L).

N. Coaches and lots within newly created, privately owned mobile home parks shall be held in common ownership, except in cases where the coaches and/or lots are owned by a public agency.

O. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios, and special development requirements. (Ord. 674 § 23, 2008; Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 286 § 2, 1989; Ord. 192 § 1, 1986; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.1.3(B)), 1983)

17.16.060 Pre-existing mobile home parks.
A pre-existing mobile home park shall not be deemed nonconforming by reason of failure to meet the minimum requirements prescribed by this section; provided, that the regulations of this chapter shall apply to the enlargement or expansion of a pre-existing mobile home park, and; provided, that a pre-existing mobile home park on a site less than 10 acres shall not be further reduced in area. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.1.4), 1983)

17.16.070 Signs.
No sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be permitted in an MHP zone except as provided in Chapter 17.40 PMC. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.1.5), 1983)

Chapter 17.18
PRD PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Sections:

17.18.010    Purpose.

17.18.020    Permitted and conditional uses.

17.18.030    Property development standards – General requirements.

17.18.040    Property development standards – Special requirements.

17.18.050    Accessory uses and structures.

17.18.060    Signs.

17.18.010 Purpose.
A. Planned residential development regulations are intended to facilitate development of areas designated for residential use on the general plan by permitting greater flexibility and, consequently, more creative and imaginative designs for the development of such residential areas than generally is possible under conventional zoning or subdivision regulations.

B. These regulations are further intended to promote more economical and efficient use of the land while providing a harmonious variety of housing choices, a higher level of urban amenities, and preservation of natural and scenic qualities of open spaces. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.2.1), 1983)

17.18.020 Permitted and conditional uses.
Permitted and conditional uses in a PRD zone shall be as follows:

A. Planned residential developments, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit;

B. Permitted and conditional uses in accordance with those indicated for the RC zone.

C. Notwithstanding any provision of the municipal code to the contrary, the use of any property within any planned residential development zone in the City of Poway as a marijuana dispensary, cooperative, or collective or for marijuana cultivation, delivery, manufacturing, or storage, as defined in PMC 17.04.514, is prohibited. The issuance of any permit, license, or certificate for the operation of any such uses shall be prohibited. (Ord. 808 § 13, 2017; Ord. 785 § 13, 2016; Ord. 736 § 13, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.2.2), 1983)

17.18.030 Property development standards – General requirements.
The following requirements are minimum unless otherwise stated:

A.    Density – Maximum per net acre

12 (lesser density may be approved by the City Council)

B.    Site area (in acres)

5

C.    Front yard setback (in feet)

25

D.    Side yard setback each side (in feet)

20/20

E.    Street side yard setback (in feet)

25

F.    Rear yard setback (in feet)

25

G.    Building and structure height (maximum in feet)

35 feet or 2 stories, whichever is less, or as expressly authorized pursuant to an adopted specific plan. Amateur radio antenna installations are subject to the height and other regulations contained in Chapter 17.31 PMC.

H.    Site coverage, maximum

35 percent

I.    Parking spaces per unit, covered in a garage

1.75 spaces (one covered)/1 BD units

2.75 spaces (two covered)/2 BD units

3.00 spaces (2 covered)/3 BD units

J.    Distance between buildings (in feet)

15 for 1 story – 25 for 2 story

(Ord. 771 § 4, 2014; Ord. 267 § 2(5), 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.2.3), 1983)

17.18.040 Property development standards – Special requirements.
The following special development requirements shall apply to all planned residential developments:

A. The planned residential development shall be designed and developed in a manner compatible with any complementary to existing and potential residential development in the immediate vicinity of the project site. Site planning on the perimeter shall provide for the protection of the property from adverse surrounding influences, as well as protection of the surrounding areas from potentially adverse influences within the development.

B. Where individual lots are desired, there shall be a 3,000 net square foot minimum area requirement for individual lots or individual dwelling sites.

C. Required open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the total area of the planned development. Land occupied by buildings, streets, driveways or parking spaces may not be counted in satisfying this open space requirement; provided, however, that land occupied by recreational buildings and structures may be counted as required open space.

D. At least 50 percent of the required open space shall have an overall finished grade not in excess of 15 percent. Said space shall be suitably improved for its intended purposes. All lawn and landscaped areas reserved for common use shall be provided with a permanent automatic watering system adequate to irrigate such areas.

E. The remaining 50 percent of the required open space may also be improved, or may be left in its natural state, if natural features worthy of preservation exist on the site. Open space left in its natural state shall be kept free of litter and shall at no time constitute a health, safety, fire or flood hazard. Areas devoted to natural or improved flood control channels and those areas encumbered by flowage, floodway or drainage easements may be applied toward satisfying this portion of the total open space requirement.

F. If development is to be accomplished in stages, the development plan shall coordinate improvement of the open space, the construction of buildings, structures, and improvements in such open space, and the construction of dwelling units in order that each development stage achieves a proportionate share of the total open space and environmental quality of the total planned development.

G. All or any part of the required open space shall be reserved for use in common by the residents of the planned development. Areas permanently reserved for common open space shall be reserved for the use and enjoyment of the residents in a manner which makes the City, or a public district or public agency a party to and entitled to enforce the reservation. The City Council may require that open space easements over the required open space be conveyed to the City.

H. No building, except as hereafter provided, shall be located closer than five feet to any interior vehicular or pedestrian way, court, plaza, open parking lot or any other surfaced area reserved for public use or for use in common by residents of the planned development. Such setback shall generally be measured from the nearest edge of a surfaced area; provided, however, that where no sidewalk exists in conjunction with a public or private street, such setback shall be measured from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way or private road easement.

I. All public streets within or abutting the proposed planned development shall be dedicated and approved to City specifications for the particular classification of street. When the developer desires to retain any streets within the development as private streets, such streets shall be irrevocably offered for dedication and maintained for their intended purpose by the homeowners’ association or other means acceptable to the City Council.

J. Planned residential developments shall relate harmoniously to the topography of the site, shall make suitable provision for the preservation of watercourses, drainage areas, wooded areas, rough terrain, and similar natural features and areas, and, shall otherwise be so designed as to use and retain such natural features and amenities to the greatest extent possible.

K. All exterior lighting shall be constructed in accordance with PMC 17.08.220(L). All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad-mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with any appropriate screening treatment.

All new and existing utility connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other facilities appurtenant to such underground facilities may be placed above ground. The requirement for undergrounding existing utilities shall not apply to any overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34,500 volts and long-distance and main trunk communication facilities. The requirement for undergrounding existing utility connections may be waived or modified by the City Council in accordance with criteria and provisions for such as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

L. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios, and special development requirements. (Ord. 674 § 24, 2008; Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 192 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 178 § 1(A), 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.2.3(B)), 1983)

17.18.050 Accessory uses and structures.
Accessory uses and structures shall be located as specified on the development plans as approved by the City Council; provided, however, that accessory structures shall meet all of the setbacks for site development as specified in PMC 17.18.030. Approval of a minor conditional use permit shall be required prior to the outdoor placement of “seatainers” on any property. “Seatainers” may be used for storage only and the minor conditional use permit shall regulate their placement and screening. Amateur radio antenna installations are a permissible accessory use to a residential use and subject to the height and other regulations contained in Chapter 17.31 PMC. (Ord. 771 § 5, 2014; Ord. 490 § 2(4), 1997; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.2.4), 1983)

17.18.060 Signs.
No sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be permitted excepted as prescribed in Chapter 17.40 PMC. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.2.5), 1983)

Chapter 17.20
PC PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE
Sections:

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    Use regulations.

17.20.030    Property development standards – General requirements.

17.20.040    Property development standards – Special requirements.

17.20.050    Performance standards.

17.20.060    Preapplication procedure.

17.20.070    Development plan.

17.20.080    Adoption of zone and/or development plan.

17.20.090    Amendments to development plan.

17.20.100    Review of development progress.

17.20.120    South Poway Planned Community.

17.20.130    Old Coach Planned Community.

17.20.140    Poway Road Planned Community.

17.20.010 Purpose.
The planned community zone is included in the development regulations to achieve the following purposes:

A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare;

B. To implement the objectives and policies of the general plan;

C. To safeguard and enhance environmental amenities and the quality of development;

D. To attain the physical, social, and economic advantages resulting from comprehensive and orderly planned use of land resources;

E. To lessen congestion and assure convenience of access; to secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers; to provide for adequate light, air, sunlight, and open space; to promote and encourage conservation of scarce resources; to prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population; to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community; to attain a desirable balance of residential and employment opportunities; and to expedite the provision of adequate and essential public services;

F. To facilitate development within the City in accordance with the general plan by permitting greater flexibility and encouraging more creative and imaginative designs for major urban development projects subject to large-scale community planning;

G. To promote more economical and efficient use of the land while providing a harmonious variety of housing choices and commercial and industrial activities, a high level of urban amenities, and preservation of natural and scenic qualities of open space;

H. To provide a process for initiation, review, and regulation of large-scale comprehensively planned urban communities that affords the maximum flexibility to the developer within the context of an overall development program and specific, phased development plans coordinated with the provision of necessary public services and facilities. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.1), 1983)

17.20.020 Use regulations.
A. Allowable use in each planned community zone shall be as established by a development plan text approved by the City Council. The development plan text may incorporate uses by reference to specific base zone provisions, or may establish specific use lists with definitions pertaining thereto.

B. Existing uses within the planned community zone at the time of its establishment shall be deemed allowable and incorporated in the development plan, unless terminated, discontinued, or changed pursuant to a specific time schedule incorporated in the development plan text.

C. Unless otherwise provided by the development plan text, public utility facilities and publicly owned facilities shall be allowable subject to a conditional use permit.

D. Unless otherwise provided by the development plan text, accessory uses or facilities shall be subject to the same use regulation provisions as the principal use or facility.

E. Unless specified as subject to a conditional use permit, each allowable use in the planned community zone shall be subject to development review.

F. Home occupations pursuant to Chapter 17.28 PMC shall be allowable in each planned community.

G. Notwithstanding any provision of the municipal code to the contrary, the use of any property within any planned community zone in the City of Poway as a marijuana dispensary, cooperative, or collective, or for marijuana cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage, as defined in PMC 17.04.514, is prohibited. The issuance of any permit, license, or certificate for the operation of any such uses shall be prohibited.

H. Amateur radio antenna installations are a permissible accessory use to a residential use and subject to the height and other regulations contained in Chapter 17.31 PMC. (Ord. 808 § 14,

2017; Ord. 785 § 14, 2016; Ord. 771 § 6, 2014; Ord. 736 § 14, 2012; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.2), 1983)

17.20.030 Property development standards – General requirements.
A. A planned community zone shall include a minimum area of 300 contiguous acres, under single ownership or otherwise subject to unified planning, by persons, corporations, or other entities. Property owned by public utilities, local districts or local governments will not be counted toward the 300 acre minimum, but may be used as a connector of single ownership.

B. A planned community zone may be established with or without a development plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapters 17.46 through 17.52 PMC.

1. In the event the City Council establishes a planned community zone without a development plan, the uses, property development standards, performance standards and the like shall be those of the RR-A, residential rural A zone (see PMC 17.08.090 through 17.08.240) unless the previous zoning is different; then the uses, property development standards, performance standards and the like shall be those of the previous zone.

2. In the event the City Council establishes a planned community zone with a development plan it shall be subject to the following provisions:

a. Provide for the development of a comprehensively planned urban community within the zone that is superior to development otherwise allowable under alternate regulations;

b. Provide for development within the zone in a manner consistent with the general plan and with related development and growth policies of the City;

c. Provide for the construction, improvement, or extension of transportation facilities, public utilities, and public services required by development with the zone.

C. There shall be no minimum area, width, or depth requirement for individual lots, except as established by a development plan, a conditional use permit, or development review.

D. There shall be no minimum yard requirement for individual lots except as established by a development plan, a conditional use permit, or by development review.

E. There shall be no minimum usable open space requirement for individual lots, except as established by a development plan, a conditional use permit, or by development review.

F. There shall be a maximum height of 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less or as expressly authorized pursuant to an adopted specific plan, and no coverage requirement for individual lots, except as established by a development plan, a conditional use permit, or by development review. Amateur radio antenna installations are subject to the height and other regulations contained in Chapter 17.31 PMC.

G. The maximum number of dwelling units within a planned community zone shall not exceed the ability of the City to provide services in accordance with the general plan and applicable local ordinances; provided, that the distribution of units within the zone and the maximum residential density on any individual site or within designated portions of the zone shall be governed by the development plan, conditional use permit, or development review.

In the event the general plan does not establish a maximum residential density for said site, the City Council shall determine the appropriate density based on detailed review of the development plan and text and the provisions of this title.

H. Approval of a minor conditional use permit shall be required prior to the outdoor placement of “seatainers” on any property. “Seatainers” may be used for storage only and the minor conditional use permit shall regulate their placement and screening. (Ord. 771 § 7, 2014; Ord. 674 § 25, 2008; Ord. 490 § 2(5), 1997; Ord. 267 § 2(6), 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.3(A)), 1983)

17.20.040 Property development standards – Special requirements.
A. The planned community zone and all uses therein shall be designed and developed in a manner compatible with and complementary to existing and potential development in the general vicinity of the zone. Site planning on the perimeter shall provide for the mutual protection of the zone and surrounding property from potential adverse influences.

B. All public streets within or abutting the development shall be dedicated and improved to City specifications for that particular classification of street. Private streets within the development shall be irrevocably offered for dedication and maintained for their intended purpose by means acceptable to and enforceable by the City. Consideration of other forms of access, such as pedestrian ways, courts, plazas, driveways, horse trails, bike trails, or open parking lots offered for dedication may be made at the time of the development plan and text consideration as a means of meeting requirements for open space or park dedication requirements.

C. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios, and special development requirements. (Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.3(B)), 1983)

17.20.050 Performance standards.
A. All development within a planned community zone shall relate harmoniously to the topography of the site, shall make suitable provision for the preservation of water courses, drainage areas, wooded areas, rough terrain, and similar natural features, and shall otherwise be so designed inasmuch as possible, to use and retain natural features and amenities to the best advantage.

B. All exterior lighting shall be constructed in accordance with PMC 17.08.220(L) and 17.10.150(H). Mechanical and electrical equipment, including air conditioners, antennas, pumps, heating or cooling or ventilating equipment, exterior lighting, or similar equipment shall be located and operated in a manner so as not to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring residents. Excluding roof-mounted solar collector panels and decorative exterior lighting, all such equipment and devices shall be screened from view from any abutting street, and shall not be located in a street yard.

C. All areas for storage of maintenance equipment, and all service areas including refuse storage and collection facilities, shall be enclosed by a fence, wall, and/or landscape screen.

D. All uses within a planned community zone shall provide off-street parking and loading facilities pursuant to Chapter 17.42 PMC. The applicant may apply for and receive administrative relief from Chapter 17.42 PMC at the time of development plan tentative consideration by the City Council when verified proof has been submitted through specific examples of existing projects and/or expert testimony that supports reduced parking standards or stalls.

E. The proposed means for assuring continuing existence, maintenance and operation of the various common elements and facilities.

F. Additional site development regulations and performance standards applicable to individual uses or to designated portions of a planned community zone may be established by the development plan, conditional use permit, or development review approval pursuant to the development plan. (Ord. 674 § 26, 2008; amended during 8/97 supplement; Ord. 192 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.4), 1983)

17.20.060 Preapplication procedure.
A. Prior to submitting an application for a development plan in a planned community zone, or for a planned community zone, applicant or prospective developer shall hold preliminary consultations with the Director of Development Services and other City officials to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys, and other data. Such preliminary consultations should be relative to a conceptual development plan which includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1. Proposed land uses to be developed within the zone;

2. Development concepts to be employed;

3. Schematic maps, illustrative material, and narrative sufficient to describe the general relationships between land uses, and the intended design character and scale of principal features;

4. A preliminary time schedule for development, including quantitative data, such as population, housing units, land use acreage, and other data sufficient to illustrate phasing of development and potential impact on public service requirements.

B. Following initial preliminary consultations pursuant to this section, the Director may require submission of a housing market analysis, satisfactory to the Director of Development Services demonstrating the need for housing by price range and number of dwelling units. Such analysis may be requested as a part of the review procedure, may be made a requirement for submission of an application for a development plan in a planned community area, planned community zone, or may be requested as part of the environmental assessment or EIR.

C. Following initial preliminary consultations pursuant to this section, the Director may require submission of a commercial and/or industrial market analysis satisfactory to the Director of Development Services for any proposed shopping center or major commercial and/or industrial uses, showing the need for such uses in the location requested and the inadequacy of existing zoned sites to meet this need. The market analysis shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Determination of potential trade area;

2. Determination of potential employment area;

3. Estimates of existing and future population of the trade area;

4. Estimates of existing and future employment;

5. Determination of existing and potential effective buying power in the trade area;

6. Determination of the net potential customer buying power for the proposed commercial development;

Such analysis may be requested as part of the review procedure, and may be made a requirement of submission of an application for a development plan in a planned community area, planned community zone, or may be requested as part of the environmental assessment or EIR.

D. Following initial preliminary consultation pursuant to this section, the Director may require presentation of the conceptual development plan to the City Council. Such presentation shall be for information purposes only, and shall be in addition to subsequent public review requirements pursuant to an application for a planned community zone and submission of a development plan. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.5), 1983)

17.20.070 Development plan.
The development plan which may be submitted with an application for a planned community zone or subsequent to the adoption thereof shall include the following:

A. A boundary survey map of the property and a calculation of the gross land area within the proposed zone; a tentative subdivision map may be substituted if the applicant proposes to subdivide the property;

B. A topographic map and general grading concept plan with specific sections for sensitive areas, as determined by the Directors of Development and Public Services for the property and adjacent land within 100 feet of the property, shown at contour intervals not to exceed two feet for natural slopes over two percent or less; for natural slopes over two percent contour interval shall not exceed five feet;

C. Maps and supporting tabulations showing the current general plan land use designation, the current zoning classification, and the current land use within the proposed zone and on adjacent sites within 500 feet; the location of structures and other significant improvements shall be shown;

D. A land use plan identifying areas within the proposed zone and uses to be developed therein, supported by proposed or projected acreage, population, housing units, employment, and such related planning and development data as the Director of Development Services may require;

E. A development plan indicating the general phasing or anticipated schedule; said plan shall indicate the total phasing of the planned community and areas to be developed in phases and the anticipated time schedule for beginning of construction and for completion of each phase of development; said plan shall include a pro rata share of amenities, parks, and open space; this is a generalized schedule and may be adjusted according to market constraints as the community develops;

F. A circulation plan, showing existing and proposed public and private streets, pedestrian ways, trails, and related transportation access or circulation features required to serve the proposed development; the circulation plan shall be supported by schematic designs of principal traffic and circulation improvements, and such traffic engineering data as required by the Development Director to demonstrate that existing and proposed facilities, both within and outside the zone, shall be adequate to serve land uses proposed by the development plan. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.6), 1983)

17.20.080 Adoption of zone and/or development plan.
A. An application for a planned community zone and/or development plan shall be subject to review and approval in the same manner as prescribed in Chapters 17.46 through 17.52 PMC.

B. Each planned community zone established shall be indicated on the zoning map by the letters “PC” followed by a reference number identifying the zone. The development plan as modified and approved by the City Council, is incorporated into this title.

C. An application approved for a planned community zone without a development plan shall regulate development in accordance with the RR-A, residential rural A uses, property development standards, performance standards and the like until such time as adoption of a development plan. The adoption of the development plan will repeal and replace the provisions of the residential rural A, or other previous zones. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.7), 1983)

17.20.090 Amendments to development plan.
A. A development plan may be amended in the same manner as provided by Chapters 17.46 through 17.52 PMC for a change of zone boundaries or for a change in the regulations applicable with a zone. Amendment of a development plan shall be subject to the same findings as prescribed for initial enactment of a planned community zone and adoption of the development plan applicable to the planned community zone.

B. An amendment to a development plan may be initiated by the City Council. An amendment may also be initiated by the applicant for the planned community zone or a successor thereto, provided such applicant or successor has, at the time of application for an amendment, a continuing controlling interest in development or management of uses within the planned community zone. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.8), 1983)

17.20.100 Review of development progress.
A. The Director of Development Services shall review each planned community zone annually, and shall submit a report to the City Council containing the following:

1. A summary of the development status within the zone and an assessment of progress during the year toward completion of development authorized by the development plan including adherence to development schedules and phasing;

2. A statement of any changes in land use and economic development trends, housing market indicators, commercial and industrial development rates, or programs for provision of public facilities and services which, in the opinion of the Director, vary significantly from those upon which the development plan were based, and which could affect adversely continued progress toward completion of development within the zone.

B. A copy of the annual report of the Director shall be provided to the applicant and to such other interested parties or successors as deemed appropriate by the Director. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 5.3.9), 1983)

17.20.120 South Poway Planned Community.
In order to preserve the very low density character of the residential portions of the South Poway Planned Community, no property located within the South Poway Planned Community shall be rezoned to a zone, nor shall the Poway Municipal Code or the South Poway Planned Community development plan be amended in such a way, which would increase the residential density within the South Poway Planned Community until and unless such rezoning or amendment is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election.* (Ord. 283 § 2(G), 1988)

17.20.130 Old Coach Planned Community.
In order to preserve the very low density and intensity of development in the Old Coach Planned Community, no property located within the Old Coach Planned Community shall be rezoned to a zone, nor shall the Poway Municipal Code or the Old Coach Planned Community development plan be amended in such a way, which would increase the residential density or increase the commercial or manufacturing use permitted within the Old Coach Planned Community until and unless such rezoning or amendment is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election.* (Ord. 283 § 2(H), 1988)

 

*    Editor’s Note: PMC 17.20.120 and 17.20.130 were added by Ord. 283 and were approved by the voters at a general municipal election November 8, 1988. The language added shall not be modified or rescinded without the approval of a simple majority of the City voting at a special or general election.

17.20.140 Poway Road Planned Community.
The Poway Road Planned Community includes the area identified in the Poway Road specific plan which is intended to reflect the long-term vision and objectives for land use development and public improvements along a 2.65-mile portion of Poway Road between Oak Knoll Road and Garden Road. The project area encompasses a total of 235 acres and includes land use designations/zoning districts that support mixed-use, commercial office, general commercial, automotive, town center, and open space uses. (Ord. 814 § 8, 2017)

Chapter 17.21
HC HOSPITAL CAMPUS ZONE
Sections:

17.21.010    Purposes.

17.21.020    Permitted and conditional uses – HC.

17.21.030    Temporary uses.

17.21.040    Property development standards.

17.21.050    General requirements.

17.21.060    Accessory structures.

17.21.070    Other structures.

17.21.080    Walls and fences.

17.21.090    Signs.

17.21.100    Rezone restrictions.

17.21.010 Purposes.
This zone is intended to provide centralized services and facilities in an integrated complex to conveniently service the medical needs of the community. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.020 Permitted and conditional uses – HC.
Development in the Hospital Campus zone must include a minimum 100-bed inpatient acute-care hospital as the most significant principal use. The following additional uses shall be permitted where the symbol “P” appears and shall be permitted uses subject to a conditional use permit where the symbol “C” appears, and shall be permitted uses subject to a minor conditional use permit where the symbol “M” appears. A use that is not listed is prohibited. Land uses identified for the zone may be further limited by the presence of a specific plan or other applicable provision of the PMC.

A.    Doctor’s offices

M

B.    Laboratories

P

C.    Outpatient surgery centers

P

D.    Imaging centers

P

E.    Medical training and research facilities

C

F.    Mental health clinics

M

G.    Continuing care facilities

C

H.    Outpatient clinics

M

I.    Rehabilitation clinics

M

J.    Pharmacies

P

K.    Other outpatient service facilities

C

L.    Other uses that the City Council may determine to be similar in nature

C

(Ord. 773 § 7, 2015; Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.030 Temporary uses.
Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.26 PMC upon issuance of a temporary use permit (TUP). (Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.040 Property development standards.
The following regulations shall apply to all parcels in the Hospital Campus (HC) zone. The requirements are minimum unless otherwise stated. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.050 General requirements.
A. Minimum Development Size. All development within the Hospital Campus zone shall total a minimum of 40 acres in size. The area comprising the Hospital Campus may include more than one legal lot, and have more than one legal owner, but the whole shall be planned, designed, developed, maintained and used as an integrated complex. A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be placed on the property which describes the means by which the integrated planning, design, development, maintenance and use of the Hospital Campus shall be guaranteed.

B. Development Plan. A development plan shall be prepared for the entire site regardless of whether development is contemplated in the near future. The purpose of the development plan is to show conceptually where buildings and other improvements will be located and where and how parking, on-site circulation and off-site circulation will function.

C. Development Review. A development review authorizing specific projects shall be approved by the City Council prior to issuance of any development permits.

D. Street Access. All lots in the Hospital Campus zone shall have a minimum 20-foot-wide access to a public street.

E. Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage, including all buildings, structures, accessory buildings and structures, shall not exceed 30 percent of the total lot area.

F. Setbacks. The minimum setback for any structure from any property line abutting any zone other than Hospital Campus shall be 20 feet. A minimum building setback of 25 feet shall be required whenever a hospital campus abuts a lot in any residential zone. When any property in an HC zone abuts a property in a commercial or manufacturing zone, the minimum side and rear yard setbacks may be reduced at the discretion of the City Council, and such reduction shall not constitute a variance. All required setback areas which are adjacent to streets shall be fully landscaped according to the City landscape guidelines.

G. Design. The architectural theme of the Pomerado Hospital Campus shall reflect the rural nature of the surrounding hillside area and shall maintain the open suburban atmosphere. The exterior pattern and coloring of the buildings should incorporate earth tones of the surrounding natural setting and be consistent with a “Santa Fe” southwestern style of architecture. The overall appearance of the area should preserve the high quality visual environment which is pleasing to the passerby as well as the user.

H. Maximum Structure Height.

1. The maximum height of any structure shall be 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less, except that any addition to the existing Pomerado Hospital building may be the same overall height from grade as the existing structure, if it is attached or connected to the existing structure. Additionally, any parking structure on the site needed to accommodate Pomerado Hospital’s on-parking requirements may be up to three stories high; provided, that the overall height of the parking structure from grade does not exceed 35 feet.

2. Architectural appurtenances such as clock towers and similar design elements may exceed the maximum height of 35 feet. Proposals for such appurtenances, however, shall be evaluated through the development review application process on a case-by-case basis so that architectural compatibility and appropriate building scale is achieved and maintained.

I. Off-Street Parking. See Chapter 17.42 PMC, to be determined by City Council.

J. Site Development Standards. The site plan should use imaginative, creative, and stimulating architectural design with special consideration given to the provision of the following items where appropriate:

1. Low-intensity lighting;

2. Generous landscaping;

3. Decorative paved walkways;

4. Basic design theme;

5. Separation of pedestrian and vehicular rights-of-way;

6. Architecturally integrated ground-mounted equipment such as trash receptacles and transformers;

7. Bus or transit shelters as determined by the Director of Development Services;

8. Adequate bicycle and motorcycle parking as determined by the City Council;

9. Architectural compatibility with on-site and surrounding structures.

K. Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be constructed in accordance with PMC 17.08.220(L) and 17.10.150(H).

L. Floodplain. All development in the floodplain shall be in accordance with the National Flood Insurance requirements and local ordinance.

M. Landscaping. All development in the HC zone shall be landscaped in accordance with the City landscape guidelines.

N. Energy Conservation. Buildings shall be located on the site to provide adjacent buildings adequate sunlight for solar access. All new construction and remodeling shall be preplumbed for solar hot water heating. Buildings shall be designed to minimize energy consumption requirements, including, but not necessarily limited to, following conservation measures:

1. Cogeneration;

2. South-facing windows;

3. Double-glazed windows;

4. Earth berming against exterior walls;

5. Green houses;

6. Deciduous shade trees.

O. Where a hospital campus abuts property in any commercial or manufacturing zone, fencing and/or walls may be required, as necessary, to mitigate potential negative impacts to adjacent properties.

P. Wherever off-street parking areas are facing the front or side yard of property in a residential zone, a masonry wall or berm three feet in height shall be erected in the landscaped area between the required landscape area and the parking area to adequately screen the parking areas from the residential properties.

Q. All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad-mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with any appropriate screening treatment. All new and existing utilities connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other facilities may be placed above ground but shall be screened from view. The requirement for undergrounding existing utilities shall not apply to any overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34.5KV and long distance and main trunk communication facilities. The requirement for undergrounding existing utility connections may be waived or modified by the City Council in accordance with criteria and provisions for such as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

R. The noise level emanating from any hospital campus activity shall not exceed 60 dBA CNEL, as the acceptable outdoor noise exposure level when measured at the property line in accordance with Chapter 8.08 PMC.

S. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, and trash receptacle areas, shall be screened from surrounding properties by use of a wall or fence or shall be enclosed within a building. Structural and design plans for any required screening under the provisions of this section shall be approved by the Development Services Director.

T. All roof appurtenances including, but not limited to air conditioning units, and mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets, and adjacent residentially zoned property.

U. Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation and parking arrangements shall be required to facilitate the ease of vehicular and pedestrian movement between adjoining properties.

V. Odor. No use shall be permitted which creates offensive odor in such quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the site.

W. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios, and special development requirements. (Ord. 674 § 28, 2008; Ord. 628 § 2, 2005; Ord. 518, 1999; amended during 8/97 supplement; Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.060 Accessory structures.
A. Accessory buildings and structures (attached or detached) shall meet all of the requirements for location of the main structure as constructed or required by the zone.

B. The Uniform Building Code shall govern the placement and fencing of swimming pools, spas and ornamental pools.

C. Approval of a minor conditional use permit shall be required prior to the outdoor placement of “seatainers” on any property. “Seatainers” may be used for storage only and the minor conditional use permit shall regulate their placement and screening. (Ord. 490 § 2(6), 1997; Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.070 Other structures.
Porches, steps, architectural features, such as awnings, chimneys, balconies, stairways, wing walls, or bay windows may project not more than four feet into any required front or rear yard area, nor into any required side yard area more than one-half of the required side yard. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.080 Walls and fences.
A. In any required street setback area, view-obscuring fencing shall not exceed 30 inches in height, except for retaining walls as approved through the development review process.

B. In any required rear or interior side yard area, a wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height except as allowed by subsection E of this section.

C. A wall or fence adjacent to a driveway or street providing vehicular access to an abutting lot or street shall not exceed 30 inches in height within 15 feet of the edges of the driveway and the street right-of-way and/or shall comply with CalTrans’s design standards for sight visibility. Corner cut-offs may be required for safety and visibility (see Diagram 17.21.080).

Diagram 17.21.080

D. Fiberglass sheeting, bamboo sheeting or other similar temporary material shall not be permitted as a fencing material.

E. A wall or fence up to eight feet in height may be allowed by the Director of Development Services where necessary for noise attenuation from arterial streets or other noise sources. The wall or fence shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the objectives and policies of the general plan community design element.

F. Where barbed wire strands, razor wire, or concertina wire (coiled barbed wire) is placed at the top of a wall or fence, such material shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of six feet above grade and shall be maintained in a safe condition.

G. It is unlawful for an owner of a parcel of land within the City to keep barbed wire or any other type of wire fencing in an unsafe, abandoned or materially dangerous condition. Unmaintained wire fencing, including but not limited to, barbed wire, razor wire, and concertina wire (coiled barbed wire), is declared to be public nuisance and shall be subject to the nuisance abatement procedure, Chapter 8.72 PMC.

H. It is unlawful to place electrified fencing, razor or concertina wire on the rooftop of any building. (Ord. 674 § 29, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.090 Signs.
A. One freestanding sign identifying the hospital campus may be maintained at each entrance to a public street. No such sign shall be higher than eight feet, measured from the adjacent grade, nor more than 65 square feet in area.

B. In addition to entry identification signs permitted under subsection A of this section, additional directional signs may be provided as necessary to ensure safe and efficient on-site circulation and appropriate identification of emergency services. No such sign shall be higher than eight feet, measured from the adjacent grade; more than 65 square feet in area; or readily visible to the public right-of-way.

C. Building wall-mounted signs are permitted in accordance with the following:

1. Maximum Number. One per building frontage for each hospital building, not to exceed two, with the exception that the Outservices Patient Pavilion may have one additional sign for a combined total of three for that building only. Signs may be combined on a single building frontage.

2. Maximum Area. One hundred fifty square feet for each sign. Combined sign area not to exceed 15 percent of the building face.

3. Maximum Height. Letter height maximum of four feet. Not to project above the building roof line.

D. A comprehensive sign program shall be required pursuant to PMC 17.40.180.

E. Except as provided in this section, signs shall comply with the provisions contained in Chapter 17.40 PMC. (Ord. 663 § 2, 2007; Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

17.21.100 Rezone restrictions.*
No property which was subject to Ordinance 283 shall be rezoned to any zone other than PF, HC, OS-R or OS-RM, nor shall any amendment to this title be adopted which would increase the residential density on property so zoned or change the uses permitted thereon to allow commercial or manufacturing uses until and unless such rezoning or amendment is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, no use shall be permitted and no building permit shall be issued for any use in violation of Ordinance No. 283. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1993)

*    Editor’s Note: PMC 17.22.080 (for the Open Space zone on which the HC zone is based) was added by Ord. 283 and was approved by the voters at a general municipal election November 8, 1988. The language added shall not be modified or rescinded without the approval of a simple majority of the City voting at a special or general election.

Chapter 17.22
PF PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE
Sections:

17.22.010    Purposes.

17.22.020    Permitted and conditional uses – PF.

17.22.030    Accessory uses.

17.22.040    Temporary uses.

17.22.050    Property development standards.

17.22.060    General requirements.

17.22.070    Special requirements.

17.22.080    Performance standards.

17.22.090    Accessory structures.

17.22.100    Walls and fences.

17.22.110    Signs.

17.22.120    Rezone restrictions.

17.22.010 Purposes.
This zone is intended primarily for lands containing privately and publicly owned facilities serving the needs of the general community. It is the intent that this zone be applied to an entire parcel of land or to a portion of a parcel of land, provided that the remainder of the parcel meets the area requirements for which it is zoned. (Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.020 Permitted and conditional uses – PF.
The uses shall be permitted where the symbol “P” appears and subject to a conditional use permit where the symbol “C” appears, and subject to a minor conditional use permit where the symbol “M” appears in the column beneath each zone designation. Where the symbol “X” appears the use is prohibited. A use that is not listed is prohibited. Land uses identified for the zone may be further limited by the presence of a specific plan or other applicable provision of the PMC.

A.    Cemeteries, crematories, columbariums, and related facilities

C

B.    Government office buildings including City Hall

C

C.    Churches and other religious institutions

C

D.    Corporation yards

C

E.    Fire stations

C

F.    Museums

C

G.    Open air amphitheater

C

H.    Performing Arts Center

C

I.    Public buildings and grounds

C

J.    Public or private nonprofit educational institutions

C

NOTE: Classroom facilities of the Poway Unified School District are not bound by these regulations.

 

K.    Public utility and public service substations, reservoirs, pumping plants, and similar installations, not including public utility offices

C

L.    Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages only ancillary to other “P” or “C” use

M

M.    Schools and school district headquarters

C

N.    Water treatment facility

C

O.    Other public facility uses that the City Council may determine to be similar in nature

C

P.    Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

(Ord. 808 § 15, 2017; Ord. 785 § 15, 2016; Ord. 773 § 8, 2015; Ord. 736 § 15, 2012; Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.030 Accessory uses.
A.    Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use

P

B.    Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use

C

C.    “Seatainers”

M

(Ord. 490 § 2(7), 1997; Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.040 Temporary uses.
Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.26 PMC upon issuance of a temporary use permit (TUP). (Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.050 Property development standards.
The following regulations shall apply to the site of a permitted or conditional use. The requirements are minimum unless otherwise stated. Where a public facility land use is located on a portion of a larger parcel of land, the area remaining within the larger parcel shall meet the minimum area requirement of the underlying zone. Each building site shall have a minimum 20-foot-wide vehicular access to a public street. (Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.060 General requirements.
Requirement

Number

A.    Width of flag lots (in feet)

20

B.    Front yard setback (in feet)

20

C.    Side yard setback (in feet), each side

20

D.    Side yard setback street side (in feet)

20

E.    Rear yard setback (in feet)

20

F.    Lot coverage, maximum lot coverage shall include all buildings, structures, accessory buildings and structures

30%

G.    Maximum structure height

35 feet or two stories whichever is less, or as expressly authorized pursuant to an adopted specific plan or as determined by PMC 17.23.070(K) for architectural appurtenances

H.    Off-street parking

(See Chapter 17.42 PMC, to be determined by City Council)

(Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.070 Special requirements.
A. A minimum building setback of 25 feet shall be required whenever a parcel of land in the PF zone abuts a lot in any residential zone. The building setback may be used for required open off-street parking areas. The building setback may be increased by the City Council in situations where additional distance would help to mitigate or alleviate potential problems, hazards, or environmental concerns.

B. When any property in an PF zone abuts a property in a commercial or manufacturing zone, the minimum side and rear yard setbacks may be reduced at the discretion of the City Council, and such reduction shall not constitute a variance.

C. In the PF zone, new construction and reconstruction or rehabilitation of existing buildings and/or sites shall be in accordance with the following design criteria as applicable:

1. Development Plan. A development plan shall be prepared for the entire site under consideration regardless of whether development is contemplated in the near future. The purpose of the development plan is to show conceptually, where buildings might be located and where and how parking, on-site and off-site circulation will function.

2. Site Development Standards. The site development standards shall be consistent with the requirements of the PF zone as indicated in PMC 17.22.050 and herein. The standards shall be reminiscent and reflective of the early farming and rural country character of Poway and consistent with the community design element of the general plan. The site plan should use imaginative, creative, and stimulating architectural design with special consideration given to the provision of the following items where appropriate:

a. Low-intensity lighting;

b. Generous landscaping;

c. Decorative paved walkways;

d. Basic design theme;

e. Separation of pedestrian and vehicular rights-of-way;

f. Architecturally integrated ground-mounted equipment such as trash receptacles and transformers;

g. Bus or transit shelters as determined by the Director of Development Services;

h. Adequate bicycle and motorcycle parking as determined by the City Council;

i. Architectural compatibility with on-site and surrounding structures.

D. All exterior lighting shall be constructed in accordance with PMC 17.08.220(L) and 17.10.150(H).

E. All development in the floodplain shall be in accordance with the National Flood Insurance requirements and local ordinance.

F. A minimum of two toilets and one wash basin is required to be provided for each gender for all buildings and facilities accessible by the public. Additional toilets and wash basins are required for larger buildings and facilities based on the number of people expected to use them.

G. Where a public facility zoned parcel fronts on more than one street, it shall be considered to have multiple frontages and be required to meet the front yard setback requirement on all street frontages.

H. Driveways in all public facility zones shall be constructed subject to the following standards:

Maximum Grade Break

Maximum Slope

Minimum Surfacing

Width

8% every 20 feet

12%

6" P.C.C. or 3" A.C. on 4" cl. 2 base or as approved by the City Engineer

Min. 16 ft. Max. 35 ft. Fire access – 10 ft. min.

I. Architectural appurtenances such as clock towers and similar design elements on or adjacent to public facility structures, may exceed the maximum height of 35 feet. Proposals for such appurtenances, however, shall be evaluated through the development review application process on a case-by-case basis so that architectural compatibility and appropriate building scale is achieved and maintained.

J. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios, and special development requirements. (Ord. 674 § 30, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; amended during 8/97 supplement; Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.080 Performance standards.
A. Landscaping. All development in the PF zones shall be landscaped in accordance with the City landscape guidelines.

B. Energy Conservation. Buildings shall be located on the site to provide adjacent buildings adequate sunlight for solar access. All new construction and remodeling shall be preplumbed for solar hot water heating. Buildings shall be designed to minimize energy consumption requirements, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following conservation measures:

1. Cogeneration;

2. South-facing windows;

3. Eave coverage for windows;

4. Double glazed windows;

5. Earth berming against exterior walls;

6. Green houses;

7. Deciduous shade trees.

C. Where a public facility land use abuts property in any commercial or manufacturing zone, fencing and/or walls may be required, as necessary, to mitigate potential negative impacts to adjacent properties.

D. Wherever off-street parking areas are facing the front or side yard of property in a residential zone, a masonry wall or berm three feet in height shall be erected in the landscaped area between the required landscape area and the parking area to adequately screen the parking areas from the residential properties.

E. All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad-mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with any appropriate screening treatment. All new and existing utility connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other facilities may be placed above ground but shall be screened from view. The requirement for undergrounding existing utilities shall not apply to any overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34.5 KV and long distance and main trunk communication facilities. The requirement for undergrounding existing utility connections may be waived or modified by the City Council in accordance with criteria and provisions for such as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

F. The noise level emanating from any new public facility land activity shall not exceed 60 dBA CNEL, as the acceptable outdoor noise exposure level when measured at the property line in accordance with Chapter 8.08 PMC.

G. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, and trash receptacle areas, shall be screened from surrounding properties by use of a wall or fence or shall be enclosed within a building. Structural and design plans for any required screening under the provisions of this section shall be approved by the Development Services Director.

H. All roof appurtenances including, but not limited to air conditioning units, and mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets, and adjacent residentially zoned property.

I. Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation and parking arrangements shall be required to facilitate the ease of vehicular and pedestrian movement between adjoining properties.

J. Odor. No use shall be permitted which creates offensive odor in such quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the site.

K. In any PF zone, the regulations regarding nonconforming uses and structures shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.44 PMC. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.090 Accessory structures.
A. Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings and structures (attached or detached) shall meet all of the requirements for location of the main structure as constructed or required by the zone, except as herein provided. Where public facility uses abut any residential zone, the following shall apply.

1. Accessory buildings or structures shall be allowed to encroach into the required rear yard setback up to one-half of the distance.

2. An accessory structure shall meet the setback requirements of the main building for the front and street side yard areas.

3. An accessory structure may be located within an interior side yard or rear yard; provided, that such structure is located no closer than 10 feet to an interior side or rear lot line and is at least 10 feet from the main structure.

4. Swimming Pools. The Uniform Building Code shall govern the placement and fencing of swimming pools, spas and ornamental pools.

B. Canopies, Patios and Breezeways. Canopies, patios, and breezeways attached to the main building or connecting the main building with a detached accessory building, may extend into a required rear or interior side yard provided that portions of such structures extending into the yard:

1. Shall not exceed 15 feet in height or project closer than five feet to an interior side yard or closer than 10 feet at the rear lot line;

2. Shall be entirely open on at least three sides for patios and canopies except for necessary supporting columns. A roof connecting a main building and an accessory building shall be open on two sides.

C. Other Structures. Porches, steps, architectural features, such as eaves, awnings, chimneys, balconies, stairways, wing walls, or bay windows may project not more than four feet into any required front or rear yard area, nor into any required side yard area more than one-half of the required side yard. (Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.100 Walls and fences.
A. In any required street setback area, view-obscuring fencing shall not exceed 30 inches in height, except for retaining walls as approved through the development review process.

B. In any required rear or interior side yard area, a wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height except as required by subsection E of this section.

C. A wall or fence adjacent to a driveway or street providing vehicular access to an abutting lot or street shall not exceed 30 inches in height within 15 feet of the edges of the driveway and the street right-of-way and/or shall comply with CalTrans’s design standards for sight visibility. Corner cut-offs may be required for safety and visibility (see Diagram 17.22.100).

Diagram 17.22.100

D. Fiberglass sheeting, bamboo sheeting or other similar temporary material shall not be permitted as a fencing material in any PF zone.

E. 1. Where a public facilities land use abuts property in any residential zone, a masonry wall up to eight feet in height from the highest finished grade at the property line shall be erected and maintained between such uses and the residential zone. Where the adjacent grade of the abutting residential property is four feet or more lower or higher than the project site, the masonry wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height. Openings shall be provided in the wall as appropriate to encourage pedestrian access.

2. Other types of fences, such as framed stucco walls, may be permitted in lieu of a masonry wall upon determination by the City Council that the substituted wall is compatible with the proposed project, surrounding property uses, and the noise level requirements herein. No walls are required in front or street side yards unless needed for noise attenuation and/or privacy. In addition, 15-gallon trees, 20 feet on-center, and shrubbery shall be installed and maintained along the inside of the wall in a five-foot-wide, raised landscaped planter to provide a dense landscape screen.

F. A wall or fence up to eight feet in height may be allowed by the Director of Development Services where necessary for noise attenuation from arterial streets or other noise sources. The wall or fence shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the objectives and policies of the general plan community design element.

G. Where barbed wire strands are placed at the top of a wall or fence, such material shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of six feet above grade and shall be maintained in a safe condition.

H. It is unlawful for an owner of a parcel of land within the City to keep barbed wire or any other type of wire fencing in an unsafe, abandoned or materially dangerous condition. Unmaintained wire fencing, including but not limited to barbed wire, razor wire, and concertina wire (coiled barbed wire), is declared to be public nuisance and shall be subject to the nuisance abatement procedure, Chapter 8.72 PMC. Razor wire and concertina wire (coiled wire) are prohibited.

I. It is unlawful to place electrified fencing, razor, or concertina wire on the rooftop of any building. (Ord. 674 § 31, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.110 Signs.
No sign or outdoor advertising structures shall be permitted in any PF zone except as provided in Chapter 17.40 PMC. (Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

17.22.120 Rezone restrictions.*
No property which was subject to Ordinance 283 shall be rezoned to any zone other than OS-R, HC or OS-RM, nor shall any amendment to this title be adopted which would increase the residential density on property so zoned or change the uses permitted thereon to allow commercial or manufacturing uses until and unless such rezoning or amendment is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election. (Ord. 372 § 3, 1993)

 

*    Editor’s Note: PMC 17.22.080 (for the Open Space zone on which the PF zone is based) was added by Ord. 283 and was approved by the voters at a general municipal election November 8, 1988. The language added shall not be modified or rescinded without the approval of a simple majority of the City voting at a special or general election.

Chapter 17.23
OS-R OPEN SPACE-RECREATION ZONE*
Sections:

17.23.010    Purposes.

17.23.020    Permitted and conditional uses – OS-R.

17.23.030    Accessory uses.

17.23.040    Temporary uses.

17.23.050    Property development standards.

17.23.060    General requirements.

17.23.070    Special requirements.

17.23.080    Performance standards.

17.23.090    Accessory structures.

17.23.100    Walls and fences.

17.23.110    Signs.

17.23.120    Rezone restrictions.

 

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 266, 272 and 283.

17.23.010 Purposes.
A. This zone is intended for low-intensity active-recreational and ancillary commercial needs which could be compatible with residential land uses. These active-recreational opportunities are meant to serve the recreational and social interaction needs of the City residents of all ages, economic situations, and physical conditions. Publicly owned lands, such as parks, may also be included in this zone subject to approval by the City. Only those additional uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, the open space-recreation land use and surrounding lands uses. It is the intent that this zone be applied to an entire parcel of land or to a portion of a parcel of land, provided that the remainder of the parcel meets the area requirements for which it is zoned.

B. In addition to the objectives outlined in PMC 17.02.010 (Purpose and scope), the open space-recreation zone is included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:

1. Provide for compatible recreational uses.

2. Provide public or private active-recreation uses and activities on land within the community.

3. Promote land use compatibility with existing or planned residential, commercial, manufacturing, and open space land uses which surround the OS-R zone activity or land use.

4. Encourage in-fill active-recreation land uses which provide a range of opportunities within the community that service the recreational and social interaction needs of City residents of all ages, economic situations, and physical conditions.

5. Provide for recreational opportunities within planned communities and planned residential developments.

6. Provide for associated building construction and development which is architecturally compatible and sensitive to existing and planned land uses on the same parcel of land and on surrounding properties. (Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.020 Permitted and conditional uses – OS-R.
The uses shall be permitted where the symbol “P” appears and subject to a conditional use permit where the symbol “C” appears, and subject to a minor conditional use permit where the symbol “M” appears in the column beneath each zone designation. Where the symbol “X” appears the use is prohibited. A use that is not listed is prohibited. Land uses identified for the zone may be further limited by the presence of a specific plan or other applicable provision of the PMC.

A.    Art galleries (enclosed or open-air)

C

B.    Baseball fields

C

C.    Batting cages as accessory use

M

D.    Botanical and zoological gardens

C

E.    Churches and other religious institutions

C

F.    Club houses and pro shops associated with public and private golf courses

C

G.    Country clubs

C

H.    Driving range, with or without associated golf course (public and private)

C

I.    Eighteen-hole golf courses (private and public)

C

J.    Freestyle/motocross (nonmotorized) bicycle courses

C

K.    Lawn bowling (public or private)

P

L.    Museums

C

M.    Par or running course

P

N.    Private picnic grounds

C

O.    Public parks, buildings and grounds

C

P.    Racquetball/handball court

C

Q.    Riding academies and stables (public and private)

C

R.    Restaurant in conjunction with an existing or contemplated recreational use

C

S.    Riding and hiking staging areas/rest areas

C

T.    Rodeo arena

C

U.    Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages only ancillary to other P or C use

M

V.    Skateboard parks

C

W.    Soccer park (public and private)

C

X.    Swim clubs (public and private)

C

Y.    Tennis courts (public and private)

C

Z.    Other open space-recreational uses that the City Council may determine to be similar in nature

C

AA.    Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

BB.    Public utility installations

C

(Ord. 808 § 16, 2017; Ord. 785 § 16, 2016; Ord. 773 §§ 9, 11, 2015; Ord. 736 § 16, 2012; Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.030 Accessory uses.
A.    Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use

P

B.    Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use

C

C.    “Seatainers”

M

(Ord. 490 § 2(8), 1997; Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.040 Temporary uses.
Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.26 PMC upon issuance of a temporary use permit (TUP). (Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.050 Property development standards.
The following regulations shall apply to the site of a permitted or conditional use. The requirements are minimum unless otherwise stated. Where an open space-recreation land use is located on a portion of a larger parcel of land, the area remaining within the larger parcel shall meet the minimum area requirement of the underlying zone. Each building site shall have a minimum 20-foot-wide vehicular access to a public street. (Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.060 General requirements.
Requirement

Number

A.    Density, maximum living units per site, to be utilized for on-site caretaker housing purposes

1

B.    Width of flag lots (in feet)

20

C.    Front yard setback (in feet)

20

D.    Side yard setback (in feet), each side

20/20

E.    Side yard setback, street side (in feet)

20

F.    Rear yard setback (in feet)

20

G.    Lot coverage, maximum lot coverage shall include all buildings, structures, accessory buildings and structures

30%

H.    Maximum structure height

35 feet or two stories, whichever is less, or as expressly authorized pursuant to an adopted specific plan or as determined by PMC 17.23.070(K) for architectural appurtenances

I.    Off-street parking

(See Chapter 17.42 PMC, to be determined by the City Council)

(Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.070 Special requirements.
A. In any OS-R zone, a minimum building setback of 25 feet shall be required whenever a parcel of land in the OS-R zone abuts a lot in any residential zone. The setback area may be used for required open off-street parking areas. The building setback may be increased by the City Council in situations where additional distance would help to mitigate or alleviate potential problems, hazards or environmental concerns.

B. When any property in an OS-R zone abuts a property in a commercial or manufacturing zone, the minimum side and rear yard setbacks may be reduced at the discretion of the City Council, and such reduction shall not constitute a variance.

C. In the OS-R zone, new construction and reconstruction or rehabilitation of existing buildings and/or sites shall be in accordance with the following design criteria:

1. Development Plan. A development plan shall be prepared for the entire site under consideration regardless of whether development is contemplated in the near future. The purpose of the development plan is to show conceptually, where buildings might be located and where and how parking, on-site and off-site circulation will function.

2. Site Development Standards. The site development standards shall be consistent with the requirement of the OS-R zone as indicated in PMC 17.23.050 and herein. The standards shall be reminiscent and reflective of the early farming and rural country character of Poway and consistent with the community design element of the general plan. The site plan should use imaginative, creative, and stimulating architectural design with special consideration given to the provision of the following items where appropriate:

a. Low-intensity lighting;

b. Restrooms and benches;

c. Generous landscaping;

d. Decorative paved walkways;

e. Basic design theme;

f. Separation of pedestrian and vehicular rights-of-way;

g. Architecturally integrated ground-mounted equipment such as trash receptacles and transformers;

h. Bus or transit shelter as determined by the Director of Development Services;

i. Adequate bicycle and motorcycle parking as determined by the City Council;

j. Architectural compatibility with on-site and surrounding structures;

k. Children’s play area with appropriate adult supervision;

l. A park-like landscaped quiet area for passive and family picnic area.

D. All exterior lighting shall be constructed in accordance with PMC 17.08.220(L) and 17.10.150(H).

E. All development in the floodplain shall be in accordance with the National Flood Insurance requirements and local ordinance.

F. A minimum of two toilets and one wash basin is required to be provided for each gender for all buildings and facilities accessible by the public. Additional toilets and wash basins are required for larger buildings and facilities based on the number of people expected to use them.

G. Hours of operation of any land use or activity located in any OS-R zone shall be restricted to between sunrise to 10:00 p.m. weekdays, weekends, and holidays. Any exceptions to these time limits with regard to special events shall be subject to a temporary use permit granted by the City Council.

H. All gambling and the sale and consumption of illegal drugs on-site is strictly prohibited. The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited except as permitted by conditional use permit.

I. Where an open space-recreation zoned parcel fronts on more than one street, it shall be considered to have multiple frontages and be required to meet the front yard setback requirement on all street frontages.

J. Driveways in all open space-recreation zones shall be constructed subject to the following standards:

Maximum Grade Break

Maximum Slope

Minimum Surfacing

Width

8% every 20 feet

12%

6" P.C.C. or 3" A.C. on 4" cl. 2 base or as approved by the City Engineer

Min. 16 ft. Max. 35 ft. Fire access – 10 ft. min.

K. Architectural appurtenances to churches or other religious institutions involving a steeple, or cross, or the combination thereof, and clock towers and similar design elements on open space-recreation structures, may exceed the maximum height of 35 feet. Proposals for such appurtenances, however, shall be evaluated through the development review application process on a case-by-case basis so that architectural compatibility and appropriate building scale is achieved and maintained.

L. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios, and special development requirements. (Ord. 674 § 32, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; amended during 8/97 supplement; Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.080 Performance standards.
A. Landscaping. In all OS-R zones, required front and street side yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the City landscape guidelines.

B. Energy Conservation. Buildings shall be located on the site to provide adjacent buildings adequate sunlight for solar access. All new construction and remodeling shall be preplumbed for solar hot water heating. Buildings shall be designed to minimize energy consumption requirements, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following conservation measures:

1. Cogeneration;

2. South-facing windows;

3. Eave coverage for windows;

4. Double glazed windows;

5. Earth berming against exterior walls;

6. Green houses;

7. Deciduous shade trees.

C. Where an open space-recreation facility land use abuts property in any commercial or manufacturing zone, fencing and/or walls may be required, as necessary, to mitigate potential negative impacts to adjacent properties.

D. Wherever off-street parking areas are facing the front or side yard of property in a residential zone, a masonry wall or berm three feet in height shall be erected in the landscaped area between the required landscape area and the parking area to adequately screen the parking areas from the residential properties.

E. All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad-mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with any appropriate screening treatment. All new and existing utilities connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other facilities may be placed above ground but shall be screened from view. The requirement for undergrounding existing utilities shall not apply to any overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34.5KV and long distance and main trunk communication facilities. The requirement for undergrounding existing utility connections may be waived or modified by the City Council in accordance with criteria and provisions for such as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

F. The noise level emanating from any new open space-recreation activity shall not exceed 60 dBA CNEL, as the acceptable outdoor noise exposure level when measured at the property line in accordance with Chapter 8.08 PMC.

G. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, and trash receptacle areas, shall be screened from surrounding properties by use of a wall or fence or shall be enclosed within a building. Structural and design plans for any required screening under the provisions of this section shall be approved by the Development Services Director.

H. All roof appurtenances including, but not limited to air conditioning units, and mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets, and adjacent residentially zoned property.

I. Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation and parking arrangements shall be required to facilitate the ease of vehicular and pedestrian movement between adjoining properties.

J. Odor. No use shall be permitted which creates offensive odor in such quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the site.

K. In any OS-R zone, the regulations regarding nonconforming uses and structures shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.44 PMC. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.090 Accessory structures.
A. Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings and structures (attached or detached) shall meet all of the requirements for location of the main structure as constructed or required by the zone, except as herein provided. Where open space-recreation uses abut any residential zone, the following shall apply:

1. Accessory buildings or structures shall be allowed to encroach into the required rear yard setback up to one-half of the distance.

2. An accessory structure shall meet the setback requirements of the main building for the front and street side yard areas.

3. An accessory structure may be located within an interior side yard or rear yard; provided, that such structure is located no closer than five feet to an interior side or rear lot line and is at least 10 feet from the main structure.

4. Swimming Pools. The Uniform Building Code shall govern the placement and fencing of swimming pools, spas and ornamental ponds.

B. Canopies, Patios and Breezeways. Canopies, patios, and breezeways attached to the main building or connecting the main building with a detached accessory building, may extend into a required rear or interior side yard provided that portions of such structures extending into the yard:

1. Shall not exceed 15 feet in height or project closer than five feet to an interior side yard or closer than 10 feet at the rear lot line;

2. Shall be entirely open on at least three sides for patios and canopies except for necessary supporting columns. A roof connecting a main building and an accessory building shall be open on two sides.

C. Other Structures. Porches, steps, architectural features, such as eaves, awnings, chimneys, balconies, stairways, wing walls, or bay windows may project not more than four feet into any required front or rear yard area, nor into any required side yard area more than one-half of the required side yard. (Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.100 Walls and fences.
A. In any required street setback area, view-obscuring fencing shall not exceed 30 inches in height, except for retaining walls as approved through the development review process.

B. In any required rear or interior side yard area, a wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height except as required by subsection E of this section.

C. A wall or fence adjacent to a driveway or street providing vehicular access to an abutting lot or street shall not exceed three feet in height within 15 feet of the intersection of the driveway and the street right-of-way and/or shall comply with CalTrans’s design standards for sight visibility. Corner cut-offs may be required for safety and visibility (see Diagram 17.23.100).

Diagram 17.23.100

D. Fiberglass sheeting, bamboo sheeting or other similar temporary material shall not be permitted as a fencing material in any OS-R zone.

E. 1. Where an open space-recreation land use abuts property in any residential zone, a masonry wall up to eight feet in height from the highest finished grade at the property line shall be erected and maintained between such uses and the residential zone. Where the adjacent grade of the abutting residential property is four feet or more lower or higher than the project site, the masonry wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height. Openings shall be provided in the wall as appropriate to encourage pedestrian access.

2. Other types of fences, such as framed stucco walls, may be permitted in lieu of a masonry wall upon determination by the City Council that the substituted wall is compatible with the proposed project, surrounding property uses, and the noise level requirements herein. No walls are required in front or street side yards unless needed for noise attenuation and/or privacy. In addition, 15-gallon trees, 20 feet on-center, and shrubbery shall be installed and maintained along the inside of the wall in a five-foot-wide, raised landscaped planter to provide a dense landscape screen.

F. A wall or fence up to eight feet in height may be allowed by the Director of Development Services where necessary for noise attenuation from arterial streets or other noise sources. The wall or fence shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the objectives and policies of the general plan community design element.

G. Where barbed wire strands are placed at the top of a wall or fence, such material shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of six feet above grade and shall be maintained in a safe condition.

H. It is unlawful for an owner of a parcel of land within the City to keep barbed wire or any other type of wire fencing in an unsafe, abandoned or materially dangerous condition. Unmaintained wire fencing, including but not limited to barbed wire, razor wire, and concertina wire (coiled barbed wire), is declared to be public nuisance and shall be subject to the nuisance abatement procedure, Chapter 8.72 PMC. Razor wire and concertina wire (coiled wire) are prohibited.

I. It is unlawful to place electrified fencing, razor, or concertina wire on the rooftop of any building. (Ord. 674 § 33, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.110 Signs.
No sign or outdoor advertising structures shall be permitted in any OS-R zone except as provided in Chapter 17.40 PMC. (Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

17.23.120 Rezone restrictions.*
No property which was subject to Ordinance 283 shall be rezoned to any zone other than PF, HC, OS-R, or OS-RM, nor shall any amendment to this title be adopted which would increase the residential density on property so zoned or change the uses permitted thereon to allow commercial or manufacturing uses until and unless such rezoning or amendment is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election. (Ord. 372 § 4, 1993)

*    Editor’s Note: PMC 17.23.120 was added by Ord. 283 and was approved by the voters at a general municipal election November 8, 1988. The language added shall not be modified or rescinded without the approval of a simple majority of the City voting at a special or general election.

Chapter 17.24
OS-RM OPEN SPACE-RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ZONE
Sections:

17.24.010    Purposes.

17.24.020    Permitted and conditional uses – OS-RM.

17.24.030    Accessory uses.

17.24.040    Temporary uses.

17.24.050    Property development standards.

17.24.060    General requirements.

17.24.070    Special requirements.

17.24.080    Performance standards.

17.24.090    Accessory structures.

17.24.100    Wall and fences.

17.24.110    Signs.

17.24.120    Rezone restrictions.

17.24.010 Purposes.
A. This zone is intended for lands where valuable natural resources are located. The mountainous areas, prominent ridges, riparian areas, wildlife corridors, areas of high biological value, areas with geologic hazards, and areas with valuable historic and prehistoric resources are included within this zone. Limited activity, involving minimal disturbance of the existing terrain and habitat, may be allowed on lands carrying this zone with the approval of the City Council.

B. In addition to the objectives outlined in PMC 17.02.010, the open space-resource management zone is included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:

1. Preserve open space for the conservation of natural and cultural resources and maintain the natural character of the land;

2. Provide for the conservation and preservation of environmentally significant physical and cultural resources, including designated mitigation sites;

3. Conserve areas of historic and community significance for the enjoyment of future generations. (Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.020 Permitted and conditional uses – OS-RM.
The uses shall be permitted where the symbol “P” appears and subject to a conditional use permit where the symbol “C” appears, and subject to a minor conditional use permit where the symbol “M” appears in the column beneath each zone designation. Where the symbol “X” appears the use is prohibited. A use that is not listed is prohibited. Land uses identified for the zone may be further limited by the presence of a specific plan or other applicable provision of the PMC.

1.    Botanical and zoological gardens

C

2.    Ranger stations, interpretive centers

C

3.    Historical landmarks

P

4.    Historical structures

P

5.    Keeping of beehives

M

6.    National and State parks

P

7.    Public utility installations

C

8.    Riding and hiking trails

P

9.    Wilderness camping areas

C

10.    Wildlife preserves and sanctuaries

P

11.    Marijuana: dispensaries, collectives and cooperatives, cultivation, delivery, manufacturing and storage as defined in PMC 17.04.514

X

(Ord. 808 § 17, 2017; Ord. 785 § 17, 2016; Ord. 773 § 10, 2015; Ord. 736 § 17, 2012; Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.030 Accessory uses.
1.    Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use

P

2.    Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use

M

3.    Limited complementary uses such as tot lots and restrooms

M

4.    “Seatainers”

M

(Ord. 490 § 2(9), 1997; Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.040 Temporary uses.
Temporary uses as prescribed in Chapter 17.26 PMC upon issuance of a temporary use permit (TUP). (Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.050 Property development standards.
The following regulations shall apply to the site of a permitted or conditional use. The requirements are minimum unless otherwise stated. No building permit shall be issued except for minor construction and rehabilitation or restoration of existing historical structures. (Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.060 General requirements.
Building and structure height (maximum in feet)

35 feet or two stories, whichever is less, or as expressly authorized pursuant to an adopted specific plan; PMC 17.23.070(K) for architectural appurtenances

(Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.070 Special requirements.
A. In the OS-RM zone, minor construction and reconstruction or rehabilitation of existing historical buildings, structures and/or sites shall be in accordance with the following design criteria:

1. Reconstruction/Minor Construction Plan. A reconstruction/minor construction plan shall be prepared for the entire site under consideration. The purpose of the development plan is to show where minor, new buildings (such as ranger stations, interpretive centers) and existing historic buildings might be/are located and where and how parking, on-site and off-site circulation will function. Minimal disturbance of the existing terrain and habitat is to occur. Previously approved mitigation sites, biological open space easements (public or private) must also be delineated on the development plan, restricted from any uses and properly managed. A long-term management plan for these areas must also be submitted for review and approval by the City and appropriate agencies.

2. Site Development Standards. The site development standards shall be consistent with the requirement of the OS-RM zone as indicated in PMC 17.24.050 and herein. The standards shall be reminiscent and reflective of the time period when the structure was constructed for reconstruction, compatible with the surroundings for minor construction, and consistent with the community design element of the general plan. The site plan should use imaginative, creative, and historic architectural design with special consideration given to the provision of the following items where appropriate:

a. Low-intensity lighting;

b. Landscaping with native plant species;

c. Historic design theme.

B. All public projects and private development projects within the jurisdiction of the City that have the potential to adversely impact sensitive plant species, wildlife species, and associated natural habitats shall either demonstrate that any removal of habitat associated with the proposed development has been authorized by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or comply with the adopted Poway subarea habitat conservation plan, the companion implementing agreement, and the requirements thereof including the compensation mitigation strategy, mitigation ratios, and special development requirements. (Ord. 450 § 3, 1995; Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.080 Performance standards.
In any OS-RM zone, the regulations regarding nonconforming uses and structures shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.44 PMC. (Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.090 Accessory structures.
None. (Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.100 Wall and fences.
A. Fiberglass sheeting, bamboo sheeting or other similar temporary material shall not be permitted as a fencing material in any OS-RM zone. Chain link fencing or suitable alternative may be allowed to preserve areas with archaeological, historic, botanical or geological significance.

B. Where barbed wire strands are placed at the top of a wall or fence, such material shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of six feet above grade and shall be maintained in a safe condition.

C. It is unlawful for an owner of a parcel of land within the City to keep barbed wire or any other type of wire fencing in an unsafe, abandoned or materially dangerous condition. Unmaintained wire fencing, e.g., barbed wire, is declared to be public nuisance and shall be subject to the nuisance abatement procedure, Chapter 8.72 PMC. Razor wire and concertina wire (coiled barbed wire) are prohibited.

D. It is unlawful to place or maintain electrified fencing, razor or concertina wire on the rooftop of any building. (Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.110 Signs.
No sign or outdoor advertising structures shall be permitted in any OS-RM zone except as provided in Chapter 17.40 PMC. (Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

17.24.120 Rezone restrictions.*
No property which was subject to Ordinance 283 shall be rezoned to any zone other than PF, HC, OS-R or OS-RM, nor shall any amendment to this title be adopted which would increase the residential density on property so zoned or change the uses permitted thereon to allow commercial or manufacturing uses until and unless such rezoning or amendment is approved by ordinance adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election, or first approved by the Poway City Council and then adopted by the voters of the City at a special or general election. (Ord. 372 § 5, 1993)

 

*    Editor’s Note: PMC 17.22.080 (for the Open Space zone on which the OS-RN zone is based) was added by Ord. 283 and was approved by the voters at a general municipal election November 8, 1988. The language added shall not be modified or rescinded without the approval of a simple majority of the City voting at a special or general election.

Chapter 17.26
SPECIAL USES AND CONDITIONS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

17.26.010    Applicability.

Article II. Temporary Uses

17.26.020    Purpose.

17.26.030    Temporary uses listed.

17.26.035    Marijuana dispensary, cooperative or collective.

17.26.040    Permits and bonds.

17.26.050    Extension or modification of limitations.

17.26.060    Condition of site following temporary usage.

17.26.070    Fee.

17.26.080    Noticing requirements.

Article III. Inclusionary Housing Requirements

17.26.100    Definitions.

17.26.200    Inclusionary requirements.

17.26.300    In-lieu fees.

17.26.400    Appeal for adjustment, reduction or waiver.

Article IV. Requests for Reasonable Accommodation under the Fair Housing Act

17.26.500    Purpose.

17.26.510    Definitions.

17.26.520    Applicability.

17.26.530    Application requirements.

17.26.540    Approval authority, notice and decision.

17.26.550    Findings and conditions.

17.26.560    Appeal of determination.

Article V. Affordable Housing Incentives

17.26.600    Purpose and general plan consistency.

17.26.610    Definitions.

17.26.620    Administration.

17.26.630    Qualifications for density bonus and concession(s) or incentive(s).

17.26.640    Specified density bonus percentages.

17.26.650    Donation of land for very low-income housing.

17.26.660    Bonus and incentives for housing with child care facilities.

17.26.670    Residential condominium conversions.

17.26.680    Incentive(s) and concession(s).

17.26.690    Waiver or modification of development standards.

17.26.700    Parking standards.

17.26.710    Continued affordability.

17.26.720    Density bonus, incentive or concession housing agreement required.

Article VI. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone

17.26.730    Purpose.

17.26.740    Applicability.

17.26.750    Definitions.

17.26.760    Permitted uses.

17.26.770    Development standards.

Article VII. Homeless Shelters

17.26.780    Purpose.

17.26.790    Definitions.

17.26.800    Applicability.

17.26.810    Permitted uses.

17.26.820    Development standards.

17.26.830    Guidelines and other development standards.

Article I. General Provisions

17.26.010 Applicability.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the uses and conditions enumerated in this chapter. Where this chapter prescribes regulations more restrictive than the zone in which a use or conditional use is permitted, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 6), 5, 1983)

Article II. Temporary Uses

17.26.020 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the temporary use regulations and shall provide regulations for the uses enumerated in this chapter. Where this chapter prescribes regulations more restrictive than the zone in which a use or conditional use is permitted, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. Temporary uses are subject to approval by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 721 § 2, 2011; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 6.0.1), 5, 1983; Ord. 100 § 1, 1983)

17.26.030 Temporary uses listed.
The following temporary uses may be approved:

A. Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, parades or similar outdoor entertainment or enterprises, subject to not more than five calendar days of operation in any calendar year. Requests exceeding these time limitations may be granted by the Director of Development Services upon written request, subject to a minor development review application and noticing requirements pursuant to PMC 17.26.080.

B. Christmas tree sales lots, Halloween pumpkin sales, and other holiday sales subject to not more than 40 calendar days of site occupation and operation in any calendar year:

C. Religious, patriotic, historic, or similar displays or exhibits within yards, parking areas, or landscaped areas, subject to not more than 28 calendar days of display in any calendar year;

D. Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits, subject to not more than three calendar days of operation or exhibition in any 60-calendar-day period;

E. Parking lot and sidewalk sales, other than outdoor displays pursuant to PMC 17.10.190, and located within commercially zoned properties, not to exceed five calendar days in any 60 calendar days and subject to appropriate conditions. A qualified business conducting a special promotional parking lot sales event may request additional time for the parking lot sale subject to the following:

1. The Director may approve a special promotional parking lot sales event for up to a maximum of 34 days for a single event and up to four such events in a 12-month period with a minimum of 30 days between events, subject to noticing requirements pursuant to PMC 17.26.080.

F. Entertainment attractions such as tethered balloon rides, bands, etc., may be permitted for not more than 15 days per year provided they are safe and do not unreasonably impact neighbors. On-site broadcasting of a mobile radio show shall not constitute “entertainment” and is permitted; provided, that neighbors are not unreasonably impacted by the event;

G. Off-site sales events may be approved for the sale of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles and/or boats;

H. Seasonal retail sale of agricultural products (fruit and vegetable stands) for periods of less than 90 days, if said products are raised on the premises;

I. For any agricultural or animal husbandry activity or project (4-H, FFA, or similar) conducted for educational purposes or school credits, a permit may be granted in any district when the Development Services Director determines that such use will not cause a public nuisance relative to sanitation and health conditions;

J. Special events, such as horse shows, at a commercial stable when authorized by the conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit;

K. Charitable or school sponsored drop-off bins for recycling of cans, newspapers, or similar items, or for drop-off of clothes and small items. Bins shall be located in the parking lots of businesses within the CG or CN zones when written permission is granted by the property owner or business owner. The bins shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner;

L. Charitable special events, including fund raising tours in residential neighborhoods and craft fairs and similar events in residential neighborhoods, shall be limited to a two-day duration and no more than twice per year. Written notification of adjacent property owners shall be required prior to the event;

M. Temporary use of property for mobile trailer units for uses including, but not limited to, classrooms, offices, and banks, for periods not to exceed 180 days, subject to a minor development review application approved by the Director of Development Services and subject to noticing requirements pursuant to PMC 17.26.080. Requests for such uses for more than 180 days in duration require approval of a minor conditional use permit. All such units shall meet all necessary requirements of zoning, building, fire and health codes;

N. Contractors’ offices and storage yards on the site of an active construction project for a period not to exceed one year. Time extension applications may be considered in conjunction with the presence of an active building permit or other related construction permit for the project;

O. Mobile home residences or recreational vehicles (RVs) such as motor homes and travel trailers of sufficient size and design to provide extended term living quarters as determined appropriate by the Director of Development Services, for security purposes on the site of an active construction project. Duration is limited to one year. Time extension applications may be considered in conjunction with the presence of an active building permit or other related construction permit for the project;

P. Subdivision sales offices and model home complexes located within the subdivision, subject to the following minimum requirements:

1. Offices shall be no closer than one vacant lot to an existing dwelling unit not part of the subdivision, trailers may be used for no more than 90 calendar days or until such time as the subdivision sales offices have been completed, whichever is less,

2. An A.C. paved parking lot shall be provided with sufficient parking spaces to accommodate said use,

3. Offices shall be allowed for a maximum of two years or until 90 percent of the homes within the subdivision are sold, whichever is less. Annual review for compliance with conditions of approval may be required,

4. Faithful performance bonding in an amount appropriate to guarantee removal and/or conversion of the sales office and attendant facilities shall be required, and

5. Other conditions that the Director of Development Services deems necessary to assure that the sales office will not constitute a nuisance or be objectionable to the residential uses in the neighborhood;

Q. Temporary sheltering of homeless persons by qualified churches or synagogues. Sheltering periods shall be limited to two-week durations, no more than twice per year and at no closer than three-month intervals. “Qualified churches and synagogues” are defined as those possessing a valid conditional use permit. The following guidelines shall apply:

1. Only 12 individuals may be sheltered at any given time by a participating institution,

2. Maximum length of stay within the program is limited to six weeks total, two weeks maximum at each church,

3. Homeless persons shall remain on church property only during the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. and must be supervised by church personnel during those hours;

R. Outdoor food preparation accessory to a restaurant or food store use, within commercially zoned properties not to exceed five calendar days in any 60 calendar days and subject to applicable conditions of the Development Services Department;

S. Additional uses determined by the Director of Development Services to be similar to the foregoing. (Ord. 773 §§ 12, 13, 2015; Ord. 721 § 2, 2011; Ord. 661 §§ 3, 4, 5, 2007; Ord. 580 § 3, 2003; Ord. 540 § 4, 2001; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 443, 1995; Ord. 432 § 2, 1994; Ord. 255 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 6.02), 5, 1983; Ord. 100 § 1, 1983)

17.26.035 Marijuana dispensary, cooperative or collective.
Notwithstanding any provision of the municipal code to the contrary, the use of any property within any zone in the City of Poway as a marijuana dispensary, cooperative, or collective, or for marijuana cultivation, delivery, manufacturing or storage, as defined in PMC 17.04.514, is prohibited. The issuance of any permit, license, or certificate for the operation of any such uses shall be prohibited. (Ord. 808 § 18, 2017; Ord. 785 § 18, 2016; Ord. 736 § 18, 2012)

17.26.040 Permits and bonds.
A. All temporary uses shall be subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit by the Development Services Director and other necessary permits and licenses, including but not limited to building permits, sign permits, and solicitor’s or vending licenses.

B. In the issuance of a temporary use permit, the Development Services Director shall indicate the permitted hours of operation and any other conditions, such as walls or fences and lighting, which are deemed necessary to reduce possible detrimental effects to surrounding developments and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

C. Prior to the issuance of a permit for a temporary use, except those listed under PMC 17.26.030(C), (F), (G), (K) and (L), a cash deposit may be required to be deposited with the City. This cash deposit shall be used to defray the costs of cleanup of the property by the City in the event the permittee fails to do same.

D. The decision of the Development Services Director may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 2.20 PMC, Administrative Appeals. (Ord. 721 § 2, 2011; Ord. 661 § 6, 2007; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 6.0.3), 5, 1983; Ord. 100 § 1, 1983)

17.26.050 Extension or modification of limitations.
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, upon written application, the Development Services Director may extend the time within which temporary uses may be operated, or may modify the limitations under which such uses may be conducted, if the Development Services Director determines that such extension or modification is in accord with the purposes of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 721 § 2, 2011; Ord. 661 § 7, 2007; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 6.0.4), 5, 1983; Ord. 100 § 1, 1983)

17.26.060 Condition of site following temporary usage.
Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use, and shall thereafter be used only in accord with the provisions of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 721 § 2, 2011; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 6.0.5), 5, 1983; Ord. 100 § 1, 1983)

17.26.070 Fee.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of processing the application prescribed in this chapter. This fee may be waived by the approving authority for charitable groups that do not need any public services. (Ord. 721 § 2, 2011; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.0.6), 5, 1983; Ord. 100 § 1, 1983)

17.26.080 Noticing requirements.
For those temporary uses identified in PMC 17.26.030(A), (E), and (M) as requiring noticing, the following shall apply:

A. A notice of pending decision shall be mailed to all property owners of property contiguous to the subject property, and those separated by a public or private street; and

B. A posted notice shall be displayed at all entrances to the subject property. (Ord. 721 § 2, 2011)

Article III. Inclusionary Housing Requirements

17.26.100 Definitions.
As used in this article:

“Affordable to moderate-income households” means average monthly housing payments, during the first calendar year of a household’s occupancy, including property taxes, homeowners’ insurance and homeowners’ association dues, if any, which are equal to or less than one-twelfth of 35 percent of 110 percent of area median income, adjusted for family size. Affordable housing cost shall be set based on presumed occupancy levels of one person in a studio unit, 1.5 persons in a one bedroom unit, three persons in a two bedroom unit and 1.5 additional persons for each additional bedroom thereafter. Down payment shall be based on five percent of the affordable housing price.

“Affordable to low-income households” means average monthly housing payments, during the first calendar year of a household’s occupancy, including property taxes, homeowners’ insurance and homeowners’ association dues, if any, which are equal to or less than one-twelfth of 30 percent of 80 percent of area median income, adjusted for family size. Affordable housing cost shall be set based on presumed occupancy levels of one person in a studio apartment, 1.5 persons in a one bedroom unit, three persons in a two bedroom unit and 1.5 additional persons for each additional bedroom thereafter. Down payment shall be based on five percent of the affordable housing price.

“Affordable to very low-income households” means monthly rent, including utility allowances as published from time to time by the San Diego County Housing Authority and all fees for housing services, which are equal to or less than one-twelfth of 30 percent of 50 percent of area median income, adjusted for family size. Affordable rent shall be based on presumed occupancy levels of one person in a studio apartment, 1.5 persons in a one bedroom unit, three persons in a two bedroom unit, and 1.5 additional persons for each additional bedroom thereafter.

“Construction cost index” means the Engineering News Record Building Cost Index. If that index ceases to exist, the City Manager shall substitute another construction cost index, which in his or her judgment is as nearly equivalent to the original index as possible.

“Deed restriction” means an attachment to the grant deed to an affordable unit, which purpose is to assure continuing affordability of the unit over time. The term of the deed restriction shall not be less than 45 years for ownership units and 55 years for rental units.

“In-lieu fee” means a fee paid as an alternative to the provision of inclusionary units for new residential development.

“Median income” means the median household income as established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development for the San Diego Standard Metropolitan Area. (Ord. 816 § 3, 2018; Ord. 701 § 3, 2009; Ord. 595 § 2, 2003; Ord. 424, 1993)

17.26.200 Inclusionary requirements.
A. Affordable Housing Set Aside.

1. New rental residential development shall provide that 15 percent of the units created shall be affordable to very-low-income households and the continued affordability shall be guaranteed by recorded deed restriction providing such set aside. Said deed restriction shall not be less than 55 years. Such a development project which does not so provide shall be denied as inconsistent with the Housing Element of the General Plan.

2. New ownership residential development shall provide that 15 percent of the units created shall be affordable to low-income households or 20 percent of the units created shall be affordable to moderate-income households and the continued affordability shall be guaranteed by recorded deed restriction providing such set aside. Said deed restriction shall be not less than 45 years. Such a development project, which does not so provide shall be denied as inconsistent with the Housing Element of the General Plan.

3. Inclusionary units may be provided either on-site or at a different location within the City of Poway.

4. Inclusionary units should be reasonably disbursed throughout the development, should contain on the average the same number of bedrooms as the market-rate units in the development, and should be compatible with the design and use of remaining units in terms of appearance, materials and finish quality. The applicant shall have the option of reducing the interior amenity levels and square footage of inclusionary units, provided all units conform to the requirements of the City Building and Housing Codes.

B. Development Incentives.

1. Any development that includes inclusionary units shall be entitled to a density bonus and concessions or incentives as allowed pursuant to the affordable housing incentives contained in Article V of this chapter.

2. Developers may seek to utilize any available Federal and State subsidies in tandem with inclusionary units. The City shall provide assistance to developers to obtain such subsidies.

3. The City shall exercise its discretionary power with regard to zoning, planning and subdivision requirements related to minimum lot size, floor areas, parking, open space requirements, streets, sidewalks, the provision of other public improvements, and permit fees in such a manner as to facilitate the economic feasibility of housing projects with inclusionary units. (Ord. 701 § 4, 2009; Ord. 595 § 2, 2003; Ord. 424, 1993)

17.26.300 In-lieu fees.
A. The developer of for-sale or rental housing may, in lieu of providing required inclusionary housing on site or off site, pay a fee to the City as established by City Council resolution from time to time.

B. Fractional unit requirements shall be met through the payment of a proportional share of the in-lieu fee as established by City Council resolution from time to time.

C. Any payment made pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a reserve account in the general fund to be used only for the development or acquisition of very-low-, low-, and moderate-income housing. (Ord. 816 § 4, 2018; Ord. 683 § 69, 2008; Ord. 595 § 2, 2003; Ord. 424, 1993)

17.26.400 Appeal for adjustment, reduction or waiver.
A. An applicant of any project subject to the requirements of this article may appeal to the City Council for a reduction, adjustment or waiver of the requirements based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impact of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the inclusionary requirement.

B. Any such appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk not later than 10 days before the first public hearing on any discretionary approval or permit for the development, or if no such discretionary approval or permit is required, or if the action complained of occurs after the first public hearing on such permit or approval, then the approval shall be filed within 10 days after payment of the fees objected to. The appeal shall set forth in detail the factual and legal basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The City Council shall consider the appeal at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing within 60 days after the filing of the appeal, whichever is later. The appellant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to support the appellant’s position. The decision of the City Council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment, or reduction of the fee or inclusionary requirement. (Ord. 701 § 5, 2009; Ord. 642 § 1, 2006)

Article IV. Requests for Reasonable Accommodation under the Fair Housing Act

17.26.500 Purpose.
This article provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures. (Ord. 699 § 2, 2009)

17.26.510 Definitions.
As used in this article:

“Acts” means the federal Fair Housing Amendments Acts of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act.

“Applicant” means an individual who files an application for reasonable accommodation under this article.

“Individual with a disability” means any person who has a medical condition, physical disability, or mental disability as those terms are defined in the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (California Government Code Section 12900 et seq.). (Ord. 699 § 2, 2009)

17.26.520 Applicability.
A. A request for reasonable accommodation to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability may be made by any person, when the application of a requirement of a zoning or land use regulation or other City requirement, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities.

B. A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. This article is intended to provide for minor structural modifications and/or regulatory exceptions.

C. A reasonable accommodation cannot waive a requirement for a conditional use permit or development review permit when otherwise required, or result in approval of a use otherwise prohibited by the City’s land use and zoning regulations.

D. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require the City to waive or reduce development or building fees associated with the granting of a reasonable accommodation request.

E. A reasonable accommodation may be granted in compliance with this article without the need for approval of a variance in compliance with Chapter 17.50 PMC.

F. A request for reasonable accommodation shall comply with PMC 17.26.530 (Application requirements). (Ord. 699 § 2, 2009)

17.26.530 Application requirements.
A. Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation requiring review by the Director shall be submitted in the form of an administrative remedy letter request to the Director and shall contain the information listed below. All other requests shall require the approval of a minor development review by the City Council pursuant to Chapter 17.52 PMC and shall contain the following information in addition to the submittal requirements for a minor development review:

1. The applicant’s name, address and phone number;

2. Applicant’s representative’s name, address and phone number (if applicable);

3. Address and/or assessor’s parcel number of the property for which the request is being made;

4. Name and address of the property owner and the property owner’s written consent to the application;

5. The current actual use of the property;

6. The basis of the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts;

7. The zoning provision, regulation or policy from which the reasonable accommodation is being requested;

8. The type of accommodation sought;

9. The reasons why the requested reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual; and

10. Copies of supportive information deemed necessary by the Department of Development Services to facilitate proper consideration of the request, consistent with the Acts.

B. Review with Other Land Use Applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (including, but not limited to, conditional use permit, minor conditional use permit, development review, minor development review, general plan amendment, zone change, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by this section together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval.

C. Application Fee. The application fee for a request for reasonable accommodation shall be the same as the fee for an administrative remedy letter or minor development review, as appropriate, as contained on the City’s master fee schedule unless the request is being made concurrently with an application for some other discretionary approval, in which case, the applicant shall pay only the required application fee for the discretionary approval. (Ord. 699 § 2, 2009)

17.26.540 Approval authority, notice and decision.
A. Approval Authority.

1. Director. The Director of Development Services, or designee, has the authority to review and decide upon requests for reasonable accommodation, including whether the applicant is a disabled person within the meaning of this article, except as noted in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

2. City Council. The City Council has the authority to review and decide upon requests for reasonable accommodation, including whether the applicant is a disabled person within the meaning of this article, when a reasonable accommodation request entails new construction or the expansion of an existing structure that would otherwise require the approval of a variance pursuant to Chapter 17.50 PMC or where a modification to a grading standard is requested.

B. Notice. A notice to the immediately adjacent property owners is required at least 10 days in advance of a decision of the Director or a meeting of the City Council unless the request is being made concurrently with an application for discretionary approval in which case the notice shall be as required pursuant to that discretionary approval.

C. Decision. The Director shall make a written determination within 45 days of the application being deemed complete and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in compliance with PMC 17.26.550 (Findings and conditions). If the application is reviewed by the City Council, the City Council shall consider an application at the next reasonably available public meeting after an application has been deemed complete. A decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application shall be made in compliance with the findings set forth in PMC 17.26.550 (Findings and conditions). (Ord. 699 § 2, 2009)

17.26.550 Findings and conditions.
A. Findings. The written decision to approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

1. Whether the housing in the request will be used by an individual with a disability under the Acts;

2. Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts;

3. Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City;

4. Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a City program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning;

5. Potential impacts on surrounding uses;

6. Physical attributes of the property and structures; and

7. Whether there are other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit.

B. Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the review authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection A of this section. The reviewing authority may condition the approval on any or all of the following, or other conditions as deemed appropriate.

1. Removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable financial burden, when the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists;

2. Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists;

3. Recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the accommodating feature once the need for it no longer exists;

4. Measures to reduce the impact on surrounding uses;

5. Identification of other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit; and

6. Other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 699 § 2, 2009)

17.26.560 Appeal of determination.
A determination to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 2.20 PMC. Decisions of the City Council are final. (Ord. 699 § 2, 2009)

Article V. Affordable Housing Incentives

17.26.600 Purpose and general plan consistency.
It is the goal of the City to provide adequate and appropriate housing opportunities for the needs of, and affordable to, current and future residents. The purpose of this article is to implement the housing element of the general plan; implement Sections 65915 through 65917 of the California Government Code; and provide incentives to developers for the production of housing affordable to very low-, lower-, and moderate-income households, and senior citizens and for the provision of child care facilities. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.610 Definitions.
As used in this article:

“Affordable housing cost” means the allowable housing expenses paid by a qualifying household that does not exceed a specified fraction of the gross monthly income, adjusted for household size and as established in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Affordable rent” means the allowable rental housing expenses paid by a qualifying household that does not exceed a specified fraction of gross monthly income adjusted for household size and as established by Section 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Allowable housing expense” means the total monthly or annual recurring expenses required of a household to obtain shelter. For a for-sale unit, allowable housing expenses include loan principal, loan interest, property and mortgage insurance, property taxes, homeowner’s association dues and a reasonable allowance for utilities. For a rental unit, allowable housing expenses include rent and a reasonable allowance for utilities.

“Child care facility” means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers.

“Concession” means any of the following:

1. A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements, and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.

2. Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located.

3. Other regulatory concessions or incentives proposed by the applicant or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

“Condominium project” means a project as defined by California Civil Code Section 1351(f), as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 1351(f).

“Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of application by the applicant to the City. The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary in accordance with applicable provisions of this article.

“Development standard” means any site or construction condition, including, but not limited to, a height limitation, a setback requirement, a floor area ratio, an on-site open space requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, charter, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation.

“Housing development” means a development project for five or more residential units and includes a subdivision or planned community or condominium project, approved by the City, consisting of residential units or unimproved residential lots and includes either: (1) a project that substantially rehabilitates and converts an existing commercial building to residential use, or (2) the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in Government Code Section 65863.4(d), where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

Incentive. See “Concession.”

“Lower-income household” means households of lower income as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. At the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, a household whose median income is equal to or less than 80 percent of the area median income is lower income, and is considered to be able to afford rent that does not exceed 30 percent of 80 percent of the area median income.

“Maximum allowable residential density” means the density allowed under the zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan, or if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range and land use element of the general plan applicable to the project. Where the density allowed under the zoning ordinance is inconsistent with the density allowed under the land use element of the general plan, the general plan density shall prevail.

“Moderate-income household” means households of moderate income as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code. At the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, a household whose median income is equal to or less than 120 percent of the area median income is moderate income, and is considered to be able to afford rent that does not exceed 30 percent of 120 percent of the area median income.

“Planned development” means a project as defined by California Civil Code Section 1351(k), as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 1351(k).

“Qualifying resident” means a resident as defined by California Civil Code Section 51.3 as the same may be amended from time to time, or any state law replacing Section 51.3.

“Senior citizen housing development” means a development as defined by Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the California Civil Code, or mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the California Civil Code.

“Specific adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or general plan land use designation shall not constitute a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety.

“Target dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit that will be offered for rent or sale exclusively to and which shall be affordable to the designated income group or qualified resident, as required by this article.

“Target income level” means the income standards for very low, lower and moderate income levels within San Diego County as determined annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

“Very low-income household” means households of very low income as defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. At the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, a household whose median income is equal to or less than 50 percent of the area median income is very low income, and is considered to be able to afford rent that does not exceed 30 percent of 50 percent of the area median income. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.620 Administration.
A. Applicability. The provisions established by this article apply to all applications for density bonuses and concessions and incentives made pursuant to Section 65915 of the California Government Code.

B. Application. All affordable housing projects proposing to utilize the density bonus, concession or incentive provisions of this article shall be required, at a minimum, to submit a development review application. For moderate income household projects, a specific plan shall also be required. A development review or specific plan shall be used to waive any development standards that would otherwise serve to prohibit the implementation of this article. The granting of a density bonus, concession or incentive consistent with this article shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. In addition to the standard application submittal requirements, the following additional information shall be provided with any density bonus request:

1. The total number of requested housing units above the amount allowed by the existing zoning and any additional incentives being requested.

2. The number of affordable units by number of bedrooms and income group to be provided by the project.

3. The term of affordability for the affordable units.

4. The standards for maximum qualifying incomes for affordable units.

5. The process to be used to verify tenant/homeowner incomes.

6. The process for monitoring the continued affordability of the units.

7. How vacancies will be marketed and filled.

8. Restrictions and enforcement mechanisms in the event of failure to maintain affordability provisions.

9. The type and justification for the specific concession(s) or incentive(s) the applicant is seeking, information regarding the concession(s) or incentive(s), and to request, if desired, to meet with the City regarding the concession or incentive request.

10. Any other provisions deemed necessary by the City. (Ord. 741 § 2, 2012; Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.630 Qualifications for density bonus and concession(s) or incentive(s).
A. The City shall grant one density bonus, as specified in PMC 17.26.640, and concessions or incentives, as described in PMC 17.26.680, when an applicant seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this article, that will contain at least one of the following:

1. Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low-income households.

2. Ten percent of the total units of the housing development for lower-income households.

3. A senior citizen housing development.

4. Ten percent of the total units of a condominium project or planned development as affordable housing units affordable to moderate-income households; provided, that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase subject to the restrictions specified in this article.

B. As used in subsection A of this section, the term “total units” does not include units permitted by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this section or any other local law granting a greater density bonus.

C. Each applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this article shall elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section. Each housing development is entitled to only one density bonus, which may be selected based on the percentage of either very low-income affordable housing units, lower-income affordable housing units or moderate-income affordable housing units, or the development’s status as a senior citizen housing development. Density bonuses from more than one category may not be combined. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.640 Specified density bonus percentages.
A. Only housing developments consisting of five or more dwelling units that comply with PMC 17.26.630 are eligible for the density bonus percentages provided by this article. For the purposes of this section, density bonus shall mean a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of application by the applicant to the City. The density bonus is based on the percentage of affordable units as indicated in the tables in this section. The percentage of affordable units shall be determined prior to applying the density bonus. The applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus.

B. Density Bonus for Very Low-Income Units. If the housing development provides five to 11 percent of the total housing units for very low-income households, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

Density Bonus for Very Low-Income Units

Percentage of Very Low-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus over the Maximum Allowable Residential Density

5

20

6

22.5

7

25

8

27.5

9

30

10

32.5

11

35

C. Density Bonus for Lower-Income Units. If the housing development provides 10 to 20 percent of the total housing units for low-income households, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

Density Bonus for Lower-Income Units

Percentage of Lower-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus over the Maximum Allowable Residential Density

10

20

11

21.5

12

23

13

24.5

14

26

15

27.5

16

29

17

30.5

18

32

19

33.5

20

35

D. Density Bonus for Senior Citizen Housing Development. If the development is a senior citizen housing development, the density bonus shall be 20 percent of the number of senior housing units.

E. Density Bonus for Moderate-Income Units. If the housing development provides 10 to 40 percent of the total housing units of a condominium project or planned development affordable to moderate-income households and all the units of the development are offered to the public for purchase subject to the restrictions specified in PMC 17.26.710, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

Density Bonus for Moderate-Income Units

Percentage Moderate-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus over the Maximum Allowable Residential Density

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35

F. An applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than that to which the applicant is entitled to under this article. All density bonus calculations resulting in a fractional number shall be rounded upwards to the next whole number.

G. For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower-income households are located. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.650 Donation of land for very low-income housing.
A. Density Bonus for Land Donation. When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the City or another developer that is to be used to develop housing for very low-income households, the applicant shall be entitled to density bonus above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the entire residential development as noted in the table below, provided the conditions contained in subsection B of this section are met:

Density Bonus for Land Donation

Percentage Very Low-Income Units With Land Donation

Percentage Density Bonus over the Maximum Allowable Residential Density

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35

The density bonus noted in the table above shall be in addition to any density bonus granted pursuant to PMC 17.26.630, up to a maximum combined density increase of 35 percent, if an applicant seeks both the increase pursuant to this section and PMC 17.26.630. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the City’s authority to require an applicant to donate land as a condition of development.

B. An applicant shall be eligible for the density bonus described in subsection A of this section if all of the following conditions are met:

1. The applicant donates and transfers land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application.

2. The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than 10 percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development.

3. The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned with appropriate development standards for development at the density described in Section 65583.2(c)(3) of the California Government Code, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

4. The transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low-income housing units on the transferred land, not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application, except that the local government may subject the proposed development to subsequent development review to the extent authorized by Section 65583.2(i) of the California Government Code if the design is not reviewed by the City prior to the time of transfer.

5. The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with PMC 17.26.710, which shall be recorded on the property at the time of the transfer.

6. The land is transferred to the local agency or to a housing developer approved by the City. The City may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to a developer.

7. The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the City agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

8. A proposed source of funding for the very low-income units shall be identified not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.660 Bonus and incentives for housing with child care facilities.
A. When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of PMC 17.26.630 and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the project, the City shall grant either of the following if requested by the developer:

1. An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility; or

2. An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

B. A housing development shall be eligible for the density bonus or concession described in this section if the City, as a condition of approving the housing development, requires all of the following to occur:

1. The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable pursuant to PMC 17.26.710.

2. Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low-income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low-income households, lower-income households, or moderate- income households pursuant to PMC 17.26.630.

C. Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession or incentive for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities.

D. The application and review process for the provision of child care facilities and related density bonus or concessions or incentives is set forth in PMC 17.26.620. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.670 Residential condominium conversions.
A. The City shall grant either a density bonus of 25 percent or in-lieu incentive(s) of equivalent financial value to an applicant or developer proposing to convert apartments to condominiums pursuant to PMC Title 16, and who agrees to provide either of the following:

1. A minimum 33 percent of the total units of the housing development as restricted and affordable to persons and families of very low, lower, or moderate income; or

2. A minimum of 15 percent of the total units of the housing development as restricted and affordable to persons and families of lower-income households.

B. An applicant proposing to convert apartments to condominiums shall be ineligible for a density bonus or in-lieu incentive(s) under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or in-lieu incentive(s) were previously provided under this article.

C. In determining the number of density bonus dwelling units to be granted pursuant to the standards of this section, the number of existing apartment units within the structure or structures proposed for conversion shall be multiplied by 0.25. Any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

D. In determining the number of target dwelling units to be reserved pursuant to the standards of this section, the number of existing apartment units within the structure or structures proposed for conversion shall be multiplied by 0.33 for moderate- or lower-income units or 0.15 for lower- or very low-income units. Any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

E. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units, which is equal to 33 percent or 15 percent of the total units of the housing development.

F. In cases where a density increase of less than 25 percent is requested, no reduction will be allowed in the number of target dwelling units required.

G. A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the density bonus approval. The density bonus housing agreement shall be consistent with PMC 17.26.720.

H. Upon application by a developer pursuant to this title, the final decision-making authority of the City shall grant either a density bonus and at least a concession or incentive, or in-lieu incentive(s) of equivalent financial value, to qualified lower-income and/or moderate-income housing developments unless specific findings are made pursuant to California Government Code Section 65589.5(d).

I. The value of each incentive will vary from project to project; therefore, additional incentives or in-lieu concession(s) or incentive(s) shall be determined on a case-by-case basis.

J. This section shall not limit or require the City to provide direct financial incentives or publicly owned land for the housing development, or to waive fees or dedication requirements. All concessions or incentives are to be negotiated between the City and the developer.

K. It is the exclusive prerogative of the City to offer in-lieu concession(s) or incentive(s) of equivalent financial value, based upon the land cost per dwelling unit, instead of a density bonus and at least one additional incentive.

L. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the City to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.680 Incentive(s) and concession(s).
A. An applicant for a density bonus may also submit to the City a proposal for specific concession(s) or incentive(s) in exchange for the provision of affordable housing units in accordance with this article. All requests for concessions or incentives in association with applications for a density bonus are subject to PMC 17.26.630. Applicants may request a meeting with the City to discuss requests pursuant to this section.

B. The City shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following:

1. The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code;

2. The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to very low-, lower- or moderate-income households; or

3. The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law.

C. If the conditions of PMC 17.26.630 are met by an applicant making a request pursuant to this section, the City shall grant the applicant the following number of concessions or incentives:

1. One incentive or concession for projects that include at least 10 percent of the total units affordable to lower-income households, at least five percent for very low-income households, or at least 10 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.

2. Two concessions or incentives for projects that include at least 20 percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least 10 percent very low-income households, or at least 20 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.

3. Three concessions or incentives for projects that include at least 30 percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least 15 percent for very low-income households, or at least 30 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.

The requirements to qualify for concessions or incentives are summarized in the following table:

Summary of Requirements to Qualify for
Concessions or Incentives

Income Category

Percentage of Units Needed to Qualify for Concessions or Incentives

Very low income (rental)

5%

10%

15%

Lower income (rental)

10%

20%

30%

Moderate income (for-sale common interest development only)

10%

20%

30%

Allowable number of incentives

1

2

3

D. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the City to grant a concession or incentive that has a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

E. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the City to grant a concession or incentive that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

F. Nothing in this section shall limit or require the provisions of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land by the City, or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.690 Waiver or modification of development standards.
A. An applicant may submit to the City a proposal for the waiver, modification or reduction of development standards that will otherwise physically preclude the construction of a development meeting the criteria of PMC 17.26.630 at the densities or with the concession(s) or incentive(s) permitted by this article. The applicant may also request a meeting with the City to discuss such waiver, modification or reduction.

B. In order to obtain the waiver, modification or reduction in development standards, the applicant shall show that the development standards will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of PMC 17.26.630, at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this article.

C. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the City to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

D. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the City to waive or reduce development standards that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, or to grant any waiver or reduction that would be contrary to state or federal law.

E. A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of concessions or incentives to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to PMC 17.26.680. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.700 Parking standards.
A. A developer may request that the parking standards list in this section be applied if the housing development meets any of the criteria in PMC 17.26.630. If requested, the City shall grant the following maximum parking ratios, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, which shall apply to the entire development, not just the restricted affordable units, when requested by the developer:

1. Zero to one bedroom dwelling unit: one on-site parking space.

2. Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces.

3. Four or more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces.

B. If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.

C. These parking standards may be granted when requested by a developer even if no density bonus is requested; provided, that all the criteria of PMC 17.26.630 are met. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.710 Continued affordability.
A. An applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure, continued affordability of all very low- and lower-income units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for a period of 30 years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Rents for the very low- and lower-income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent. Owner-occupied affordable housing units shall be available at an affordable housing cost.

B. An applicant shall agree, and the City shall ensure, that the initial occupants of moderate-income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a condominium project in the planned development are persons and families of moderate income and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost. The City shall enforce an equity-sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source law. The following shall apply to the equity-sharing agreement:

1. Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The City shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which amount shall be used within five years for any of the purposes that promote home ownership as described in Section 33334.2(e) of the Health and Safety Code.

2. For purposes of this subsection, the City’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

3. For purposes of this subsection, the City’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the City’s initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

17.26.720 Density bonus, incentive or concession housing agreement required.
A. Applicants/developers requesting a density bonus, concession or incentive shall demonstrate compliance with this article by the preparation and approval of a density bonus, incentive or concession housing agreement (agreement). The terms of the agreement shall be subject to review by the Director of Development Services, the Director of Redevelopment Services and the City Attorney.

B. Following execution of the agreement by the applicant and the City, the completed agreement, or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded. The conditions contained in the agreement shall be filed and recorded as a deed restriction on the parcel or parcels designated for the construction of target units at the time of final map recordation, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for such parcels or units. The agreement shall be binding upon all future owners and successors in interest for this property, which is the subject of the housing development application.

C. At a minimum, the agreement shall include the following:

1. The total number of units proposed within the housing development, including the number of density bonus units and the number of target units;

2. A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the housing development, and the standards for determining the corresponding affordable rent or affordable sale price and housing cost;

3. The location, unit sizes (square feet) and number of bedrooms of target units;

4. Tenure of use restrictions for target units of at least 30 years;

5. A schedule for completion and occupancy of the target units;

6. A description of any additional incentives and/or financial assistance being provided by the City;

7. A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the City may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement);

8. Where applicable, tenure and conditions establishing rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, setting rental rates, filling vacancies, and operating and maintaining units for rental target dwelling units; and

9. Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this article.

D. In the case of for-sale housing developments, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the initial sale and use of target units during the applicable use restriction period.

1. Target units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to and occupied by eligible very low-, lower-income, or, in the case of a condominium or planned development, moderate-income households at an affordable sales price and housing cost, or to qualified senior citizen residents (i.e., maintained as senior citizen housing).

2. The initial purchase of each target unit shall execute an instrument or agreement, approved by the City Attorney, restricting the sale of the target unit in accordance with this article during the applicable use restriction period. Such instrument or agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the target unit and shall contain provisions as the City may require ensuring continued compliance with this article and the state density bonus law.

E. In the case of rental housing developments, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of target units during the use restriction period:

1. The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies and the proper management and maintenance of target units for qualified tenants;

2. Provisions requiring owners to verify tenant incomes and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this article; and

3. Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the City, which includes the name, address and income of each person occupying target units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each target unit. (Ord. 701 § 6, 2009)

Article VI. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone

17.26.730 Purpose.
The purpose of the affordable housing overlay zone is to establish a process and an area that will permit the construction of residential development at densities beyond that allowed by the current/underlying zone. The provisions of the overlay zone apply specifically to affordable housing. The intent of the affordable housing overlay zone is to:

A. Encourage the development of affordable housing that is compatible and complementary to its neighborhood context, is located near essential services and amenities, and allows for or encourages neighborhood walkability.

B. Provide various development incentives to encourage affordable housing that is consistent with State programs and the housing element of the Poway general plan.

C. Ensure that adequate affordable housing is provided to very low, low, moderate, and above moderate income families consistent with the City’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA).

D. Provide the opportunity to preserve and cluster parcels that will assist in creating affordable housing while still permitting the property owner the ability to develop to the underlying zone. (Ord. 741 § 3, 2012)

17.26.740 Applicability.
A. Affordable housing overlay zone shall be applied to the areas and/or parcels identified in the housing element of the Poway general plan. The list of overlay properties identified in the housing element may be modified by the City Council from time to time to meet future Regional Housing Needs Allocation unit requirements.

B. The affordable housing overlay designation may be attached to property within any land use category, including nonresidential categories, but not in any zone that would conflict with City Proposition FF.

C. The official zoning map of the City of Poway shall at all times identify and include the location of areas and/or parcels subject to the affordable housing overlay, and is further incorporated into this article by this reference. (Ord. 741 § 3, 2012)

17.26.750 Definitions.
“Affordable housing-low” (AH-L) means an overlay zone with housing unit densities of up to 30 dwelling units per acre and typically requires an income qualification of less than 80 percent of San Diego County’s area median income. The provisions of the AH-L apply specifically to affordable housing. Unless otherwise specified, all other development regulations shall comply with the standards of the underlying zoning as described in the PMC, and any applicable specific plans.

“Affordable housing-moderate” (AH-M) means an overlay zone with housing unit densities of up to 30 dwelling units per acre and typically requires an income qualification between 81 and 120 percent of San Diego County’s area median income. Housing typically developed under this overlay is detached and/or attached single-family homes. The provisions of the AH-M apply specifically to affordable housing. Unless otherwise specified, all other development regulations shall comply with the standards of the underlying zoning as described in the PMC and any applicable specific plans.

Other related definitions are included by reference in PMC 17.26.100, 17.26.510 and 17.26.610. (Ord. 741 § 3, 2012)

17.26.760 Permitted uses.
Permitted uses allowed within the AH-L or AH-M overlay zone include multifamily residential, single-family, and attached single-family residential units. Permitted accessory uses shall be associated with the AH residential development and may include, but are not limited to, such amenities as community buildings, playgrounds, tot lots, recreation areas, works of art, and gardens. (Ord. 741 § 3, 2012)

17.26.770 Development standards.
A. Residential projects developed under the provisions of this chapter shall be designed and processed in the time and manner set forth below.

1. General Guidelines. The affordable units required under this section:

a. May either be rental or for-sale dwellings;

b. Should be comparable in the number of bedrooms, exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to nonrestricted units;

c. Should be of good quality and are consistent with contemporary standards for new housing;

d. May be clustered or dispersed within a residential development and/or mixed use project; and

e. Shall be designed to be aesthetically pleasing and consistent with the surrounding development and the City’s architectural and design standards referenced in the Poway General Plan and/or relevant specific plan.

2. Development Criteria.

a. AH-L sites shall use the baseline development and performance standards consistent with the residential apartment (RA) zone with specific attention to PMC 17.08.080, 17.08.160, 17.08.200*, 17.08.220, and 17.08.230.

b. AH-M sites shall meet the baseline development and performance standards consistent with the residential condominium (RC) zone with specific attention to PMC 17.08.070, 17.08.160, 17.08.200*, 17.08.220, and 17.08.230.

3. Development Concessions. The type, nature and qualifications for the concessions shall be consistent with the standards set forth in PMC 17.26.680 through 17.26.720.

B. Application Requirements. Properties carrying the AH-L or AH-M designator may be developed either according to the underlying zoning or by the development standards established for the affordable housing overlay zone.

1. For properties carrying the AH-L designator, densities of up to 30 dwelling units per acre shall be allowed. The actual number of dwelling units proposed on each AH-L designated parcel is identified in the housing element. The project shall require the submittal of a development review application. The project shall comply with the related development standards contained within this chapter and relative sections of the development code.

2. For properties carrying the AH-M designator, densities of up to 30 dwelling units per acre shall be allowed. The project shall require the submittal of a development review application. A specific plan must also be prepared for each area carrying the AH-M designator. The specific plan must specify the income group or groups being targeted by each allowed density and development concession. The specific plan must also include conditions that permit the parcel(s) to develop to higher densities, including guarantees of affordability to the specified income categories and any design criteria necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding development. The actual number of dwelling units proposed on each AH-M designated parcel is identified in the housing element.

3. All projects shall provide trash and laundry facilities adequately sized and located to serve the needs of residents as provided in PMC 17.08.200* and 17.08.220.

4. All projects which do not have an on-site manager shall provide a posted phone number of the project owner or off-site manager for emergencies or maintenance problems.

C. As long-term operation and maintenance costs directly affect rental costs, solar power, low-flow water devices, and energy-efficient building material and lighting shall be incorporated into each new AH-L and AH-M project to the maximum extent economically and aesthetically feasible. Exterior landscaping shall also be designed to be low-maintenance and drought tolerant.

D. For safety purposes no building, except as hereafter provided, shall be located closer than five feet from any interior vehicular or pedestrian way, court, plaza, open parking lot, or any other surfaced area reserved for public use or for use in common by residents of the planned development. Such setback shall generally be measured from the nearest edge of a surfaced area; provided, however, that where no sidewalk exists in conjunction with a public or private street, such setback shall be measured from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way or private road easement.

E. All public streets within or abutting the planned development may be dedicated and shall be improved to City specifications for the particular classification of street. When the developer desires to retain any streets within the development as private streets, such streets shall be irrevocably offered for dedication and maintained for their intended purpose by means acceptable to the City Council. Other forms of access, such as pedestrian ways, courts, plazas, driveways, or open parking lots shall not be offered for dedication.

F. On-site resident amenities shall be provided with each AH-L or AH-M development and shall include, but not be limited to, community buildings, common open space areas, tot lots or playgrounds, outdoor barbeques, and family picnic areas.

G. Where feasible, each unit shall include patios or balconies and a minimum of 250 cubic feet of lockable enclosed storage space unless individually waived by the City Council.

H. The parking requirements for each unit shall initially be based on the parking standards set forth in PMC 17.08.160. Concessions from these standards may be granted by the City Council pursuant to PMC 17.26.690. (Ord. 741 § 3, 2012)

*    Code reviser’s note: As provided in Ordinance No. 741, adopted 4/17/12; Section 17.08.200 was repealed by Ordinance No. 701, adopted December 15, 2009.

Article VII. Homeless Shelters

17.26.780 Purpose.
It is the goal of the City to provide adequate and appropriate housing opportunities for the needs of, and affordable to, all residents. The purpose of this article is to implement the Housing Element of the General Plan and implement Section 65583 of the California Government Code, which requires the City to provide the ability to accommodate at least one year-round shelter for the unsheltered homeless population of Poway. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2017)

17.26.790 Definitions.
“Homeless” means any of the following:

A. An individual or family who lacks a fixed, regular and adequate nighttime residence, meaning:

1. An individual or family with a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private place not designed for, nor ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings, including a car, park, abandoned building, bus or train station, airport, or camping ground;

2. An individual or family living in a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designated to provide temporary living arrangements including congregate shelters, transitional housing, and hotels and motels paid for by charitable organizations or by Federal, State or local government programs for low-income individuals; or

3. An individual who is exiting an institution where he or she resided for 90 days or less and who resided in an emergency shelter or in a place not meant for human habitation immediately before entering that institution;

B. An individual or family in imminent danger of losing their primary nighttime residence; provided, that:

1. The primary nighttime residence will be lost within 14 days of the date of application for homeless assistance;

2. No subsequent residence has been identified; and

3. The individual or family lacks the resources or support networks (e.g., family, friends, faith-based or other social networks) needed to obtain other permanent housing;

C. Unaccompanied youth under 25 years of age, or families with children and youth, who do not otherwise qualify as homeless under this definition, but who:

1. Are defined as homeless under any State or Federal act, statute or regulation;

2. Have not had a lease, ownership interest, or occupancy agreement in permanent housing at any time during the 60 days immediately preceding the date of the application for homeless assistance;

3. Have experienced persistent instability as measured by two moves or more during the 60-day period immediately preceding the date of applying for homeless assistance; and

4. Can be expected to continue in such status for an extended period of time because of chronic disabilities, chronic physical health or mental health conditions, substance addiction, histories of domestic violence, childhood abuse (including neglect), the presence of a child or youth with a disability, or two or more barriers to employment, which include the lack of a high school degree or General Education Development (“GED”), illiteracy, low English proficiency, a history of incarceration, or detention for criminal activity, and a history of unstable employment; or

D. Any individual or family who:

1. Is fleeing, or is attempting to flee, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or other dangerous or life threatening conditions that relate to violence against the individual or a family member, including a child, which has either taken place within the individual’s or family’s primary nighttime residence or has made the individual or family afraid to return to their primary nighttime residence;

2. Has no other residence; and

3. Lacks the resources or support networks (e.g., family, friends, faith-based or other social networks) to obtain other permanent housing.

“Homeless shelter” means residential units managed by an agency whose primary purpose is to provide temporary shelter and social services for families and/or individuals who are homeless or have been involuntarily displaced from their previous residence. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2017)

17.26.800 Applicability.
A. Homeless shelters shall only be considered in the residential apartment (RA) zone.

B. A homeless shelter may be granted in compliance with this article without the need for approval of a discretionary permit by the City.

C. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require the City to waive or reduce development or building fees associated with the granting of approval of a homeless shelter. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2017)

17.26.810 Permitted uses.
Permitted land uses include those listed in the land use matrix in the PMC as permitted, accessory or conditional in the underlying zone district. Homeless shelters are considered a permitted use in the RA zone only. Subject to the approval of the Director of the Development Services Department, accessory uses are permitted that are complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, a residential apartment development, and are consistent with the uses and requirements set forth in Chapter 17.08 PMC as they relate to the RA zone. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2017)

17.26.820 Development standards.
The purpose of these standards is to ensure the development of homeless shelters does not adversely impact adjacent parcels or the surrounding neighborhood, and shall be developed in a manner that protects the health, safety, and general welfare of the nearby residents and businesses, while providing for the housing needs of a needy segment of the community. Unless otherwise specified, homeless shelters shall follow the development standards of the RA zone.

A. Qualifications. The applicant shall be a qualified agency with knowledge, understanding, and demonstrable experience in the operation and management of a homeless shelter.

B. Management Plan. The applicant shall prepare and submit for approval to the City a written management plan including, as applicable, provisions for staff training; neighborhood outreach; security; screening of tenants to ensure compatibility with services provided at the facility; training, counseling, and treatment programs for tenants; and the tenant’s ability to transport, or have access to public transportation to those locations where off-site services are provided.

C. Client Screening. The applicant shall establish a screening process to ensure that proposed tenants meet the minimum qualifications as homeless as defined in PMC 17.26.790.

D. Maximum Client Stay. Tenants shall be limited to a maximum stay of no more than six months.

E. Maximum Unit Density. Homeless shelters shall be subject to the underlying zoning district’s maximum unit density standard regarding units per acre. The total number of beds in all shelters shall not exceed twice the number of homeless people living in the City of Poway as identified in the most recent San Diego County Regional Task Force for the Homeless annual count.

F. Property Maintenance. The applicant shall ensure that the facility is clean and litter free at all times. The grounds shall be landscaped with materials that are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, and maintained in a trim- and weed-free state. The structure shall be painted and maintained such that it is compatible with structures existing in the surrounding neighborhood.

G. Shelter Operation. The buildings used to shelter the homeless shall comply with City, County and State building, fire and health codes, and must be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition at all times.

H. Intake Areas. The design of the facility shall denote the size and location of exterior and/or interior waiting and intake areas, if any.

I. Common Facilities. The development may provide one or more of the following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the tenants and staff:

1. Central cooking and dining rooms(s);

2. Recreation room;

3. Counseling center;

4. Child care facilities; and

5. Other support services.

J. Parking. Parking requirements shall be based on a demonstrated need and approved by the City and shall use, at a minimum, those standards identified for the RA zone.

K. Lighting. Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, be of an intensity compatible with the neighborhood, and consistent with PMC 17.08.220(L).

L. Laundry Facilities. Adequate laundry facilities or services shall be provided to serve the number of tenants within the facility. The number of washers and dryers shall be consistent with the ratio required by the RA zone.

M. Noise. Noise levels shall be regulated by provisions contained within the City of Poway noise ordinance.

N. Outdoor Activity. For the purposes of noise abatement in residential districts, organized outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

O. Shelters should be situated in close proximity to, and have convenient access to, public transportation, shopping, health care providers, and other services and facilities frequently utilized by the residents of the property.

P. Concentration of Uses. No more than one homeless shelter shall be permitted within a radius of 300 feet from another such shelter. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2017)

17.26.830 Guidelines and other development standards.
Residential projects developed under the provisions of this chapter shall be designed and processed in the time and manner set forth below.

A. General Guidelines. Homeless shelters proposed under this article:

1. Shall be comparable in the number of bedrooms, exterior appearance and overall quality of construction with surrounding apartment complexes and/or residences;

2. Shall be of good quality and be consistent with contemporary building standards for new housing;

3. Shall be built in conformance with the current building codes, including energy efficiency;

4. Shall be designed to be aesthetically pleasing and consistent with the City’s architectural and design standards referenced in the Poway General Plan and any relevant specific plan; and

5. Shall incorporate adequate security measures within the structure, parking lot and outdoor areas, such as appropriate fencing and cameras deemed necessary to ensure the safety of the tenants and employees within the homeless shelter, visitors, and those residing in adjoining residential units or complexes.

B. Other Property Development Standards. Homeless shelters proposed under this article shall:

1. Comply with PMC 17.08.160, Property development standards – General requirements; and

2. Comply, as appropriate, with PMC 17.08.220 (Property development standards – Special requirement for RC and RA zones).

Conversion of an existing apartment complex, duplex, or single-family home to a homeless shelter shall be in compliance with the aforementioned development standards. With the conversion of a single-family home to a homeless shelter building, occupancy and fire codes will limit the number of tenants. (Ord. 805 § 3, 2017)

Chapter 17.27
PAWN SHOPS
Sections:

17.27.010    Purpose.

17.27.020    Conditions.

17.27.010 Purpose.
In order to minimize the adverse effects that the operation of a pawn shop may have on the neighborhood or area in which it is located, the regulations set out in this chapter are established. (Ord. 368 § 2, 1992)

17.27.020 Conditions.
Pawn shops may be permitted only in the CB, Commercial Business zone, subject to the conditions listed in this section:

A. No pawn shop shall be located within 1,000 feet of any lot on which another pawn shop is located.

B. All pawn shops shall comply with the regulations of Chapter 5.32 PMC concerning secondhand dealers. (Ord. 773 § 14, 2015; Ord. 368 § 2, 1992)

Chapter 17.28
HOME OCCUPATIONS
Sections:

17.28.010    General requirements.

17.28.020    Cottage food businesses.

17.28.030    Exemption from payment of fee.

17.28.010 General requirements.
Home occupations may be permitted only when in compliance with the conditions listed in this chapter. Home occupations for cottage food businesses are permitted subject to the provisions listed in PMC 17.28.020. A permit must be issued by the Director of Development Services and, for cottage food businesses, the County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health, prior to operation of a home occupation. Unless exempt from payment as described in PMC 17.28.030, the fee shall be in accordance with those adopted by City Council resolution. The permit shall be issued for a term of 24 months.

A. There shall be no stock in trade or exterior storage of materials in the conduct of a home occupation.

B. A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling; if in an attached or a detached garage, shall not impede the use of said garage for vehicle storage.

C. Electrical or mechanical equipment which creates visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit shall be prohibited.

D. Only the residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home occupation.

E. There shall be no sale of goods on the premises.

F. The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not change the principal character or use of the dwelling unit involved.

G. There shall be no signs other than those permitted by this chapter.

H. The required residential off-street parking shall be maintained and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street.

I. A home occupation shall not create vehicular or pedestrian traffic in excess of that which is normal for the zone in which it is located.

J. Passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation. Passenger vehicles include motorcycles, automobiles, pickup trucks and vans.

K. Renewal of Existing Permit. All home occupation permits which are renewed shall be valid for a 24-month term unless otherwise revoked. Permits shall be required to be renewed before the expiration date shown on the permit. The City shall notify all permit holders at least 30 calendar days prior to the date of the renewal. (Ord. 773 § 15, 2015; Ord. 753 § 4, 2013)

17.28.020 Cottage food businesses.
The following regulations apply to a cottage food business:

A. Food and associated products shall be stored in the manner consistent with requirements of the County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health.

B. The business shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling; if in an attached or a detached garage, it shall not impede the use of said garage for vehicle storage.

C. Electrical or mechanical equipment which creates visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit shall be prohibited. All home/business improvements shall comply with the current fire, building, electrical, plumbing and health codes.

D. In addition to the residents of the dwelling unit, a cottage food business may employ one non-household member as an employee. Nonresident employees shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 40 hours per week maximum.

E. The business may offer direct sales from the residence/business. Food products sold from the residence shall be of the type and in the manner consistent with the class of operation permitted by the County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health. If direct sales are proposed at the site of the business, no customers shall be permitted to dine at the residence. The sale of cottage food business goods from the premises shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily.

F. The business shall not create noise, odors and/or smoke in such quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the site.

G. The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not change the principal character or use of the dwelling unit involved.

H. There shall be no signs other than those permitted by this chapter.

I. The required residential off-street parking shall be maintained and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such cottage food business shall be met off the street.

J. Deliveries shall not occur in any commercial vehicle between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; no more than one delivery vehicle may visit the site at a time, no more than three commercial vehicles may visit the site per day, and no more than 10 deliveries per week; all delivery vehicles must be limited to two axles and comply with local residential parking, stopping, noise, and size restrictions.

K. Renewal of Existing Permit. Home occupation permits used for cottage food businesses, which are renewed, shall be valid for a 24-month term unless otherwise revoked. Permits shall be required to be renewed before the expiration date shown on the permit. The City shall notify all permit holders at least 30 calendar days prior to the date of the renewal. In addition, all cottage food businesses are subject to obtaining applicable San Diego Department of Environmental Health permits, inspections, and fees.

L. A home occupation permit for a cottage food business is not transferable between: (1) persons; (2) locations; (3) change in class; and (4) types of distribution. (Ord. 773 § 15, 2015; Ord. 753 § 4, 2013)

17.28.030 Exemption from payment of fee.
A. Every person who is serving on active duty in the military, naval, or air service of the United States, or any spouse or registered domestic partner of a person who is serving on active duty in the military, naval, or air service of the United States, and who is a resident of this City may conduct a home occupation with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter without payment of any fee.

B. Every person who is honorably discharged or honorably relieved from the military, naval, or air service of the United States and who is a resident of this City may conduct a home occupation with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter without payment of any fee.

C. Claim for Exemption. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall (at the time of application for the permit) produce to the City his or her military identification, or military dependent identification, or a copy of his or her DD Form 214, or a copy of that person’s certificate of honorable discharge or honorable relief from duty. (Ord. 773 § 15, 2015)

Chapter 17.30
RECREATIONAL COURTS
Sections:

17.30.010    Generally.

17.30.020    Minimum standards required.

17.30.010 Generally.
The following regulations are established for the construction of recreational courts including but not limited to tennis, paddle tennis and other similar uses.

A. Unlighted private recreational courts may be permitted as an accessory use in single-family zones, subject to the standards contained in PMC 17.30.020 and to the approval of a minor development review by the Director of Development Services.

B. Private recreational courts with exterior lighting may be permitted as an accessory use in single-family zones subject to the approval of a minor conditional use permit and to required findings by the City Council in accordance with PMC 17.48.070.

C. Private recreational courts, lighted or unlighted, may be permitted as an accessory use in multifamily zones subject to the approval of a development review by the City Council.

D. Public or semipublic recreational courts may be approved in any zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit and to required findings by the City Council in accordance with PMC 17.48.070. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 206 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.2), 1983)

17.30.020 Minimum standards required.
Recreational courts shall meet the following minimum standards:

A. A maximum 10-foot-high fence (measured from the finished grade of the court) shall be allowed for private courts and a maximum 12-foot-high fence shall be allowed for commercial and public courts.

B. Setbacks for the court shall be:

1. Side yard, 10 feet;

2. Rear yard, 10 feet;

C. Maximum of eight lights permitted, height not to exceed 18 feet. All lights and light fixtures shall be certified by the installation contractor to:

1. Be designed, constructed, mounted and maintained such that the light source is cut off when viewed from any point above five feet measured at 10 feet from the edge of the court;

2. Be designed, constructed, mounted light shields installed and maintained such that the maximum illumination intensity measured at the property line shall not exceed one-half foot-candle above ambient light levels;

3. Be used only between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

D. The surface area of any recreational court shall be designed, painted, colored and/or textured to reduce the reflection from any light incident thereon.

E. The fencing, support posts, light poles and fixtures shall be painted a dark nonreflective color so as to reduce their overall visibility. Vinyl-coated chain link fencing with fence and light poles painted to match is acceptable.

F. Landscaping shall be installed between the fence and property line. It shall include fast-growing evergreen canopy type trees, planted one each adjacent to light poles so as to obscure views of the pole and light from neighboring properties. Dense screening planting is required to be installed in the setback area adjacent to the outside of the court fencing, to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services.

G. Light fixtures are restricted to 1,000 watt high-pressure sodium.

H. The City Council or Director of Development Services may require more stringent standards than the above in cases where extraordinary site conditions necessitate. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 461 § 2, 1996; Ord. 206 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.2), 1983)

Chapter 17.31
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA INSTALLATIONS
Sections:

17.31.010    Purposes.

17.31.020    Definitions.

17.31.030    Regulations for amateur radio antenna installations and permits required.

17.31.040    Applications for antenna permits.

17.31.050    Public notice.

17.31.060    Antenna permit findings.

17.31.070    Exempt antenna installations.

17.31.080    Maintenance and abandonment.

17.31.010 Purposes.
The purpose of the regulations contained in this chapter is as follows:

A. To preserve visual access to major natural features, such as the surrounding hillsides, and ensure that all public and private development is compatible with the unique natural and manmade resources that give Poway its charm and character.

B. To provide the minimum practicable regulations necessary to satisfy the aesthetic, health, safety, and welfare concerns that have prompted these minimal restrictions on amateur radio antenna installations.

C. To reasonably accommodate amateur radio communications, to constitute the minimum regulations necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, and to impose no unreasonable cost on the amateur radio operators.

D. To minimize the impact of the regulations on the right of individuals to engage in amateur radio antenna communication and to constitute the least intrusive means available to the City to mitigate potential adverse impacts on the safety and welfare of residents, and the quality and aesthetics of the community.

E. To avoid unreasonable limitation on amateur radio antenna communication and excessive costs associated with processing applications for permits and conditions imposed by those permits. (Ord. 771 § 8, 2014)

17.31.020 Definitions.
Whenever, in this chapter, the following terms are used they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.

A. “Amateur radio antenna” means any antenna that is used for the purpose of transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.

B. “Antenna support structure” means an antenna’s supporting mast or tower, if any.

C. “Amateur radio antenna installation” means a single structural unit which is comprised of the antenna support structure, antennas, and other communication-related appurtenances. (Ord. 771 § 8, 2014)

17.31.030 Regulations for amateur radio antenna installations and permits required.
Amateur radio antenna installations (i.e., antenna installations) may be installed, erected and maintained within all residential zoning districts in the City in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter. Unless specifically exempted pursuant to PMC 17.31.070, or otherwise specified herein, antenna installations shall comply with all of the following:

A. Height. Antenna installations over 65 feet in height shall require an antenna permit pursuant to PMC 17.31.040. Antenna installations up to 65 feet in height are permitted without the requirement to obtain an antenna permit and are subject to the regulations in subsections B and C of this section. For an antenna installation that is either mounted to any part of a building or mounted to the ground, height shall be measured from the ground level immediately adjacent to antenna installation to the highest point of the antenna installation.

B. Number. Unless exempted pursuant to PMC 17.31.070, a maximum of one antenna installation, which consists of an antenna support structure and antennas, is permitted per property. The single antenna installation may accommodate multiple antennas. Proposals for more than one antenna installation shall require an antenna permit pursuant to PMC 17.31.040.

C. Siting/Setbacks. Antenna installations may be mounted to any part of a building or mounted to the ground. No antenna installation shall be located within any front, street side, interior side, or rear building setback area that is required pursuant to the site’s underlying zoning designation. Additionally, in cases where the building has been situated a distance greater than the minimum front or street side setback, no antenna installation shall be located closer to the street than the building. Antennas that are attached to an antenna support structure may encroach into interior side and rear setback areas up to 50 percent of the required setback distance pursuant to the site’s underlying zoning designation. Proposals for antenna installations that do not comply with these provisions shall require an antenna permit pursuant to PMC 17.31.040.

D. Building Permit. A building permit may be required pursuant to the California Building Code as determined by the Building Official. (Ord. 771 § 8, 2014)

17.31.040 Applications for antenna permits.
Antenna installations that are greater than 65 feet in height, and/or do not comply with the provisions of PMC 17.31.030(B) and (C), require an antenna permit. Submittal of an antenna permit shall be on a form supplied by the Development Services Department and shall be accompanied by the following information and plans:

A. A site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned, showing the proposed location of the antenna installation in relation to property lines, setbacks, and any structures on the site, as well as the location of adjacent structures within 100 feet.

B. Specific details of any equipment associated with the antenna installation, such as footings, guy-wires and braces, including rooftop mounts, if applicable.

C. Elevations drawn to scale and dimensioned so as to fully describe the proposed antenna installation.

D. Written consent of the property owner.

E. A public notice package consisting of a map showing properties within a 500-foot radius of the site and a list of property owners. (Ord. 771 § 8, 2014)

17.31.050 Public notice.
A. For antenna installations up to 65 feet in height, which require a building permit, notice shall be provided to all property owners within 250 feet of the subject property. Notice shall be provided by the building permit applicant at the time the building permit application is submitted to the City. The applicant shall provide certification of the conducted notice to the City before the issuance of the building permit.

B. For antenna installations that require an antenna permit, the City Council shall calendar a public hearing on the application. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.46.050. (Ord. 771 § 8, 2014)

17.31.060 Antenna permit findings.
The City Council shall make the following findings before approving an antenna permit for an antenna installation greater than 65 feet in height and/or an antenna installation that does not comply with the provisions of PMC 17.31.030(B) and (C):

A. The design of the proposed antenna installation is the minimum necessary for the reasonable accommodation of the communication needs of the operator as set forth in Federal and/or State rules and regulations; and

B. There are no other feasible alternatives.

The applicant shall provide evidence necessary to document that the above findings can be met. (Ord. 771 § 8, 2014)

17.31.070 Exempt antenna installations.
The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

A. Antenna installations legally established prior to the effective date of this chapter. Any increase in height to an existing antenna installation shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter, including the requirement to obtain an antenna permit if the increased height is greater than 65 feet.

B. Any antenna installation that is six feet or less in any dimension and not located within any front yard or street side yard setback area.

C. Guy-wire supports for an antenna support structure, and not located within any front yard or street side yard setback area.

D. Wire antenna of gauge number 12 or less affixed to a structure, other antenna, or tree, and not located within any front yard or street side yard setback area.

E. One temporary, non-permanently affixed, ground-mounted antenna installation up to 20 feet in height which is not located within any setback area that is required pursuant to the site’s underlying zoning designation.

F. Building-mounted antenna installations up to 10 feet above the roofline, but no more than 35 feet in height with horizontal elements that are no greater than six feet. (Ord. 771 § 8, 2014)

17.31.080 Maintenance and abandonment.
A maintenance and removal agreement shall be executed by the property owner for any antenna installation that requires a building permit. No building permit shall be issued until such agreement has been executed. The agreement shall be a continuing condition of the building permit. The agreement shall also bind the property owner and their successors and assigns to the installation as follows:

A. Maintenance of the antenna installation to ensure compliance with the building permit and/or antenna permit.

B. Maintenance of the antenna installation in safe and good repair.

C. Removal of the antenna installation for failure to maintain the installation and/or upon its abandonment, as determined by the City Manager. Removal shall occur within 90 days of written notification to the property owner. (Ord. 771 § 8, 2014)

Chapter 17.32
KEEPING OF ANIMALS
Sections:

17.32.010    Keeping of large animals.

17.32.020    Keeping of small animals.

17.32.010 Keeping of large animals.
The following regulations are established for the keeping of large animals in residential rural and residential single-family zones pursuant to PMC 17.08.110(D). Noncompliance with these regulations may result in restrictions and/or the loss or partial loss of use of the property for this purpose.

A. Lot Size. All lots shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet for the keeping of large animals.

B. Number of Animals Allowed. The following numbers of animals are the maximum allowed unless a minor conditional use permit or conditional use permit is obtained pursuant to PMC 17.08.110(D):

Square Footage of Parcel

Maximum Permitted

In all residential zones:

 

10,000 to 15,000

2

15,001 to 17,000

3

17,001 to 20,000

4

20,001 to 25,000

5

25,001 to 30,000

6

In all zones except the RR-A and RR-B:

 

30,001 to 35,000

6

35,001 to 1 acre

6

Greater than 1 acre

6/acre to a maximum of 9 animals

In the RR-A and RR-B zones:

 

30,001 to 35,000

7

35,001 to 1 acre

8

Greater than 1 acre with minor conditional use permit or conditional use permit

10/acre

In determining the number of animals allowed, the following shall not be included in the acreage:

1. Floodways;

2. Open space and right-of-way easements.

The offspring of any animal will not be counted among the total animals permitted until such offspring reaches an age of one year.

C. Separation. The minimum distance by which an animal enclosure shall be separated from adjoining properties shall be the greatest of the following:

1. The distance from the nearest part of the animal enclosure to any building legally used for human habitation on adjoining property:

Where one to three horses are kept

35'

Where four to six horses are kept

50'

Where seven to nine horses are kept

60'

Where 10 or more horses are kept

as determined by conditional use permit

2. For enclosures under 1,152 square feet per large animal:

 

10 feet from property line

In all cases horses shall be kept so as to prevent them from causing damage to adjoining properties.

D. Setbacks. Keeping of such animals shall not be permitted in the required front and street side yard setback area.

E. Enclosures. Large animals shall be maintained in a corral or structure of design, materials, and construction sufficient to prevent the escape of the animal or animals enclosed. Electrically charged wires shall be used only to supplement other fences, and shall meet underwriter’s standards for electric fences. Special care shall be taken to ensure that stallions are provided with adequate fence enclosure to contain them within the boundaries of the owner’s property.

No structure or enclosure for the keeping of large domestic animals shall be constructed or maintained in any regular, intermittent, or seasonal watercourse.

Stables and barns shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the building code of the City. All buildings used for the keeping of animals and all corral or enclosure fences shall be constructed and maintained in a neat and orderly condition and kept in good repair. Landscaping or other screening techniques may be required as appropriate to assist in screening of stables, barns, corrals, and stored hay.

F. Disposal of Waste. Each property owner or lessee is responsible for the continuous maintenance of sanitary conditions which includes, but is not limited to, the cleaning of corrals, stables, barns and other areas to which animals have access. All wastes, including manure, urine and expended bedding, produced by said large animals shall be disposed of or treated on a regular basis so as to control flies and odor. Animal waste shall not be allowed to accumulate, run-off, or leach so as to create a nuisance or be offensive to other persons of reasonable sensitivities in the vicinity.

Manure piles shall be located in a safe area away from any water source and out of natural drainage channels. Manure storage areas shall be designed to drain away from adjacent properties and so as to prevent surface water from leaching into streams, ditches or groundwater. Manure may not be stockpiled in required side, rear, or front yard setback areas. Manure may be disposed of by removal, fertilizing or composting. If waste is to be composted or used for fertilizer, proper procedures must be used to control insects and to minimize offensive odors.

G. Fly Control. Property owners or lessees who keep large animals on their property shall carry out a positive program of fly control (i.e., through the use of traps, pesticides, etc.) when necessary to control the fly population.

H. Ponding. Each lot and structure shall be maintained so that there is no standing water or ponding within areas in which large domestic animals are kept.

I. Sanitation. All animals and all premises, enclosures or structures wherein animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and secure condition. (Ord. 674 § 36, 2008; Ord. 438 § 2, 1994; Ord. 432 § 2, 1994; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.3), 1983)

17.32.020 Keeping of small animals.
The following regulations are established for the keeping of small animals such as rabbits, poultry, pigs, goats, sheep, miniature horses, and the like pursuant to PMC 17.08.110(E).

A. The following minimum square footages and maximum number of small animals except for rabbits and poultry are allowable:

Square Footage

Maximum Permitted

10,001 to 15,000

6

15,001 to 20,001

12

20,001 to 25,000

15

25,001 to 30,000

18

30,001 to 35,000

21

35,001 to 1 acre

25

Greater than 1 acre

no limit

B. The following minimum square footages and maximum number of rabbits are allowable:

Square Footage

Maximum Permitted

6,000 to 20,000

6

20,000 to 1 acre

12

Greater than 1 acre

25 plus 12 additional per acre up to a maximum of 100

C. The following minimum square footages and maximum number of poultry are allowable:

Square Footage

Maximum Permitted

6,000 to 20,000

6

20,001 to 30,000

9

30,001 to 35,000

12

35,001 to 1 acre

15

Greater than 1 acre

25 plus 12 additional per acre up to a maximum of 100

D. No small animal shall be kept closer than 35 feet to an adjoining dwelling.

E. Keeping of small animals shall not be permitted in the required front, side, and street yard setbacks. On lots 30,000 square feet or greater, said animals may be kept within the required front yard setback area. The Director of Development Services may approve the keeping of said animals within the required front yard setback area on lots between 20,000 square feet and 30,000 square feet when the requester obtains the written permission of the adjoining property owner.

F. All small animals shall be provided with adequate enclosures, to contain them within the boundaries of the owner’s property.

G. All excrement produced by said small animals shall be dispersed on a regular basis so as to control flies and odor. (Ord. 674 § 37, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.4), 1983)

Chapter 17.33
STABLES
Sections:

17.33.010    Generally.

17.33.020    Development standards.

17.33.030    Conditions of approval.

17.33.040    Temporary use permits.

17.33.010 Generally.
Stables may be established in the residential zones upon approval of a conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit pursuant to PMC 17.08.110(D) and Chapter 17.48 PMC. All requirements of PMC 17.32.010, Keeping of large animals, shall apply. (Ord. 432 § 2, 1994)

17.33.020 Development standards.
In determining the improvements to be required in conjunction with the establishment of a stable the rural nature of the use shall be taken into consideration and urban standards will not necessarily be applied. If new structures are added which require a development review, then the public improvement requirements, shall be at least as extensive as would be required for the construction of a house in a rural residential zone. If no development review is required because the use will occupy only existing facilities, public improvement requirements shall be limited to those necessary to mitigate health and safety impacts of the use. Parking areas need not be paved. (Ord. 438 § 2, 1994; Ord. 432 § 2, 1994)

17.33.030 Conditions of approval.
Conditions imposed by the conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit shall be directed at ensuring the public health and safety and at obtaining compatibility of the use with the surrounding properties and preventing the creation of a condition which would be a nuisance. Such conditions may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation, and maintenance of the requested use, including but not limited to:

A. The number and location of animals;

B. The type and construction of corrals, stables, or other structures;

C. Fencing requirements;

D. Landscaping requirements;

E. Hours of operation for commercial facilities;

F. Lighting and the hours of illumination;

G. Nature, duration and frequency of special events. (Ord. 438 § 2, 1994; Ord. 432 § 2, 1994)

17.33.040 Temporary use permits.
If provided for in the conditional use permit authorizing the stable, special events, such as horse shows, may be approved from time to time by temporary use permits. Authorization for such special events shall be by temporary use permit as outlined in Chapter 17.26 PMC. (Ord. 432 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 17.34
KENNELS
Sections:

17.34.010    Generally.

17.34.020    Animal run requirements.

17.34.030    Dispersal of excrement.

17.34.040    Noise attenuation.

17.34.050    Runs or exercise area locations.

17.34.010 Generally.
The following regulations are established for operation and maintenance of kennels in the residential zones pursuant to PMC 17.08.110(G) and the commercial zones pursuant to PMC 17.10.060, Miscellaneous Uses, Small animal boarding. (Ord. 674 § 39, 2008; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.5), 1983)

17.34.020 Animal run requirements.
Animal runs shall meet the following minimums:

A. Minimum Sizes. Minimum sizes shall be as follows:

1. Three feet by five feet for small size animals;

2. Three feet by nine feet for medium size animals;

3. Nine feet by nine feet for large size animals.

B. Animal runs shall be constructed and/or coated with nonporous material to discourage the breeding of ticks and other similar pests.

C. All animal runs and animal holding areas shall have concrete or other durable flooring sloped for proper drainage.

D. All animal runs shall be provided with adequate enclosures to provide protection from inclement weather.

E. All animal runs shall be provided with drains sufficient to control drainage and daily washing of the runs.

F. All animal runs shall be washed down daily to control odor, flies and the breeding of ticks, fleas, bacteria and other similar items. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.5(A)), 1983)

17.34.030 Dispersal of excrement.
All kennels shall be served by sewer and/or all excrement produced by said kenneled animals shall be dispersed on a regular basis so as to control flies and odor, or stored in an enclosed container and dispersed on a regular basis. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.5(B)), 1983)

17.34.040 Noise attenuation.
All noise shall be sound attenuated so that the noise level measured at the property line is within the ambient level for the zone in which the site is located. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.5(C)), 1983)

17.34.050 Runs or exercise area locations.
No animal runs, exercise areas or keeping of the kenneled animals for commercial or noncommercial purposes shall be located within the required front, street side or side yards of the zone in which the site is located. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.5(D)), 1983)

Chapter 17.35
TEEN CLUBS AND CENTERS
Sections:

17.35.010    Teen centers.

17.35.020    Teen night clubs.

17.35.010 Teen centers.
Teen centers and other uses, determined to be similar by the Director of Development Services, operated by a nonprofit organization, service club or youth service organization, shall be permitted in all zones subject to a minor conditional use permit and to the conditions listed in this section.

A. No such use shall be located within 500 feet of the nearest point of any site on which is located a bar, night club, or similar adult use which have a minimum age for admission of 21 years as determined by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations.

B. The operation of four or less electronic machines is permitted provided their operation is ancillary to the main use of the building.

C. Toilet facilities shall be provided as required by the Uniform Building Code.

D. Adult supervision (21 years or older) shall be provided on the premises during all hours of operation at the ratio of two staff per 50 teenagers.

E. It is unlawful to sell, consume, or make available any alcoholic beverage on the site of a teen center or club. It is unlawful to admit a person who has consumed an alcoholic beverage or who has an alcoholic beverage in his or her possession.

F. All activities shall be terminated and the premises cleared of participants on or before the hour of 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 12:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday.

G. On-site parking is required at a ratio of one space per staff member plus one space per four persons permitted occupancy.

H. A minimum of one bicycle rack per four persons permitted occupancy shall be provided in a safe, convenient location, within 25 feet of the building.

I. All on-site parking areas shall be adequately lighted and supervised during hours of operation.

J. Annual review by the City Council is required to determine if all conditions of approval have been met and to ensure the use is operated in a manner not contrary to the public health, morals, peace, welfare, or safety.

K. In addition to these standards, a use proposing teenage dance activity shall comply with Chapter 5.12 PMC.

L. Only persons who have attained the age of 13 years but who have not yet attained the age of 19 years shall be admitted to the center and/or allowed to participate in activities of the center. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 221 § 1, 1987)

17.35.020 Teen night clubs.
Teen night clubs, and other uses determined to be similar by the Director of Development Services, operated by a commercial entity, shall be permitted in the CB, CG, and A/GC commercial zones subject to a conditional use permit and to the conditions listed in this section.

A. No such use shall be located within 500 feet of the nearest point of any site on which is located a bar, night club, or similar adult use which have a minimum age for admission of 21 years as determined by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations.

B. The operation of four or less electronic machines is permitted provided their operation is ancillary to the main use of the building.

C. Toilet facilities shall be provided as required by the Uniform Building Code.

D. Adult supervision (21 years or older) shall be provided on the premises during all hours of operation at the ratio of two staff per 50 teenagers.

E. It is unlawful to sell, consume, or make available any alcoholic beverage on the site of a teen center or club. It is unlawful to admit a person who has consumed an alcoholic beverage or who has an alcoholic beverage in his or her possession.

F. All activities shall be terminated and the premises cleared of participants on or before the hour of 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday.

G. On-site parking is required at a ratio of one space per staff member plus one space per four persons permitted occupancy.

H. A minimum of one bicycle rack per four persons permitted occupancy shall be provided in a safe, convenient location, within 25 feet of the building.

I. All on-site parking areas shall be adequately lighted and supervised during hours of operation.

J. Annual review by the City Council is required to determine if all conditions of approval have been met and to ensure the use is operated in a manner not contrary to the public health, morals, peace, welfare, or safety.

K. In addition to these standards, a use proposing teenage dance activity shall comply with Chapter 5.12 PMC.

L. No person shall be admitted to the club and/or allowed to participate in club activities who has not either attained the age of 15 years or reached the ninth grade in school. No person who has attained the age of 20 years shall be admitted and/or allowed to participate in club activities. (Ord. 674 §§ 40, 41, 2008; Ord. 221 § 1, 1987)

Chapter 17.36
ARCADES
Sections:

17.36.010    Purpose.

17.36.020    Conditions.

17.36.010 Purpose.
In order to minimize adverse effects that arcades and electronic games may have on the neighborhood or area in which it is located the following regulations are established. (Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 6.6), 4, 1983; Ord. 99 § 1, 1983)

17.36.020 Conditions.
Arcades may be permitted only in the CG, commercial general zone subject to a minor conditional use permit and to the conditions listed in this section:

A. No arcade shall be permitted within 500 feet of the nearest point on a lot upon which is located a religious and/or educational institution, a public park or recreation facility.

B. Adult supervision, 18 years or older, shall be provided on the premises during all hours of operation and shall be stationed so as to have direct visibility over all machines.

C. There shall be no more than one arcade per shopping center and no arcades shall be closer than 200 feet to another arcade.

D. All arcades shall not open before 9:00 a.m. and shall close by 2:00 a.m.

E. A minimum of one bicycle parking stall per video game machine shall be provided within 25 feet of the arcade in a safe, convenient location with bicycle racks to accommodate said bikes.

F. A minimum of two toilets and one washbasin shall be provided for each gender.

G. No electronic video or electrical coin-operated game in a commercial business establishment shall be operated within the City by a person 17 years old or younger during normal public school hours, or after curfew.

H. All alcoholic beverage sale and/or consumption on-site is prohibited.

I. All gambling on-site is prohibited.

J. All conditions herein must be guaranteed to be met in addition to obtaining a license to operate. The operation of four or less machines shall be permitted in all C zones provided their operation is ancillary to the use of the building and said use does not materially alter the principal use of such a building. The operation of four or less machines where they are the principal use may be approved by the Development Services Director where, in his judgment, the location does not constitute a traffic or safety hazard to the public or abrogate the intent of the zone or the regulations contained in this chapter. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 6.6), 4, 4(a), 1983; Ord. 99 § 1, 1983)

Chapter 17.37
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
Sections:

17.37.010    Purpose.

17.37.020    Conditions.

17.37.010 Purpose.
In order to minimize the adverse visual and aesthetic effects that the erection of a satellite dish antenna may have on the neighborhood or area in which it is located, the following regulations are established. (Ord. 162 § 1, 1985)

17.37.020 Conditions.
Satellite dish antennas may be installed, erected and maintained within all residential, commercial, and manufacturing zones of the City only in accordance with the following provisions:

A. “Satellite dish antenna” or “dish antenna,” as used in this chapter, means any system of wires, cables, amplifiers, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, which system is external to or attached to the exterior of any building.

B. The height of a dish antenna shall be measured from the highest point of the finished grade adjacent to the structure if ground-mounted or from the point of mounting if roof-mounted.

C. All dish antennas shall be treated as accessory structures and shall meet the height and setback requirements of the respective residential, commercial and manufacturing zone.

D. Installation of ground-mounted dish antennas over six feet in height will require a building permit for the foundation. An electrical permit shall be required for any power driven dishes, regardless of size, that operate on 25 volts of power or more.

E. All dish antennas six feet or greater in diameter and/or height shall require a minor development review permit. Dish antennas less than six feet in diameter and/or height do not require a minor development review permit.

F. All satellite dish antennas 24 inches or larger in diameter which are located in residential zones shall be ground-mounted.

G. Dish antennas which do not exceed 24 inches in diameter may be mounted on the roof of the facia of a residential building and shall comply with the following standards:

1. The satellite dish antenna shall not exceed the height of the ridge of the roof unless visually screened from the street or road by an architectural feature of the residence, such as a chimney.

2. The satellite dish antenna shall be a neutral color, as black or dark gray, or a color that blends with the roof or facia.

H. All satellite dish antennas in residential zones, regardless of height and diameter, shall be screened from the view of adjacent or across the street properties by the use of an architectural feature, fencing and/or landscaping.

I. In commercial and manufacturing zones, dish antennas may be roof- or ground-mounted. In either case, all dish antennas located within those zones, regardless of their height and diameter, shall be screened from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets, and adjacent residentially zoned property. Roof-mounted dish antennas shall be screened architecturally, while ground-mounted dish antennas shall be screened architecturally or with landscaping. (Ord. 445 § 2, 1995; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985)

Chapter 17.38
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sections:

17.38.010    Land use regulations – Purpose.

17.38.020    Definitions.

17.38.030    Locational requirements.

17.38.040    Regulatory provisions – Purpose.

17.38.050    Regulatory permit required.

17.38.060    Applications.

17.38.070    Investigation and action on application.

17.38.080    Permit denial.

17.38.090    Transfer of adult-oriented business regulatory permits.

17.38.100    Adult-oriented business performer permit.

17.38.110    Investigation and action on application.

17.38.120    Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business regulatory permits and adult-oriented business performer permits.

17.38.130    Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation.

17.38.140    Adult-oriented business development and performance standards.

17.38.150    Register and permit number of employees.

17.38.160    Display of permit and identification cards.

17.38.170    Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of 18 years prohibited.

17.38.180    Inspection.

17.38.190    Regulations nonexclusive.

17.38.200    Employment of persons without permits unlawful.

17.38.210    Time limit for filing application for permit.

17.38.220    Severability.

17.38.010 Land use regulations – Purpose.
It is the intent of this City Council that the land use regulations contained in this chapter will prevent community wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, churches, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The City Council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. Therefore, the land use regulations in this chapter are intended to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting a legally sufficient number of cites in the City for the location and operation of adult-oriented businesses. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Adult-oriented businesses” means any one of the following:

1. “Adult arcade” means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

2. “Adult bookstore” means an establishment that has 30 percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

3. “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, or restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (a) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (b) which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude; and/or (c) shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

4. “Adult hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which (a) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (b) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.

5. “Adult motion picture theater” means a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

6. “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

7. “Modeling studio” means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display “specified anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available “specified sexual activities.”

“Adult-oriented business operator” (hereafter “operator”) means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.

“Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business.

“Bar” means any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.

“Church” means a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.

“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Poway or the authorized representatives thereof.

“Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal. App. 3d 151 (1981).

“Establishment of an adult-oriented business” means and includes any of the following:

1. The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business;

2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein;

3. The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or

4. The relocation of any such adult-oriented business.

“Figure model” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.

“Health Officer” means the Health Officer of the City of Poway or his or duly authorized representative.

“Nudity or a state of nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.

“Operate an adult-oriented business” means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business.

“Permittee” means the person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character.

“Regularly features,” with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret, means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two or more occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

“School” means any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university.

“Semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

“Specified anatomical areas” means and includes any of the following:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human (a) genitals or pubic region; (b) buttocks; and (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

3. Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections 1 or 2 of this definition.

“Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

2. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

3. Masturbation, actual or simulated;

4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections 1 through 3 of this definition. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.030 Locational requirements.
Adult-oriented businesses shall be established or located only in the South Poway commercial land use area in the City subject to certain distance and separation requirements as forth below:

A. No such business shall be established or located within 300 feet of any other adult-oriented business.

B. No such business shall be established or located within 700 feet from any existing residential zone or use, park, church, or school. For purposes of this section the term “park” shall include the land designated for water park and sports complex facilities in the South Poway specific plan.

C. The distances set forth above shall be measured as a radius from the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business to the property lines of the property so zoned or used without regard to intervening structures. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.040 Regulatory provisions – Purpose.
It is the purpose of the regulatory provisions of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City. The regulatory provisions contained herein have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not intended that the regulatory provisions restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.050 Regulatory permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit as herein required (adult-oriented business regulatory permit).

B. It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect a permit as herein required (adult-oriented business performer permit).

C. Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult-oriented business in the City shall file an application with the City Manager upon a form provided by the City Clerk and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time, which shall not be refundable. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.060 Applications.
A. Adult-oriented business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with provisions contained herein. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information:

1. If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.

2. If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

3. If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

B. If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a 10 percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application.

C. If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

D. A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult-oriented business site.

E. The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.

F. The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required pursuant to the provisions contained herein to obtain an adult-oriented business performer license.

G. A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

H. A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and: (1) the property line of any other adult-oriented business within 300 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a permit is requested; and (2) the property lines of any church, school, park, residential zone or use within 700 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business.

I. A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the required lighting system required pursuant to the provisions contained herein.

J. If the City Manager determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of 10 days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed 10 days. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

K. The fact that an application possesses other types of State or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business regulatory permit. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.070 Investigation and action on application.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the City Manager shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

B. Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application, the City Manager shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

1. The City Manager shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

2. If the application is denied, the City Manager shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

3. If the application is granted, the City Manager shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

4. The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

C. The City Manager shall grant the application and issue the adult-oriented business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria as required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as well as the development and performance standards and requirements, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in PMC 17.38.080. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult-oriented business premises.

D. If the City Manager grants the application or if the City Manager neither grants nor denies the application within 30 days after it is stamped as received, the applicant may begin operating the adult-oriented business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.080 Permit denial.
The City Manager shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

A. The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult-oriented business regulatory permit is required do not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the City and the State of California, or with the locational or development and performance standards and requirements of these regulations.

B. The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

C. An applicant is under 18 years of age.

D. The required application fee has not been paid.

E. Each adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the City Manager a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.090 Transfer of adult-oriented business regulatory permits.
A. A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the permit.

B. A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business regulatory permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the City Manager stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the City Manager in accordance with PMC 17.38.050 and 17.38.060, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, and the City Manager determines in accordance with PMC 17.38.070 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit.

C. No permit may be transferred when the City Manager has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.

D. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.100 Adult-oriented business performer permit.
A. No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business, without a valid adult-oriented business performer permit issued by the City. All persons who have been issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit required by PMC 17.38.050, with the names of all performers required to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit, within 30 days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

B. The City Manager shall grant, deny and renew adult-oriented business employee permits.

C. The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with the City Manager.

D. The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

1. The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;

2. Age, date and place of birth;

3. Height, weight, hair and eye color;

4. Present residence address and telephone number;

5. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:

a. Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 315, 316, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered,

b. The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California;

6. Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution;

7. State driver’s license or identification number;

8. Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

9. The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;

10. If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed;

E. The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

F. Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the City Manager shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application.

G. If the City Manager determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the City Manager shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than 10 days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed 10 days, of the time for the City Manager to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.110 Investigation and action on application.
A. Within five days after receipt of the properly completed application, the City Manager shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows:

1. The City Manager shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

2. If the application is denied, the City Manager shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

3. If the application is granted, the City Manager shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business employee permit.

4. The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.

B. The City Manager shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection D of this section.

C. If the City Manager grants the application or if the City Manager neither grants nor denies the application within five days after it is stamped as received, the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the license was sought.

D. The City Manager shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

1. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application;

2. The applicant is under 18 years of age;

3. The adult-oriented business employee permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by State or City law;

4. The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute;

5. The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in this chapter or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the State of California. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the application.

E. Each adult-oriented business performer permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for permits. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.120 Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business regulatory permits and adult-oriented business performer permits.
An adult-oriented business regulatory permit or adult-oriented business employee permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

A. On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the City Manager shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City Manager, but at a minimum shall include the following:

1. All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The City Manager’s decision may be appealed in accordance with PMC 17.38.160.

B. A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business:

1. The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City.

2. The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented business, or in the case of an adult-oriented business performer, the permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult-oriented business:

a. Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.

b. Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur.

c. Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

d. The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318 or Subdivision b of Section 647 of the California Penal Code.

e. Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4.

f. Any conduct prohibited by this chapter.

3. Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate City official.

C. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the City Manager finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the City Manager shall impose one of the following:

1. A warning;

2. Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months;

3. Revocation of the permit. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.130 Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation.
After denial of an application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit or an adult-oriented business performer permit, or after denial of renewal of a permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or person to whom the permit was granted may seek review of such administrative action by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this code. If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant, permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The City shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite review, if sought by the permittee. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.140 Adult-oriented business development and performance standards.
A. Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the Fire Department and building regulations and standards adopted pursuant to this code.

B. No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

C. All off-street parking area and premises entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.

D. The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building.

E. Except for those businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business shall be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight on any particular day.

F. The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Development Services Director or designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the premises at any time.

G. All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except rest rooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times.

H. Any adult-oriented business which is also an “adult arcade,” shall comply with the following provisions:

1. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

2. The view area specified in subsection (H)(1) of this section shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.

3. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

4. The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms.

5. Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from remaining in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.

6. The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner and operator’s license to conduct the adult-oriented establishment.

I. All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

Area

Foot-Candles

Bookstores and other retail establishments

20

Theaters and cabarets

5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles)

Arcades

10

Motels/hotels

20 (in public areas)

Modeling studios

20

J. The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

K. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission:

1. No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within 10 feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. “Entertainer” shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business.

2. The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use.

3. The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

4. The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum of a three foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

5. No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

6. Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection.

7. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.

8. No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business (as that term is defined herein) shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

L. Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

1. Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.

2. Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by persons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of State law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.150 Register and permit number of employees.
Every permittee of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or Health Officer of the City. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.160 Display of permit and identification cards.
A. Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business.

B. The City Manager shall provide each adult-oriented business performer required to have a permit pursuant to the chapter, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such performer.

C. An adult-oriented business performer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult-oriented business. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.170 Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of 18 years prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires such permit, to any person who is not at least 18 years of age.

B. It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult-oriented business, any person who is not at least 18 years of age. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.180 Inspection.
An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Development Services Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.190 Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.200 Employment of persons without permits unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult-oriented business performer permit. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.210 Time limit for filing application for permit.
All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued for the operation of an adult-oriented business and all persons required by this chapter to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit, must apply for and obtain such a permit within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so and continued operation of an adult-oriented business, or the continued performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business after such time without a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

17.38.220 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 486 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 17.39
RESIDENTIAL SENIOR CITIZEN STANDARDS
Sections:

17.39.010    General requirements.

17.39.020    Special requirements.

17.39.010 General requirements.
The following requirements for residential senior citizen housing are minimum requirements unless otherwise stated:

Requirement

Number

1. Density, maximum living units per net acre

20 living units per net acre or 50 beds per net acre, whichever is more restrictive. Any density bonus shall be pursuant to Article V of Chapter 17.26 PMC, Affordable Housing Incentives, and shall apply only to the number of living units per acre and not to the number of beds per acre. In the case of a density bonus, the maximum density shall be 20 living units per net acre plus the density bonus, or 50 beds per net acre, whichever is more restrictive.

2. Site area (in acres)

2

3. Front yard setback (in feet)

25

4. Side yard setback each side (in feet)

10/10

5. Side yard setback street side (in feet)

25

6. Rear yard setback (in feet)

25

7. Building height, maximum

35 feet or two stories, whichever is less

8. Site coverage, maximum

50 percent

9. Parking spaces per one bedroom unit (covered in carport) and guest parking spaces per unit (uncovered) plus one space per employee. Two-bedroom units and those units providing for private ownership shall provide one space per unit. Accessible parking shall be provided at the ratio prescribed by Title 24 of the State Building Code.

Combined total of 1.2 spaces per living unit

10. Distance between buildings (in feet)

10

11. Minimum age requirement

55

(Ord. 701 § 7, 2009; Ord. 144 § 2 (Attach. 2(A)), 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.8), 1983)

17.39.020 Special requirements.
The following special development requirements shall apply to all senior citizen developments:

A. The senior citizen development shall be designed and developed in a manner compatible with and complementary to existing and potential development in the immediate vicinity of the project site. Site planning on the perimeter shall provide for the protection of the property from adverse surrounding influences, as well as protection of the surrounding areas from potential adverse influences within the development.

B. Required open space shall comprise at least 20 percent of the total area of the planned development. Land occupied by buildings, streets, driveways, or parking spaces may be not be counted in satisfying this open space requirement; provided, however, that land occupied by recreational buildings and structures may be counted as required open space. The addition of expanded exterior walkways is encouraged.

C. All or any part of the required open space shall be reserved for use in common by the residents of the development. The City Council may require that the open space easements over the required open space be conveyed to the City.

D. No building, except as hereafter provided, shall be located closer than five feet from any interior vehicular or pedestrian way, court, plaza, open parking lot, or any other surfaced area reserved for public use or for use in common by residents of the planned development. Such setback shall generally be measured from the nearest edge of a surfaced area; provided, however, that where no sidewalk exists in conjunction with a public or private street, such setback shall be measured from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way or private road easement.

E. Each building shall be surrounded on all sides by relatively level open space having a slope no greater than 10 percent and extending a minimum distance of 10 feet in all directions measured from the furthest projections of the external walls of the building.

F. All public streets within or abutting the proposed planned development may be dedicated and shall be improved to City specifications for the particular classification of street. When the developer desires to retain any streets within the development as private streets, such streets shall be irrevocably offered for dedication and maintained for their intended purpose by means acceptable to the City Council. Other forms of access, such as pedestrian ways, courts, plazas, driveways or open parking lots shall not be offered for dedication.

G. Each senior citizen housing project will be evaluated according to the location criteria set forth in this section.

1. Projects should be located on property of 15 percent or less in slope, in addition a paved surface, not exceeding a slope ratio of one to 12 shall be required to provide access to shopping/services and/or transportation.

2. Projects should be located near a wide range of commercial retail, professional and social services patronized by senior citizens.

3. Projects should be located within one-half mile from a major food store/market (one which carries a full line of meat, groceries, produce, etc.).

4. Projects should be located within approximately 500 feet of a bus or transit stop.

Projects which do not meet these location criteria will be required to provide supplemental transportation for tenants. The type, amount and extent of the supplemental transportation system will be determined by the Development Services Director and shall be based on project size, location and availability of services. Minimal standards for supplemental transportation may range from three to six round-trip visits per week/per tenant to services expected to be patronized by these tenants.

H. All projects shall provide laundry facilities adequately sized and located to serve the needs of residents as provided in PMC 17.08.220.

Projects totaling 14 living units or more shall provide a recreation/community-social room accessible to the disabled. For projects up to 25 living units, the facility shall be of at least the size of the smallest living unit provided in the project. For projects exceeding 25 units, the facility should be appropriately sized to serve the needs of residents and shall have adjacent toilet facilities for men and women. The size of the recreation room may be appropriately reduced if it is located adjacent to usable outdoor space. Unless the building is serviced by an elevator, recreation rooms should be located on the ground floor, and are more appropriately located near the entrance of projects to afford residents a protected view out onto the streetscape.

I. In addition to the standard application submittal requirements for the project, the applicant shall also submit a detailed vicinity map showing the project location and such details as the nearest market, transit stop, park or recreation center, hospital or clinic, bank, post office, or other related uses/services likely to be patronized by tenants.

J. All projects which do not have an on-site manager shall provide a posted phone number of the project owner or off-site manager for emergencies or maintenance problems. (Ord. 701 §§ 8 – 11, 2009; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 144 § 2(Attach. 2(A)), 1984; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 6.8), 1983)

Chapter 17.40
COMPREHENSIVE SIGN REGULATIONS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

17.40.010    Purpose.

Article II. Definitions

17.40.015    Definitions.

Article III. Permit Requirements and Review Procedures

17.40.020    Major review – Minor review – Building permits required.

17.40.030    Method of application.

17.40.040    Method of review.

Article IV. Administration

17.40.050    Enforcement – Referral – Rehearing.

17.40.060    Interpretation of provisions.

17.40.070    Variance.

Article V. General Requirements

17.40.090    Exempt signs.

17.40.100    Prohibited signs.

17.40.110    Signs relating to inoperative activities.

17.40.120    Enforcement, legal procedures and penalties.

17.40.130    Construction and maintenance.

Article VI. Sign Regulations

17.40.140    Sign permits.

17.40.150    Signs permitted in all zoning districts.

17.40.170    Directional kiosks.

17.40.180    Comprehensive sign program.

17.40.190    Temporary signs.

17.40.200    On-site subdivision signs.

17.40.210    Real estate kiosks.

17.40.220    Signs permitted in single-family residential, open space-recreation, and public facility zones.

17.40.230    Signs permitted in the multifamily and mobile home park zones.

17.40.240    Signs permitted in commercial zones.

17.40.250    Repealed.

Article VII. Design Standards

17.40.260    Design standards designated.

Article VIII. Nonconforming Signs

17.40.270    Intent.

17.40.280    General requirements.

17.40.290    Amortization requirements.

17.40.300    Historical signs.

17.40.310    Severability.

Article I. General Provisions

17.40.010 Purpose.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the comprehensive sign regulations. It is the purpose of these provisions to establish a comprehensive system for the regulation of on-site and off-site signs.

B. The City recognizes the need for signs as a means to identify businesses within the community. However, the City also recognizes that signing is an important design element of the physical environment. Regulations consistent with the goals and objectives of the community are necessary to ensure that the rural character and image the community is striving for can be attained.

C. It is the purpose of this chapter to make the City attractive to residents, visitors and commercial, industrial and professional businesses while maintaining economic stability through an attractive signing program. Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are to:

1. Protect the general public health, safety and welfare of the community;

2. Reduce possible traffic and safety hazards through good signing;

3. Direct persons to various activities and uses, in order to provide for maximum public convenience;

4. Provide a reasonable system of sign regulations, to ensure the development of a high-quality visual environment;

5. Encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance and to provide incentive and latitude for variety, good design relationship to the business or use it identifies, and spacing between signs and buildings;

6. Encourage a desirable rural character which has a minimum of clutter;

7. Enhance the economic value of the community and each area, business and use thereof, through the regulation of such elements as size, number, location, design and illumination of signs; and

8. Encourage signs which are well located, and take into account the service and usage of adjacent areas.

D. By the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City recognizes its legal and constitutional obligations to allow noncommercial signage wherever commercial signage is permitted, not to discriminate among noncommercial messages, and not to discriminate among commercial messages, except for the distinction between on-site and off-site signs.

E. Traffic control signs and kiosk signage located upon the public right-of-way or other public property and erected at public expense are intended to control traffic movement and to direct the public to an area of the City; to the availability and location of a public or semipublic facility or event; or to the sale of real estate in a manner which enhances the safe and orderly flow of traffic along and upon primary and secondary thoroughfares instead of narrower or more congested streets. The City Council finds that kiosk signs serve the same compelling interest as traffic control signs in that such signs reduce traffic congestion and are indispensable to the safe vehicular use of City streets. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 525 § 2, 2000; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.0), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

Article II. Definitions

17.40.015 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Advertising structure” means an on-site or off-site structure of any kind or character other than the main business identification sign, erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary for advertising purposes.

“Animated sign” means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or create a special effect or scene.

“Area identification sign” means a sign to identify an area of the City such as a residential neighborhood or a business park, located at the entrance or entrances to the area, and consisting of a fence or wall with letters or symbols affixed thereto.

“Area of the sign” means the net geometric area enclosed by an imaginary rectangle drawn around the display surface of the sign, including the outer extremities of all letters, characters and delineations. In cases where a sign is on a background, which is not illuminated and is integral to the building design and/or building color scheme, the background is not included in the “area of the sign.” In cases where multiple wall signs are located on a single building face and/or frontage and separated by a distance of three feet or greater, the “area of the sign” shall be the sum total of each sign calculated individually by the foregoing method. In cases where multiple signs are located on a single building face and/or frontage and less than three feet to another sign, the “area of the sign” shall be the area enclosed by an imaginary rectangle around the signs together. In the case of a two-sided freestanding sign, the “area of the sign” shall be the area of one side.

“Banner” means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material intended to advertise goods, services and/or a business, whether it contains copy or does not contain copy. National flags, State or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.

“Billboard” means an off-site sign of any kind erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster, bill, printing, or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever is placed.

“Building face and/or frontage” means the portion of the building elevation which faces a street or parking lot, excluding driveways and aisles.



“Building wall area” means the geometric area of a building wall, along each building face/frontage as defined in this chapter, which is used to determine maximum allowable sign area. The area is the height of the wall multiplied by the length of the wall on which the sign will be displayed. In determining the maximum allowable sign area for a tenant within a multitenant building and in cases where a tenant is displaying their sign on a wall that is contiguous to their tenant space, the building wall area is the height of the wall multiplied by the length of the wall for that tenant space. In cases where a tenant is displaying their sign on a wall that is not contiguous to their tenant space, the building wall area where the sign is to be displayed shall be used in determining maximum sign area. In this case, if the wall displays other tenant signs, the sum of all signs shall not exceed the maximum allowable sign area for the building wall.

“Business directory sign” means a sign located in a multitenant complex which lists each business and addresses and/or suite numbers, which may also have a site map for orientation.

“Canopy sign” means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. Canopy signs shall be regulated as wall signs.

“Change of sign face” is when an existing sign is altered by a change of message or design on the sign face, without any change to the size or shape of the sign framework or structure of a manufactured sign or without any change to the size of a sign painted on a wall.

“Changeable copy/electronic reader board” means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a “time and temperature” portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.

“Commercial message” means any sign wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service, sale or sales event, or other commercial activity.

“Community special event” means an event with broad community interest and/or an event sponsored by a government agency, school, or nonprofit organization, as determined the Director of Development Services.

“Comprehensive sign program” means a set of specific design standards for signs in a shopping or office center intended to integrate signs with each other, the architectural design of the building (or buildings) on the site, and landscaping to achieve an overall high quality and attractive appearance.

“Convenience sign” means any on-site sign intended to provide information of a noncommercial nature to users of the site where the sign is located. Such signs shall be designed to be viewed from on site, and necessary for public convenience or safety. Such signs shall not include commercial messages.

“Copy” means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign.

“Curbline” means the line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or roadway. In the absence of a curb, the curbline shall be established by the City Engineer.

“Directional sign” means an on-site sign intended to provide directions with words, symbols or characters to users of the site where the sign is located. Such signs shall not include commercial messages, except that a drive-through business may display their business name and/or logo as provided for in this chapter.

“Election sign” means a sign erected prior to an election to advertise or identify a candidate, campaign issue, election proposition, or other related ballot matters.

“Erect” means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting of wall signs.

“Flag” means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity.

“Flag banner” means a tall, narrow, vertically oriented banner mounted on poles, with or without copy, used to advertise goods, services, and/or a business.

“Flashing sign” means an illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign which is attached to or a part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or other structure whether portable or stationary.

“Grand opening” means the first time opening of a new business or the reopening after a major remodel which required closing the business for at least 30 days.

“Height of a sign” means the greatest vertical distance measured from the grade at which the sign supports intersect the ground, including any accompanying architectural features of the sign. In cases where the location of the sign support intersection with the ground is lower than the elevation of an adjacent street and sidewalk from which the sign is primarily viewed, the height of the sign shall be measured from the elevation of the adjacent sidewalk.

“Logo” means a trademark or symbol used to identify a business.

“Mansard roof” means any roof that has an angle greater than 45 degrees and which derives part of its support from the building wall and is attached to (but not necessarily a part of) a low-slope roof, and which extends along the full length of the front building wall or three-quarters of the length of a side building wall. For purposes of this chapter, a low-slope roof shall mean any roof with a pitch less than three inches rise per 12 inches horizontal.

“Menu board” means an outdoor sign, associated with restaurants with drive-through windows, which gives a detailed list of foods served that are available at a restaurant.

“Noncommercial message” means a message pertaining to a topic of public concern, controversy, or interest, including, but not limited to, politics, religion, philosophy, science, art or social commentary.

“Off-site sign” means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is displayed. The term “off-site sign” shall include an outdoor advertising sign (billboard) on which space is leased or rented by the owner thereof to others for the purposes of conveying a commercial or noncommercial message.

“On-site sign” means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered or existing on the same lot where such sign is displayed; provided, an on-site sign may also display a noncommercial message.

“Pennant” means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.

“Portable sign” means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; “sandwich board” signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles.

“Promotional sales” shall mean a temporary sales event to promote products, merchandise, or services available on the same premises, including parking lot sales, sidewalk sales, and leasing events, as determined by the Director of Development Services.

“Real estate sign” means a temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of said property.

“Roof sign” means any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or roof eave, or on top or above the parapet, or on a functional architectural appendage above the roof or roof eave.

“Shopping or office center” means two or more retail stores, offices and/or service establishments, or combination thereof which results in more than two such establishments sharing customer parking areas, regardless of whether said stores, offices and/or service establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownerships.

“Sign” means and includes every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stroke, stripe, trademark or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public, or, the above, when displayed near the inside surface of a window in such a way as to be in view of the general public and used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information to motorists.

“Temporary sign” means a sign erected for a temporary purpose attracting attention to an activity as provided for within this chapter.

“Wall sign” means any sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall or printed on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on which it is mounted; provided, however, said wall sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. For the purpose of this chapter, any sign display surface that is affixed parallel to a wall but in or against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be considered a wall sign. Any sign that is affixed to a building awning or a building canopy shall be considered a wall sign.

“Window sign” means any sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon a window. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 443, 1995; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993)

Article III. Permit Requirements and Review Procedures

17.40.020 Major review – Minor review – Building permits required.
A. Major review shall be required for all new freestanding signs greater than eight feet in height. Signs requiring major review shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances. Building permits may be required.

B. Minor review shall be required prior to the placing, erecting, moving, repair or reconstructing of any sign in the City not subject to subsection A of this section, including new comprehensive sign programs and amendments thereof, unless expressly exempted by this chapter. Signs requiring minor review shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances. Building permits may be required. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 722 § 3, 2011; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.1(A)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.030 Method of application.
An application for major review or minor review and building permits shall be made on forms as prescribed by the Director of Development Services. Such an application shall be filed with the Development Services Department with applicable plans as required. Said application shall be accompanied by any fees or bonds as specified by City Council resolution. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 722 § 3, 2011; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 1), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.040 Method of review.
The purpose of major review and minor review is to help ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

A. Major Review. Within 15 working days after receipt of all required materials of a sign application, the Director of Development Services, or a designated representative, shall prepare and place on the agenda of the City Council for consideration within 18 days a report to the City Council recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of such sign application. Consideration by the City Council shall be delayed only with the consent of the applicant. Authority to approve or deny a major review shall rest with the City Council. The standards of review shall be the requirements set forth in this chapter and the applicable building code.

B. Minor Review. Within 15 calendar days after receipt of all required materials of a sign application, or 45 calendar days for a comprehensive sign program, the Director of Development Services, or a designated representative, shall render a decision to approve, approve with modifications, or deny such sign request. Review shall ensure that any sign proposal is in conformance with this chapter, is consistent with its title and purpose, and conforms to the applicable building code requirements. In cases where the placing, erecting, moving, or reconstructing of a sign does not require the issuance of a building permit, the Director of Development Services, or a designated representative, shall render a decision to approve, approve with modifications, or deny such sign request (not including comprehensive sign programs) within 10 working days. For sign permits that meet all the requirements of an approved comprehensive sign program, the permit shall be issued within five full working days from the date of complete application. Notice of pending decision on a new comprehensive sign program or an amendment to an existing comprehensive sign program shall be provided 10 days prior to the decision by mail to all property owners of property contiguous to the subject property, and those separated by a public or private street, and by posting a notice at each entrance to the subject property. The decision of the Director may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 2.20 PMC, Administrative Appeals. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 722 § 3, 2011; Ord. 525 § 3, 2000; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.1(C)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A, 1983)

Article IV. Administration

17.40.050 Enforcement – Referral – Rehearing.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Development Services or a designated representative to enforce all provisions of this chapter. At the discretion of the Director, any sign request may be referred to the City Council for its review and approval.

B. In cases where a request for a permit has been referred to the City Council for decision, its action is final and effective within 10 calendar days unless a request for a rehearing is filed in accordance with Chapter 2.21 PMC.

C. Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Director of Development Services according to procedures set out in Chapter 2.20 PMC. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 492 § 6, 1998; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.2(A)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.060 Interpretation of provisions.
A. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to abrogate any easements, covenants or other existing agreements which are more restrictive than the provisions of this chapter.

B. Whenever the application of this chapter is uncertain due to ambiguity of its provisions, the question shall be referred to the City Council for determination. The City Council shall establish an interpretation that best fulfills the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.2(B)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.070 Variance.
Applications for a variance from the terms of this chapter shall be reviewed by the City Council according to the variance procedures as set forth in the zoning ordinance. Variances may be granted only for sign location and other similar performance standards, except area and height, when the City Council finds that the granting of such a variance will not be contrary to the title and purpose of this chapter, in addition to the other required findings for granting a variance. All variances may be conditioned to expire with the change of copy for the use, be reviewed on a periodic basis or be required to conform to this chapter upon change of ownership, and/or shall automatically expire upon any designated period of time. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.2(C)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

Article V. General Requirements

17.40.090 Exempt signs.
The following signs shall be exempt from the application, permit and fee requirements of this chapter; an electrical and/or building permit may be required. Any signage in excess of the specific exemptions listed in this section is prohibited.

A. Permanent window signage not exceeding 12 square feet per business frontage and limited to the name of the business, service or use, hours of operation, address and emergency information, except exposed neon tubing signs advertising products for sale on the premises;

B. Temporary advertising signage painted on the window or constructed of paper, cloth or similar expendable material affixed on the window, wall or building surface; provided, that the total area of such signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the window area; however, in all cases a minimum of 12 square feet per business frontage is permitted;

C. Real estate signs for single-family and multifamily residential sales and leasing. For single-family signs, one sign per street frontage not exceeding four square feet in area and five feet in height, provided it is unlit and is removed within 15 days after the close of escrow or the rental or lease has been accomplished. Signs placed on the rear street frontage are prohibited. Open house signs not exceeding four square feet in area and five feet in height are permitted for directing prospective buyers to property offered for sale. For multifamily signs, one per street frontage not exceeding 24 square feet and six feet in height;

D. Temporary signs for elections and other noncommercial messages are not permitted within the public right-of-way (except as otherwise provided in this chapter), on public property, or upon any public building or other publicly owned facility, including fences/walls, utilities and landscaping. Such signs are permitted on private property subject to the following:

1. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in total area for one side; double-faced signs shall not exceed six square feet per side.

2. Such signs shall not exceed an overall height of four feet. The height shall be measured from the finished grade immediately around the sign.

3. No such signs shall be lighted either directly or indirectly unless said sign is erected, painted or constructed on an authorized structure already providing illumination.

4. The number of such signs is not limited.

5. Such signs may carry any noncommercial message, including, but not limited to, political messages.

6. No such signs shall be posted in violation of any provision of this chapter. The Director of Development Services or a designated representative shall have the right to remove any sign placed in the right-of-way or on public property, contrary to any provision of this section. Removed signs shall be stored by the City. Notice of removal shall be promptly provided to the owner of such sign, or the apparent owner or candidate, within one working day of removal whenever possible. Such person shall have the right to recover the sign forthwith, without charge. All signs removed by the City may be destroyed 30 calendar days following removal.

E. Contractor or Construction Signs. For residential projects greater than four dwelling units, commercial, and industrial projects, two on-site signs shall be permitted on the construction site for all contractors (may include financial institutions, real estate agents, subcontractors, etc.) not exceeding 32 square feet each, unless legally required by government contracts to be larger. No sign shall exceed eight feet in overall height and shall be located no closer than 10 feet to any property line. Such sign shall be removed upon the granting of occupancy by the City. For all other projects, a total of two signs per development site may be installed with a maximum of four square feet in area and five feet in height for each sign. Such sign(s) shall be removed upon finalization of building permits;

F. Future Tenant Identification Sign. Future on-site tenant identification signs may be placed on vacant or developing property to advertise the future use of an approved project on the property and where information may be obtained. Such sign shall be limited to one per parcel and to a maximum of 32 square feet in area and eight feet in overall height. Further, such signs shall be placed no closer than 10 feet to any property line. Any such sign shall be removed upon finalization of building permits. Where a project has in excess of 600 lineal feet of frontage, one additional sign for each 600 lineal feet is allowed;

G. Real Estate Signs for Sale, Lease or Rent of Commercial or Industrial Property. Real estate signs for sale of commercial or industrial property, one sign per street frontage not to exceed 32 square feet in area to advertise the sale, lease, or rent of such property. No such sign shall exceed eight feet in overall height and shall not be located within the public right-of-way. Where a property has in excess of 600 lineal feet of frontage, one additional sign for each 600 lineal feet is allowed;

H. Interior signs within a structure or building when not visible or readable or intended to be read from off site or from outside of the structure or building;

I. Signs identifying a business, service or use no greater than four square feet in area may be permitted. Said signs shall not be visible from the public right-of-way, shall be attached to the main building, shall be for pedestrian traffic, and shall not otherwise require a building permit;

J. Memorial tablets, plaques or directional signs for community historical resources, installed by a City-recognized Historical Society or civic organization;

K. Convenience signs not exceeding four square feet in area, and five feet high when not mounted to a building wall;

L. Directional signs not exceeding four square feet in area and five feet high when not mounted on a building wall. For signs adjacent, and visible, to the street only one shall be permitted for each access driveway. For signs interior to the site multiple signs are allowable. No such sign shall display a commercial message except that signs providing direction to a drive-through lane/window for a drive-through business may display the business name and/or logo, only in addition to directional instruction, provided the business name and/or logo comprises no more than 50 percent of the sign area. Such signs shall be designed to be compatible with other freestanding signs on the site, constructed to be a permanent installation, and maintained in good condition;

M. Residential building identification signs used to identify individual residences and not exceeding four square feet in area;

N. One name plate per parcel not exceeding four square feet in area for single-family residential uses and agricultural uses;

O. Official and legal notices issued by any court, public body, person or officer or in furtherance of any nonjudicial process approved by State or local law;

P. Signs providing direction, warning or informational signs or structures required or authorized by law or by Federal, State, County or City authority;

Q. A single official flag of the United States of America and/or two flags of either the State of California, or other states of the United States, counties, municipalities or official flags for nations, and flags of internationally and nationally recognized organizations or the company flag. Flags shall be a maximum of five feet by eight feet and shall be displayed in a manner consistent with official flag etiquette;

R. Signs of public utility companies, indicating danger or which serve as an aid to public safety, or which show locations of underground facilities or public telephones;

S. Safety signs on construction sites;

T. One freestanding time and temperature sign that conveys time and temperature only and not exceeding 12 square feet in area nor 15 feet in height, or not higher than the roofline, whichever is less, when combined with business identification in accordance with PMC 17.40.140 through 17.40.250, and counted toward sign area for the freestanding sign;

U. One wall-mounted time and temperature sign that conveys time and temperature only not exceeding 12 square feet in area when combined with business identification in accordance with PMC 17.40.140 through 17.40.250, and counted toward sign area for the wall sign;

V. “No trespassing,” “no parking” and similar warning signs not exceeding four square feet;

W. Signs on public transportation vehicles regulated by a political subdivision, including but not limited to buses and taxicabs;

X. Signs on licensed commercial vehicles, provided such vehicles are not used or intended for use as portable signs or as may be prohibited in PMC 17.40.100;

Y. A change of sign face which conforms to an approved sign permit. Changes of a sign face on a sign that does not have an approved sign permit shall comply with PMC 17.40.020 through 17.40.040;

Z. Incidental signs for automobile repair stores, gasoline service stations, automobile dealers with service repairs, motels and hotels, showing notices of services provided or required by law, trade affiliations, credit cards accepted, and the like, attached to a freestanding sign, structure or building; provided, that all of the following conditions exist:

1. The signs number no more than four,

2. No such sign projects beyond any property line,

3. No such sign shall exceed an area per face of four square feet;

AA. Copy applied to fuel pumps or dispensers by the manufacturer such as fuel identification, station logo and other signs required by law;

BB. Agricultural signs, either wall or freestanding types, nonilluminated, and not exceeding four square feet for lots two acres or less and 16 square feet for lots greater than two acres, identifying only the agricultural products grown on the premises. The number of such signs shall be one per street frontage or a maximum of two, with wall signs to be located below the roofline and freestanding signs to be no higher than eight feet;

CC. Address numbers for buildings shall be exempt provided they meet the following height limits. The minimum height is also specified in Chapter 15.24 PMC;

 

Minimum Height

Maximum Height

a. Residential

 

 

i. Single-family

Four inches

Six inches

ii. Multifamily

Six inches

Six inches

b. Commercial

Six inches

18 inches

c. Industrial

18 inches

24 inches

DD. Flag banners in commercial zones subject to the following:

1. Flag banners shall be displayed only on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, and on City holidays.

2. Flag banners shall be displayed only on private property and not within any public right-of-way.

3. Flag banners shall be limited to 15 feet in overall height, and 30 square feet in area.

4. Flag banners shall be installed on the ground, not within any parking space or drive aisle, maintained in an upright position at all times, and shall be situated a minimum of five feet from any walkway or drive aisle. At all times flag banners shall be displayed in a manner that does not create a public safety hazard.

5. Each property which contains a single business, and each shopping or office center, shall be permitted one flag banner for every 40 lineal feet of street frontage, up to a maximum of three. (Ord. 791 § 2, 2016; Ord. 783 § 2, 2015; Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 42, 2008; Ord. 539 § 2, 2001; Ord. 525 § 4, 2000; Ord. 482 § 2(C), (D), 1997; Ord. 443, 1995; Ord. 433, 1994; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.3(A)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.100 Prohibited signs.
A. All signs not expressly permitted are prohibited in all zones, including but not limited to the following:

1. Roof signs;

2. Flashing signs, except time and temperature signs;

3. Animated signs, conveying the illusion of motion;

4. Revolving or rotating signs;

5. Vehicle signs, when parked or stored on property to identify a business or advertise a product;

6. Portable signs, except where permitted in this chapter;

7. Off-site signs, except as expressly otherwise provided by this chapter;

8. Signs within the public right-of-way, except those required by a governmental agency or authorized by PMC 17.40.090 and 17.40.170. No sign which is permitted in the public right-of-way shall be placed, erected or constructed on a utility pole, traffic device, traffic sign, warning sign, or so as to impede access to any public improvement, or to obstruct the vision of any such traffic, warning, or directional signs;

9. Signs located on public property except as may be permitted in PMC 17.40.090 or those required by a governmental agency;

10. Signs within the public right-of-way prohibited by the Streets and Highways Code (Section 101 et seq. and Section 1460 et seq.), the Vehicle Code (Section 21400 et seq.) and the Public Utilities Code (Section 7538 et seq.);

11. Signs blocking doors or fire escapes;

12. Light bulb strings outside of the building, except as part of special event signage approved under PMC 17.40.190 or as permanently installed lighting accentuating architectural features of the building;

13. Banners, flags, pennants, flag banners, and balloons or other air inflated devices, except for special events, or as otherwise provided for in PMC 17.40.090 and 17.40.190;

14. Inflatable advertising devices of a temporary nature, including hot air balloons, except for special events as provided for in PMC 17.40.190;

15. Advertising structures, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter;

16. Statuary (statues or sculptures) advertising products or logos of the business that are located outside of the structure that houses the business;

17. The use of decals, stick-on or transfer letters, or tape on the walls or parapets of buildings, fences, walls or other structures not suitable;

18. Reader board/changeable copy signs, either electric or nonelectric, except as permitted in this chapter;

19. Signs which purport to be or are an imitation of or resemble official traffic warning devices or signs, that by color, location or lighting may confuse or disorient vehicular or pedestrian traffic; this does not include traffic or directional signs installed on private property to control on-site traffic;

20. Exposed neon tubing except in limited amounts used as a design element of a permitted sign.

B. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, whenever a commercial message is permitted on a sign, a noncommercial message shall be permitted. Whenever one commercial message is permitted on an on-site sign, any on-site commercial message shall be permitted. Whenever one commercial message is permitted on an off-site sign, any off-site commercial message shall be permitted. And whenever a noncommercial message is permitted on a sign, any noncommercial message shall be permitted. All such signage shall be subject to the same standards and size requirements set forth in this chapter. Signs providing direction for traffic control purposes shall be limited to the directional message. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 43, 2008; Ord. 525 §§ 5, 6, 2000; Ord. 482 § 2(E), 1997; Ord. 433, 1994; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.3(B)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.110 Signs relating to inoperative activities.
Signs pertaining to activities or businesses which are no longer in operation, except for temporary closures for repairs, alteration or similar situations, shall be removed from the premises or the sign copy shall be removed within 30 days after the premises has been vacated including copy from the business directory. Any such sign not removed within the specified time shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to removal under the provisions of this chapter and local ordinance. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.3(C)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.120 Enforcement, legal procedures and penalties.
A. Enforcement, legal procedures and penalties shall be in accordance with the enforcement procedures established by the local ordinance.

B. Unauthorized illegal signs, other than temporary signs for elections and noncommercial messages, may be abated by the City in accordance with local ordinance.

C. If said sign is stored by the City, the owner may recover said sign from the City upon payment of any storage and/or removal charge incurred by the City.

D. The minimum charge shall be no less than $3.00 per sign. All signs removed by the City may be destroyed 30 calendar days following removal.

E. If any sign, in the opinion of the Director of Development Services, is an immediate threat to the public health and safety, said sign shall be immediately and summarily removed with the cost of said removal charged to the property owner in accordance with local ordinances. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.3(D)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.130 Construction and maintenance.
A. Construction. Every sign and all parts, portions and materials shall be manufactured, assembled, and erected in compliance with all applicable State, Federal and City regulations and the applicable building code.

B. Maintenance. Every sign and all parts, portions, and materials shall be maintained and kept in proper repair. The display surface of all signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from rust and corrosion. Any cracked or broken surfaces and malfunctioning or damaged portions of a sign shall be repaired or replaced within 30 calendar days following notification of the business by the City. Noncompliance with such a request will constitute a nuisance and will be abated in accordance with Chapters 1.08 and/or 8.72 PMC. Any maintenance, except a change of sign face, which does not involve structural changes, is permitted. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 7.3(E)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

Article VI. Sign Regulations

17.40.140 Sign permits.
Sign permits may be issued for signs included under this article provided the signs are in compliance with all other applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4(A)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.150 Signs permitted in all zoning districts.
The signs mentioned in PMC 17.40.170 through 17.40.210 may be permitted in any zoning district. These signs are in addition to those signs expressly permitted in each zoning district and are subject to the provisions listed in PMC 17.40.170 through 17.40.210. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 482 § 2(F), 1997; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4(A)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.170 Directional kiosks.
The City may install, or cause to be installed upon public right-of-way or other public property, kiosks which provide traffic direction to public or semipublic facilities or events and/or areas of the City or which identify public or semipublic transportation services. Kiosk inserts directing the public to the South Poway area, the downtown business area, civic center area, Lake Poway area, Performing Arts Center, Old Poway area, rodeo area or other public or semipublic areas or events are specifically permitted. All kiosks, including those permitted under this section, under PMC 17.40.190(G) for community special events and under PMC 17.40.210 concerning off-site real estate signage, shall be of consistent design and shall be installed and maintained under the direct supervision of the City. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 525 § 7, 2000; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993)

17.40.180 Comprehensive sign program.
A comprehensive sign program shall be developed for all shopping, or office, centers consisting of four or more tenant spaces. The purpose of the program shall be to integrate signs with building and landscaping design into a unified architectural unit. This shall be achieved by:

A. Using the same type of cabinet supports, or method of mounting for signs of the same type, or by using the same type of construction material for components, such as sign copy, cabinets and supports, or by using dissimilar signing determined compatible by the Director of Development Services;

B. Using the same form of illumination for all signs, or by using varied forms of illumination determined compatible by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A(2)), 1983)

17.40.190 Temporary signs.
Temporary signs, which include banners and other advertising devices identified in this chapter, may be approved for a limited period of time as a means of publicizing special events such as grand openings, new management, sales, Christmas tree lots, multifamily residential leasing, and community special events that are to take place within the City.

A. General Requirements.

1. Approval. To apply for approval of temporary signs, the applicant shall submit a letter to the Director of Development Services which describes the size, appearance and location of the proposed signage by means of a sketch and written description, and which indicates the display dates. The Director of Development Services shall review the request within two working days after receipt and approve, approve with modification or deny the request.

2. Enforcement. Signs which are installed or displayed without approval of the Director of Development Services are in violation of this section and are subject to issuance of a citation or other enforcement action as described in Chapter 17.54 PMC.

3. Maintenance. Temporary signage shall be maintained in good condition.

4. Log of Usage. The Development Services Department shall maintain a log of temporary signage approved for each business, other than those addressed in subsections D and E of this section, and for multifamily residential leasing activity. If the Development Services Department is notified, prior to installation of the temporary signs, that the signage will not be used, the application will be canceled and the signage not deducted from the total number of days of temporary signage available. If signage is installed without approval of the Development Services Department it shall be deducted from the total number of days available at a rate of two days for every one weekday unapproved signs are displayed and at a rate of four days for every one weekend day unapproved signs are displayed.

B. Type of Signage Allowed. The type of signage that may be displayed by a business shall be as follows:

 

Grand Opening

Promotional Sales

Christmas Tree Lots and Pumpkin Patches

Consecutive days

30

N/A

40

Frequency

1 time

N/A

1 per season

One banner, and balloons on strings under 3 feet in length

Yes

Yes

Yes

Pennants

Yes

No

No

Strings of outdoor lights

Yes

No

Yes

One on-site, freestanding special event sign (= 32 square feet and = 8 feet high)

Yes

No

Yes

Ground-mounted inflatable advertising devices

Yes

No

No

Roof-mounted inflatable advertising devices

No

No

No

Strings of balloons

No

No

No

Search lights

Yes

No

No

C. Building-Mounted Banners.

1. Size. The maximum size banner that may be displayed will depend on the width of the store front, or the multifamily building, on which it is to be displayed and shall be according to the following table:

Maximum Size Banner Allowed (square feet)

Store or Building Width (feet)

20

= 15

25

> 15 and = 20

30

> 20 and = 35

35

> 35 and = 50

45

> 50 and = 75

50

> 75 and = 100

55

> 100 and = 150

60

> 150 and = 250

65

> 250

2. Number. No more than one banner may be displayed by a business or multifamily site at one time except that the City Council may approve the display of a second banner for businesses in freestanding buildings located at the intersection of two circulation element streets.

3. Appearance and Mounting. Banners shall be attached to the building, parallel to the walls of the business they are advertising or wall of the multifamily building that is being leased. Banners may not be installed on a wall which is on the property line. In all cases, banners shall be mounted with all four corners secure and so that they are level, do not sag, and are pulled taut into a straight line across the top, with the top and bottom edges of the banner parallel to each other.

4. Days Allowed. Businesses and multifamily sites may display temporary signage for up to 75 days per year in addition to signage permitted for a “grand opening” as defined in this chapter.

D. Temporary Signage for Motor Vehicle Dealerships, and Other Retail Businesses Engaging in City-Approved Outdoor Product Display.

1. Days Allowed. Temporary signage may be displayed each Friday, Saturday, Sunday and City holiday. No temporary signage shall be allowed Monday through Thursday, excepting City holidays, unless otherwise allowed for a special promotional parking lot sales event pursuant to PMC 17.26.030.

2. Type of Signage Allowed. One banner, not to exceed 65 square feet in area, may be displayed and each vehicle or outdoor display area may have either a flag or pennant not exceeding 12 inches by 17 inches, or a balloon on a string under three feet in length.

E. Temporary Signage for Off-Site Sales Events. For off-site motor vehicle, recreational vehicle and/or boat sales events, inflatables (either tethered or mounted on the ground) may be displayed at the off-site location, in addition to normal temporary signage. This special event signage may not be displayed for more than four days per event.

F. Advertising Kiosks. As part of a comprehensive sign program, the Director of Development Services may approve a structure designated for the display of a limited number of temporary signs by businesses in shopping, or office, centers. The following regulations shall apply to advertising kiosks, in addition to any specific conditions called out in the comprehensive sign program:

1. The design of the kiosk must be consistent with the design of the other freestanding signs in the center and with the applicable design standards in an applicable specific plan.

2. Kiosks may not exceed eight feet in height nor 40 square feet in area.

3. The range of street addresses to be found within the center shall be prominently displayed on the top of each kiosk.

4. No more than three signs may be displayed per kiosk. Signs shall be in the form of rigid panels which slide into the sign structure.

5. Advertisement on the kiosk is an alternative to, not an addition to, the display of a banner on the storefront.

G. Community special events, as defined in this chapter, may be advertised on the community events kiosks provided by the City. Additional off-site, freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:

1. A total of seven freestanding signs shall be permitted at major entrances to the City and one sign shall be permitted at a centrally located area in the City. At no time may more than one sign be displayed at each location.

2. Signs shall be no more than eight feet high and 24 square feet in area.

3. No sign shall contain commercial advertising nor may the name or logo of any commercial sponsor or co-sponsor be displayed.

4. Signs may be installed not more than 30 days before the scheduled beginning of the event and shall be removed within seven days after the conclusion of the event. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 661 § 8, 2007; Ord. 482 § 2(G), 1997; Ord. 443, 1995; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.200 On-site subdivision signs.
A. One temporary on-site subdivision sign not to exceed 64 square feet total for two sides or 32 square feet for one side and a total overall height of 12 feet may be permitted on each circulation element street frontage of the property being subdivided, not to exceed two such signs for all phases of any subdivision; otherwise a maximum of one sign is permitted.

B. Such sign shall be for the identification of a subdivision, price information and the developer’s name, address and telephone number.

C. Such signs shall be removed within 10 calendar days from the date of the final sale of the land and/or residences or within 24 months, whichever comes first. Extensions of 12 months may be approved by the Director of Development Services.

D. Signs shall be maintained in good repair at all times.

E. A cash deposit of $300.00 per sign shall be deposited with the sign application to ensure compliance with this chapter and removal of such sign. The deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon sign removal by the applicant. If the City is forced to remove any signs, then the cost of removal shall be deducted from the deposit. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4(4)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.210 Real estate kiosks.
A. Off-site direction signage to real estate subdivisions may be provided through participation in the kiosk program established by the City.

B. All off-site subdivision signs not conforming to this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and removed.

C. Participation in the kiosk program shall be allowed until the units within the subdivision are sold out, or for a period of 24 months, whichever comes first. Extensions of 12 months may be approved by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4(5)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.220 Signs permitted in single-family residential, open space-recreation, and public facility zones.
The following performance standards shall be met in all cases in the single-family residential, open space-recreation, and public facility zones:

Class

Sign Type

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area in Sq. Ft.

Maximum Height

Other Standards

1. Institutional signs for private schools, churches, government facilities, and other similar uses

Wall

1 of either a wall or freestanding sign per street frontage, with a maximum of 2

20 square feet

Below roofline

Street address shall be incorporated into the face or structure of the sign.

 

May incorporate electric or nonelectric changeable copy for events and time of events.

Freestanding

24 square feet for identification; 36 square feet with changeable copy

6 feet

2. Area identification

Wall

1 of either a wall or freestanding sign per development entrance, with a maximum of 2

36 square feet

6 feet

 

Freestanding

4 feet

3. School identification

Wall

1 of either a wall or freestanding sign per street frontage, with a maximum of 2

20 square feet

Below roofline

Street address shall be incorporated into the face or structure of the sign.

 

To be located no closer than 5 feet from the property line.

 

May incorporate electric or nonelectric changeable copy for events and time of events.

Freestanding

50 square feet

20 feet

4. Nonconforming commercial uses

Wall

1

18 square feet

Below roofline

 

Freestanding

1

18 square feet

6 feet

(Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4(B)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.230 Signs permitted in the multifamily and mobile home park zones.
The following performance standards shall be met in all cases in the multifamily and mobile home park zones:

Class

Sign Type

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area in Sq. Ft.

Maximum Height

Other Standards

1. Multifamily

 

Signs shall be in harmony with the scale and design of the development.

 

Street address shall be incorporated into the face or structure of the sign.

Wall

1 of either a wall or freestanding sign per street frontage, with a maximum of 2 per development

12 square feet for 12 units or less; 24 square feet for more than 12 units

Not above the roofline

Freestanding signs shall be placed no closer than 5 feet to the property line.

Freestanding

8 feet

2. Mobile home park

Wall

1 per development entrance

36 square feet

6 feet

Street address shall be incorporated into the face or structure of the sign.

Freestanding

4 feet

(Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4(C)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.240 Signs permitted in commercial zones.
The following performance standards shall be met in all cases in the commercial zones:

Class

Sign Type

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Height

Other Standards

1. Businesses (not within shopping centers)

 

Wall signs and freestanding signs shall be architecturally designed to be compatible with the development.

Wall

Each building face and/or frontage shall be permitted multiple wall signs

Combined total area of all signs on each building face and/or frontage not to exceed 15 percent of building wall area, or 150 square feet, whichever is less

Not to project above the roofline

Illuminated signs shall not be permitted on walls which face, and are visible to, abutting residentially zoned property.

Freestanding

1 per street frontage, with a maximum of 2 per site. An additional sign may be permitted along the street frontage of a major arterial, as designated in the City General Plan, provided all the following exist: the site frontage along the major arterial is more than 300 feet, there are at least 2 driveways providing access to the site from the major arterial, and the sign would be no closer than 100 feet to any other freestanding sign.

40 square feet

8 feet or up to 15 feet in accordance with PMC 17.40.020(A) and 17.40.260(G)

Freestanding signs shall be placed on the subject property and shall not overhang other private property.

 

Street addresses shall be incorporated into the face or structure of each freestanding sign in numerals at least 6 inches high.

 

The area dedicated to the street address shall not be included in the square footage calculation for purposes of complying with the maximum sign area limitation.

2. Businesses with shopping centers

 

All shopping centers shall develop a comprehensive sign program for all tenants and uses.

Wall

Each building face and/or frontage shall be permitted multiple wall signs

Combined total area of all signs on each building face and/or frontage not to exceed 15 percent of building wall area, or 150 square feet, whichever is less

Not to project above the roofline

All shopping centers with four or more tenants shall develop a comprehensive sign program.

 

Illuminated signs shall not be permitted on building walls which face, and are visible to, abutting residentially zoned property.

Freestanding

1 per street frontage, not to exceed 3 per shopping center. An additional sign may be permitted along the street frontage of a major arterial, as designated in the City General Plan, provided all the following exist: the site frontage along the major arterial is more than 300 feet, there are at least 2 driveways providing access to the site from the major arterial, and the sign would be no closer than 100 feet to any other freestanding sign.

65 square feet

8 feet, or up to 15 feet in accordance with PMC 17.40.020(A) and 17.40.260(G)

Street addresses shall be incorporated into the face or structure of each freestanding sign in numerals at least 6 inches high. The area dedicated to the street address shall not be included in the square footage calculation for purposes of complying with the maximum sign area limitation.

 

All copy on a freestanding sign shall be in letters/numerals which are at least 6 inches in height.

3. Businesses within office centers

 

All office centers with four or more tenants shall develop a comprehensive sign program.

Wall

Each building frontage, which faces a street or main parking lot, shall be permitted multiple wall signs

Combined total area of all signs on each building face and/or frontage not to exceed 15 percent of building wall area, or 150 square feet, whichever is less

Not to project above the roofline

Illuminated signs shall not be permitted on building walls which face, and are visible to, abutting residentially zoned property.

Freestanding

1 per street frontage with a maximum of 2.

An additional sign may be permitted along the street frontage of a major arterial, as designated in the City General Plan, provided all the following exist: the site frontage along the major arterial is more than 300 feet, there are at least 2 driveways providing access to the site from the major arterial, and the sign would be no closer than 100 feet to any other freestanding sign.

40 square feet

8 feet, or up to 15 feet in accordance with PMC 17.40.020(A) and 17.40.260(G)

Street addresses shall be incorporated into the face or structure of each freestanding sign in numerals at least 6 inches high. The area dedicated to the street address shall not be included in the square footage calculation for purposes of complying with the maximum sign area limitation.

Directory (wall or freestanding)

3 per building

12 square feet

 

Placed on the wall at main entrances or freestanding.

Limited to listing the tenant’s name and suite name.

Directed at pedestrian traffic.

4. Service station

Freestanding

1 per street frontage, not to exceed a total of 2 per station

40 square feet

8 feet, or up to 15 feet in accordance with PMC 17.40.020(A) and 17.40.260(G)

 

Price sign (freestanding)

1 per street frontage, not to exceed a total of 2 per station

16 square feet for price sign

8 feet, or up to 15 feet in accordance with PMC 17.40.020(A) and 17.40.260(G)

 

Special service signs (wall or freestanding signs)

3 for each pump island

4 square feet

If mounted on a wall or pole of the canopy it shall be no higher than 8 feet. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 3 feet in height.

Special service signs shall be limited to such items as self-service, full-serve, air, water, cashier and shall be nonilluminated.

5. Motion picture or play house theater

Wall

Each building face and/or frontage shall be permitted multiple wall signs

15 percent of the building face, not to exceed 150 square feet

Not to project above the roofline

May include electric or nonelectric reader board or changeable copy sign to display current and coming attractions.

Current coming attraction (wall)

4

8 square feet

8 feet

Nonelectric reader board/changeable copy sign to display current and coming attractions.

Freestanding

1

40 square feet

8 feet

 

6. Auto dealerships

Wall

Each building face and/or frontage shall be permitted multiple wall signs

15 percent of building face not to exceed 150 square feet per face

Not to project above roofline

 

Freestanding

2

40 square feet

8 feet, or up to 15 feet in accordance with PMC 17.40.020(A) and 17.40.260(G)

Must be set back at least 20 feet from side property line and separated by at least 100 feet from other freestanding signs.

 

Street addresses shall be incorporated into the face or structure of each freestanding sign in numerals at least 6 inches high. The area dedicated to the street address shall not be included in the square footage calculation for purposes of complying with the maximum sign area limitation.

Convenience

As needed to direct traffic to services, customer parking, etc.

6 square feet

5 feet

 

7. Drive-through restaurants

Menu board

2 per drive-through lane

40 square feet

8 feet

Directed at drive-through traffic and screened from public street.

8. Additional signs for auto dealerships and other commercial businesses with outdoor display that is permitted by the underlying zone

Suspended banner

One per business

60 square feet

No higher than the light pole to which the banner is attached

Banner suspended between 2 light poles

 

Not attached to any tree or other landscaping

 

Banner to provide a minimum of 13.5 feet clearance over any drive aisle

 

Located only within the outdoor product display area

Light pole banner

One banner, or pair of banners for each light pole

16 square feet total for each light pole

No higher than the light pole to which the banner is attached

Banner hung on a single light pole

 

Located only within the outdoor product display area

Tent

One per business

600 square feet

20 feet

May incorporate signage

 

No banner or other advertising device to be attached to the tent

 

Located only within the outdoor product display area

(Ord. 768 § 2, 2014; Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 495, 1998; Ord. 482 § 2(H), (I), 1997; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4(D)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.250 Signs permitted in industrial zones.
Repealed by Ord. 674. (Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.4(E)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

Article VII. Design Standards

17.40.260 Design standards designated.
Each sign shall be designed with the intent and purpose to complement the architectural style of the main building or buildings or type of business on the site and, to the extent possible, signs located on commercial sites but in a predominantly residential area shall take into consideration compatibility with the residential area.

A. Relationship to Buildings. Signs located upon a lot with only one main building housing the use which the sign identifies shall be designed to be compatible with the predominant visual elements of the building, such as construction materials, color or other design detail. Each sign located upon a lot with more than one main building, such as a shopping center or other commercial or industrial area developed in accordance with a common development plan, shall be designed to be compatible with predominant visual design elements common or similar to all such buildings or the buildings occupied by the “main tenants” or principal uses. The Development Services Director may condition his/her recommendation or approval of a sign to require such visual elements to be incorporated into the design of the sign where such element(s) are necessary to achieve a significant visual relationship between the sign and building or buildings.

B. Relationship to Other Signs. Where there is more than one freestanding sign located on a lot, all such signs shall have designs which are complementary to each other by either similar treatment or incorporation of one or more of the following design elements:

1. Type of construction materials, such as cabinet, sign copy, supports;

2. Letter style of sign copy;

3. Type or method used for supports, uprights or structure on which sign is supported;

4. Sign cabinet or other configuration of sign area;

5. Shape of entire sign and its several components.

C. Landscaping. Each freestanding sign shall be located in a planted landscaped area which is of a shape, design and size equal to at least the maximum allowable sign area that will provide a compatible setting and ground definition to the sign. The landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, healthy and thriving condition.

D. Illumination and Motion. Signs shall be nonmoving, stationary structures (in all components) and illumination, if any, shall be maintained by artificial light which is stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times (nonflashing).

E. Sign Copy. The name of the business, use, service and/or identifying logo shall be the dominant message on the sign. Address numbers are required to be shown for each business or center on a freestanding sign or, if none exists, on the building. The area of the address numbers shall not count against the allowable sign area.

F. Relationship to Streets. Signs shall be designed so as not to obstruct any pedestrian, bicyclist or driver’s view of right-of-way. A freestanding sign adjacent to a driveway or street providing vehicular access to an abutting lot or street shall not be located within 15 feet of the intersection of the driveway and the street right-of-way and/or shall comply with the design standards for site visibility of the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) (see PMC 17.08.240(C)).

G. Maximum Sign Height. Freestanding signs shall be designed to be low profile. New and replacement freestanding signs shall not be approved for heights greater than eight feet unless the City Council finds that extraordinary circumstances exist which warrant the approval of a sign greater than eight feet in height. Such extraordinary circumstances shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Impaired visibility from vehicles entering or exiting the primary driveway of the proposed or existing development;

2. Placement of an existing nonconforming building is such that there is limited, if not any, space available for a visible low-profile sign; and

3. The grade of the site is such that the placement of a low-profile sign would not be visible from the street. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 674 § 45, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.5(A – F)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

Article VIII. Nonconforming Signs

17.40.270 Intent.
It is the intent of this article to recognize that the eventual elimination of existing signs that are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter is as important as is the prohibition of new signs that would violate these regulations. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.6(A)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.280 General requirements.
A. A nonconforming sign may not be:

1. Changed to another nonconforming sign. Changes of copy, including legal nonconforming billboards, shall comply with the requirements of PMC 17.40.020 through 17.40.040;

2. Structurally altered to extend its useful life;

3. Expanded, moved or relocated;

4. Re-established after a business, not within a center, or a business within a center without an approved comprehensive sign program, is discontinued;

5. Re-established after damage or destruction of more than 50 percent of the sign value as determined by the Director of Development Services.

B. A new sign may be approved for a site, structure, building or use that contains nonconforming signs if it meets one or more of the following criteria:

1. It is part of an approved comprehensive sign program; or

2. It lessens the nonconformity. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.6(B)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.290 Amortization requirements.
Every sign or advertising structure which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be amortized in accordance with this article. Time periods for amortization of nonconforming signs shall begin from April 6, 2012. Any sign not complying with the provisions of this chapter at the end of the amortization period shall be deemed a public nuisance and abated in accordance with local ordinances.

A. Signs to Be Brought into Conformance within 90 Days. The following signs, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter, shall be removed or otherwise brought into conformance within 90 days from April 6, 2012:

1. Illegal Signs. Any sign erected without a permit and/or erected in contravention to regulations in existence at the time of its erection or placement, or without a valid sign and/or building permit;

2. Temporary signs or temporary on-site devices attached to signs or used in conjunction with the promotion of any product, service or use, such as flags, banners, bunting, inflatable devices, pennants, streamers, and spinners;

3. Portable signs;

4. Rotating signs; and

5. Flashing signs.

B. Legal Nonconforming Signs, Other Than Freestanding Signs. Any permanent wall sign which was properly erected pursuant to regulations in existence at the time of its erection or placement, and with a valid sign and/or building permit, but which does not meet the requirements of this chapter, shall be allowed to remain in existence, notwithstanding its nonconforming character, for the useful life of the sign, providing that such signs and sign structures remain in full compliance with PMC 17.40.130(B). Such signs must be brought into conformance if major exterior building modification occurs as determined by the Director of Development Services.

C. Legal Nonconforming Freestanding Signs. Any permanent freestanding sign measuring 65 square feet or less and 25 feet or less in height, which was properly erected pursuant to the regulations in existence at the time of its erection or placement, and with a valid sign permit and/or building permit, shall be allowed to remain for the useful life of the sign, providing that such sign structures remain in full compliance with PMC 17.40.130(B), 17.40.270 and 17.40.280. Such signs must be brought into conformance if a building permit or permits are subsequently issued on the site for major exterior modifications unless such conformance is waived by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 482 § 2(J), 1997; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.6(C)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.300 Historical signs.
Signs which have historical significance to the community, but do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, may be issued a permit to remain; provided, that the City Council makes the following findings:

A. The sign has historical significance for the community;

B. The sign does not create nor cause a traffic hazard;

C. The sign does not create a visual nuisance to the character of the community;

D. The sign is properly maintained and structurally sound;

E. The sign does not adversely affect adjacent properties. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 427 (Exh. A), 1993; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 7.6(D)), 3, 1983; Ord. 82 § 1 (Exh. A), 1983)

17.40.310 Severability.
Each provision of this chapter is separate and distinct from all others. In the event that any provision is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful or unconstitutional, it shall be severed from all other provisions hereof, and the remainder shall continue to be of full force and effect. The City Council specifically declares that it would have passed and adopted the sections of this chapter regulating the size of signs and prohibiting billboards whether or not it adopted any other provisions hereof; that those sections are separate, distinct, and severable from all other sections hereof; and that the invalidity of any other provisions hereof shall not affect the validity of those sections. (Ord. 739 § 2, 2012; Ord. 525 § 8, 2000)

Chapter 17.41
LANDSCAPE EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
Sections:

17.41.010    Purpose.

17.41.020    Applicability.

17.41.030    Definitions.

17.41.040    Provisions for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

17.41.050    Water efficient landscape worksheet.

17.41.060    Soil management report.

17.41.070    Landscape design plan.

17.41.080    Irrigation design plan.

17.41.090    Certificate of completion.

17.41.100    Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.

17.41.110    Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.

17.41.120    Irrigation efficiency.

17.41.130    Recycled water.

17.41.140    Graywater systems.

17.41.150    Stormwater management and rainwater retention.

17.41.160    Public education.

17.41.170    Provisions for existing landscapes, irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.

17.41.180    Effective precipitation.

17.41.190    Reporting.

17.41.200    Prescriptive compliance.

17.41.010 Purpose.
A. The State Legislature has found:

1. That the waters of the State are of limited supply and are subject to ever-increasing demands;

2. That the continuation of California’s economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;

3. That it is the policy of the State to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;

4. That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;

5. That landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can and should be water efficient; and

6. That Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use.

B. Consistent with the legislative findings, the purpose of this chapter is to:

1. Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and extend beyond the conservation and efficient use of water;

2. Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible;

3. Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

4. Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; and

5. Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies.

C. Landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed and maintained with the watershed-based approach can improve California’s and Poway’s environmental conditions and provide benefits and realize sustainability goals. Such landscapes will make the urban environment resilient in the face of climatic extremes. Consistent with the legislative findings and purpose of this chapter, conditions in the urban setting will be improved by:

1. Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and promoting productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen production, shade, habitat and aesthetic benefits;

2. Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements, reducing reliance on petroleum-based fertilizers and pesticides, and planting climate-appropriate shade trees in urban areas;

3. Conserving water by capturing and reusing rainwater and graywater wherever possible and selecting climate-appropriate plants that need minimal supplemental water after establishment;

4. Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use and landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally sourced materials, and using compost, mulch and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent erosion; and

5. Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing local native plants, climate-adapted nonnatives and avoiding invasive plants. Utilizing integrated pest management with least toxic methods as the first course of action. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.020 Applicability.
A. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

1. New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

2. Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;

3. Existing landscapes pursuant to PMC 17.41.170; and

4. Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to PMC 17.41.050, 17.41.100, and 17.41.110; and existing cemeteries pursuant to PMC 17.41.170.

B. Any project with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in PMC 17.41.200.

C. For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than 2,500 square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to PMC 17.41.200(A)(5).

This chapter does not apply to:

1. Registered local, State or Federal historical sites;

2. Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

3. Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

4. Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.030 Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:

“Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

“Automatic irrigation controller” means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

“Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

“Certificate of completion” means the document required under PMC 17.41.090.

“Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association’s certified irrigation designer program.

“Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and Irrigation Association’s certified landscape irrigation auditor program.

“Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

“Common interest developments” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives as defined in Civil Code Section 1351.

“Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.

“Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

“Distribution uniformity” means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.

“Drip irrigation” means any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

“Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

“Effective precipitation,” “Eppt,” or “usable rainfall” means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

“Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

“Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

“Establishment period of the plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

“Estimated total water use” or (“ETWU”) means the total water used for the landscape as described in PMC 17.41.050.

“ET adjustment factor” or (“ETAF”) means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

“Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

“Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

“Flow sensor” means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.

“Friable” means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.

“Fuel modification plan guideline” means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone.

“Graywater” means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. “Graywater” includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers.

“Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and nonpervious).

“Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated.

“Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

“Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.

“Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s landscape irrigation auditor certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “WaterSense” labeled auditing program.

“Irrigation efficiency” or (“IE”) means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiencies for purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

“Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

“Irrigation water use analysis” means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

“Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the State of California as provided by Business and Professions Code, Section 5615.

“Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

“Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

“Landscape documentation package” means the documents required by this chapter that are submitted by a project applicant to the local agency for review and approval.

“Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area.”

“Landscape water meter” means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use.

“Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

“Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

“Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

“Master shut-off valve” is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed, water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.

“Maximum applied water allowance” or (“MAWA”) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in PMC 17.41.050. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)].

“Median” is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.

“Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.

“Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

“Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

“New construction” means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

“Nonresidential landscape” means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.

“Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

“Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” or “overhead spray irrigation systems” means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

“Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.

“Parkway” means the area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress.

“Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

“Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor that, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

“Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required in this chapter, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the City. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.

“Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shutoff device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

“Record drawing” or “as-builts” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

“Recreational area” means areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf courses, tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.

“Recycled water,” “reclaimed water,” or “treated sewage effluent water” means treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

“Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters that affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch-tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

“Rehabilitated landscape” means any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of PMC 17.41.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet.

“Residential landscape” means landscapes surrounding single- or multifamily homes.

“Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

“Soil moisture sensing device” or “soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

“Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.

“Special landscape area” or (“SLA”) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water.

“Sprinkler head” or “spray head” means a device that delivers water through a nozzle.

“Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

“Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

“Submeter” means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.

“Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

“Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, and buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

“Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

“Water conserving plant species” means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.

“Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

“Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

“WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, and the Department of Water Resources 2014. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.040 Provisions for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.
New construction and rehabilitated landscape projects as defined in PMC 17.41.030 (Definitions) and pursuant to PMC 17.41.020 (Applicability) shall comply with PMC 17.41.050 through 17.41.120. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.050 Water efficient landscape worksheet.
A project applicant shall complete a water efficient landscape worksheet which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the ETAF for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The MAWA is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The ETWU is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.

A. In calculating the MAWA and ETWU, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the reference evapotranspiration table established by the State.

B. Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

1. The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

2. All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

3. All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in the water efficient landscape worksheet.

4. ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.060 Soil management report.
In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows:

A. Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

1. Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

2. The soil analysis shall include:

a. Soil texture;

b. Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

c. pH;

d. Total soluble salts;

e. Sodium;

f. Percent organic matter; and

g. Recommendations.

3. In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately 15 percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots.

4. The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following:

a. If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape documentation package; or

b. If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the certificate of completion.

5. The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

6. The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the City with certificate of completion. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.070 Landscape design plan.
A. For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

1. Plant Material.

a. Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the ETWU in the landscape area does not exceed the MAWA. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

i. Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;

ii. Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants;

iii. Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance;

iv. Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area; and

v. Selection of plants pursuant to the City of Poway Landscape and Irrigation Design Manual.

b. Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use.

c. Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

i. Use the sunset western climate zone system which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;

ii. Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and

iii. Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

d. Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than 25 percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where 25 percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).

e. High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.

f. A landscape design plan for projects in the very high fire hazard area shall comply with applicable standards contained in the Landscape and Irrigation Design Manual.

g. The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged.

h. The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low water use plants as a group.

2. Water Features.

a. Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

b. Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

c. Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

d. Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.

3. Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments.

a. Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.

b. Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected.

c. For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.

d. A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.

e. Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards.

f. The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydroseeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

g. Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer products shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available.

B. The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

1. Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

2. Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

3. Identify recreational areas;

4. Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

5. Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

6. Identify type of mulch and application depth;

7. Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

8. Identify type and surface area of water features;

9. Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious);

10. Identify location, installation details, and 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the City or regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan;

11. Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies and their 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity;

12. Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;

13. Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

14. Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized by the City to design a landscape. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.080 Irrigation design plan.
A. This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturer’s recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

1. System.

a. Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all nonresidential irrigated landscapes of 1,000 square feet and residential irrigated landscapes of 5,000 square feet or greater.

b. Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing nonvolatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

c. If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure-regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

i. If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

ii. Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

d. Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

e. Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

f. Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.

g. Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on nonresidential landscapes and residential landscapes of 5,000 square feet or larger.

h. Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features.

i. The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

j. Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

k. The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

l. The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in PMC 17.41.050 regarding the MAWA.

m. All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/International Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

n. In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

o. Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

p. Head-to-head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

q. Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turf grass.

r. Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.

s. Areas less than 10 feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.

t. Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any nonpermeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from nonpermeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

i. The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

ii. The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

iii. The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in PMC 17.41.120. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

u. Slopes greater than 25 percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

2. Hydrozone.

a. Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

b. Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

c. Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, ground covers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.

d. Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

i. Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

ii. The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

e. Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

f. On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone information table on the water efficient landscape worksheet. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.

B. The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

1. Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

2. Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

3. Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

4. Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

5. Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in PMC 17.41.030;

6. The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

7. The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized by the City to design an irrigation system. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.090 Certificate of completion.
A. A certificate of completion is required at project completion and shall include the following six elements:

1. Project information sheet that contains:

a. Date;

b. Project name;

c. Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address;

d. Project address and location; and

e. Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;

2. Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package:

a. Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these “as-built” or record drawings shall be included with the certification; or

b. A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes.

3. Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller;

4. Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule;

5. Irrigation audit report; and

6. Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations.

B. The project applicant shall:

1. Submit the signed certificate of completion to the City for review and approval.

2. Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the property owner or his or her designee.

C. The City shall:

1. Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant.

2. Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the local agency shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.100 Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.
A. Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.

B. A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

C. Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency.

D. A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.110 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
A. All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a City landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.

B. In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments), an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately 15 percent will satisfy this requirement.

C. For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as described in PMC 17.41.020:

1. The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the City that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming; and

2. The City shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits and irrigation surveys for compliance with the MAWA. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.120 Irrigation efficiency.
For the purpose of determining ETWU, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.130 Recycled water.
A. The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water.

B. All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and State laws.

C. Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.140 Graywater systems.
Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable City standards. Refer to PMC 17.41.020(C) for applicability on landscape areas less than 2,500 square feet with the ETWU met entirely by graywater. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.150 Stormwater management and rainwater retention.
A. Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration, which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged.

B. Project applicants shall refer to the City or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements.

C. All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration.

D. It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either: (1) the one-inch, 24-hour rain event or (2) the eighty-fifth percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, State or Federal regulation.

E. It is recommended that storm water projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site storm water and dry weather runoff capture and use:

1. Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.

2. Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roofs and concrete driveways.

3. Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.

4. Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.

5. Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.

6. Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture storm water and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil.

7. Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.160 Public education.
A. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community.

1. The City shall provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget.

B. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter.

1. Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.

2. Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.170 Provisions for existing landscapes, irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
A. This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015, and are over one acre in size.

1. For all landscapes subject to this section that have a water meter, the City shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the MAWA for existing landscapes. The MAWA for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62).

2. For all landscapes subject to this section that do not have a meter, the City shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.

B. All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.180 Effective precipitation.
A. The City may consider effective precipitation (25 percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate MAWA:

MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas.

MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for nonresidential areas. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.190 Reporting.
A. The City shall report annually in January to the DWR on implementation of this chapter to address the following:

1. Define the reporting period.

2. State the entity responsible for implementation.

3. State number and types of projects subject to this chapter during the specified reporting period.

4. State the total area (in square feet or acres) subject to this chapter over the reporting period, if available.

5. Provide the number of new housing starts, new commercial projects, and landscape retrofits during the reporting period.

6. Describe the procedure for review of projects subject to this chapter.

7. Describe actions taken to verify compliance.

8. Describe enforcement measures.

9. Explain challenges to implementing and enforcing this chapter.

10. Describe educational and other needs to properly implement this chapter. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

17.41.200 Prescriptive compliance.
A. Pursuant to PMC 17.41.020(B) any project, as an option to compliance with PMC 17.41.050 through 17.41.120, shall comply with the following items and must be documented on a landscape plan in order to use the prescriptive compliance option:

1. Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the following elements:

a. Date;

b. Project applicant;

c. Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));

d. Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf and plant material;

e. Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed);

f. Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well);

g. Contact information for the project applicant and property owner; and

h. Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option in Chapter 17.41 of the Poway Municipal Code.”

2. Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet to a depth of six inches into landscape area (unless contraindicated by a soil test).

3. Plant material shall comply with all of the following:

a. For residential areas, install climate-adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for 75 percent of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water. For nonresidential areas, install climate-adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for 100 percent of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water;

b. A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

4. Turf shall comply with all of the following:

a. Turf shall not exceed 25 percent of the landscape area in residential areas, and there shall be no turf in nonresidential areas;

b. Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of one foot vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length; and

c. Turf is prohibited in parkways less than 10 feet wide, unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles. Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by subsurface irrigation or by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.

5. Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:

a. Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data and utilize a rain sensor.

b. Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not lose programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.

c. Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range.

d. Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply.

e. All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

f. Areas less than 10 feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produce no runoff or overspray.

6. For nonresidential projects with landscape areas of 1,000 square feet or more, a private submeter(s) to measure landscape water use shall be installed.

B. At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide the owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of installation, irrigation schedule, and a schedule of landscape and irrigation maintenance. (Ord. 781 § 3, 2015)

Chapter 17.42
OFF-STREET PARKING
Sections:

17.42.010    Purpose.

17.42.020    General provisions.

17.42.030    Schedule of off-street parking requirements.

17.42.040    Property development standards – Generally.

17.42.050    Property development standards – General requirements.

17.42.060    Property development standards – Special requirements.

17.42.070    Performance standards.

17.42.010 Purpose.
A. All regulations set forth in this chapter are for the purpose of providing convenient off-street parking space for vehicles. The parking requirements of this chapter are to be considered as the minimum necessary for such uses permitted by the respective zone.

B. The intent of these regulations is to provide adequately designed parking areas with sufficient capacity and adequate circulation to minimize traffic congestion and promote public safety. It shall be the responsibility of the developer, owner or operator of the specific use to provide and maintain adequate off-street parking. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 8.0), 1983)

17.42.020 General provisions.
A. Off-street parking facilities, for both motor vehicles and bicycles, shall be provided for any new building constructed, for any new use established, for any addition or enlargement of an existing building or use, and for any change in the occupancy of an existing building.

B. For additions or enlargements of any existing building or use, or any change of occupancy or manner of operation that would increase the number of parking spaces required, the additional parking spaces shall be required only for such addition, enlargement, or change and not for the entire building or use, unless required as a condition of approval of a conditional use permit.

C. The required parking facilities needed for any development shall be located on the same site or, if an irrevocable access and/or parking easement is obtained, the parking may be on an adjacent site. Property within the ultimate right-of-way of a street or highway shall not be used to provide required parking or loading or unloading facilities.

D. The requirements of this title shall apply to temporary as well as permanent uses.

E. No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of the lack of off-street parking facilities prescribed in this title. However, the facilities being used for off-street parking on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum standards prescribed in this section.

F. Projects with unexpired site designs or conditional use permits approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall meet the requirements of the parking ordinance in effect on the date the site designs or conditional use permits were approved.

G. All required off-street parking spaces shall be designed, located, constructed, and maintained so as to be fully usable during workday periods or as needed by the use of the premises.

H. Where the application of these schedules results in a fractional space, then the fraction shall be rounded to the higher whole number.

I. The parking requirement for uses not specifically listed in the matrix shall be determined by the approval body for the proposed use on the basis of requirements for similar uses, and on any traffic engineering and planning data that is appropriate to the establishment of a minimum requirement.

J. In the calculation of parking requirements for centers, off-peak-hour uses from the normal operating hours of the center shall not be counted toward the parking requirement.

K. In situations where a combination of uses are developed on a site, parking shall be provided for each of the uses on the site according to the schedule given in this chapter. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 8.1), 1983)

17.42.030 Schedule of off-street parking requirements.
The schedule of off-street parking requirements shall be as follows:

USE

MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED

A.    Administrative and professional services as listed in PMC 17.10.060, except medical, dental, and related health services

1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area

B.    Shopping centers and general commercial uses as listed in PMC 17.10.060, except as noted below:

1 space/300 square feet of gross floor area

1.    Eating and drinking establishments

1 space/each 5 seats or 1 space/75 square feet of seating area where there are no fixed seats, plus one space per employee

a.    Fast food restaurants with drive-in or drive-through

1 space/each 7 seats plus 1 space per employee and an on-site queue line for at least 8 vehicles when drive-through is included

2.    Gasoline dispensing and/or automotive service stations

2 spaces for each service bay plus 4 spaces

3.    Appliance and/or furniture stores

1 space/500 square feet of gross floor area

4.    Hotels and motels

1 space per unit plus 1 space per employee

a.    Retirement hotels

0.6 space per unit plus 1 space per employee

5.    Auto and/or truck sales

1 space/400 square feet of gross floor area

6.    Medical and dental offices or clinics, veterinary offices or clinics

1 space/200 square feet of gross floor area

7.    Commercial Recreation Facilities.

 

a.    Bowling alleys, billiard halls

5 spaces/alley plus 2 for each billiard table plus required parking for other uses on the site

b.    Commercial stables

1 space/5 horses boarded on-site

c.    Driving range (golf)

1 space/tee plus required parking for any other uses on the site

d.    Golf course (regulation)

6 spaces/hole plus required parking for any other uses on the site

e.    Miniature golf

3 spaces/hole plus required parking for any other uses on the site

f.    Parks (public or private)

To be determined by the City Council

g.    Skating rinks

1 space/100 square feet of gross floor area

h.    Tennis, handball, and racquetball facilities

3 spaces/court plus required parking for additional uses on the site

i.    Theaters

 

(1)    Motion picture

1 space/5 seats plus 5 spaces for employees

(2)    Playhouse

1 space/5 seats plus 1 space per employee

j.    Physical fitness centers

1 space/200 square feet of gross floor area

C.    Public and Semipublic Uses.

 

1.    Day nurseries, day care or preschools

1 space/staff member plus 1 space/5 enrollees or 1 space/10 enrollees if adequate drop-off facilities are provided. Drop-off facilities must be designed to accommodate a continuous flow of passenger vehicles for safe loading and unloading. The adequacy of drop-off facilities proposed shall be determined by the City Council.

2.    Convalescent and/or nursing homes

1 space/4 beds plus 1 space per the highest employee shift

3.    Hospitals

To be determined by the City Council. Applicant shall submit a parking study.

4.    Educational institutions, public or private

 

a.    Elementary and junior high school

2 spaces/classroom

b.    Senior high schools

1 space/faculty member and employee plus 1 space/6 students

c.    Colleges and vocational schools

0.5 spaces/faculty member and employee plus 1 space/3 students

d.    Churches, convents, monasteries, other religious institutions, and other places of public assembly

1 space/3 seats within the main auditorium or 1 space/45 square feet of gross floor area within the main auditorium where there are no fixed seats

5.    Public utilities

To be determined by the City Council

6.    Libraries, public or private

1 space/250 square feet of gross floor area

D.    Manufacturing Uses.

 

1.    Manufacturing

1 space/750 square feet of gross floor area devoted to manufacturing plus the required parking for square footage devoted to other uses. Ten percent of the spaces provided must be designated for use by carpools.

2.    Research and development

1 space/300 square feet of gross floor area. Ten percent of the spaces provided must be designed for use by carpools.

3.    Storage

1 space/1,000 square feet of gross area for the first 20,000 square feet devoted to storage plus the required parking for square footage devoted to other uses. 1 space/ 2,000 square feet for the second 20,000 square feet. 1 space/4,000 square feet for area in excess of 40,000 square feet.

E.    Single-Family Residential, Multiple-Family Residential and Senior Citizen Residential are indicated in their respective zones.

 

F. Accessible Parking Requirements. Accessible parking requirements are established by the State. The parking standards contained in this chapter are identical to those established by the State at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. Any future changes in the State accessible parking standards would preempt the requirements given in this chapter.

1. Accessible parking for residential uses shall be provided at the rate of one space for each dwelling unit that is designed for such occupancy.

2. Accessible parking spaces shall be provided for all uses other than residential at the following rate:

Total Number of Parking Spaces in Parking Lot or Parking Garage

Minimum Number of Required Accessible Parking Spaces

1 – 25

1

26 – 50

2

51 – 75

3

76 – 100

4

101 – 150

5

151 – 200

6

201 – 300

7

301 – 400

8

401 – 500

9

501 – 1,000

Two percent of total

1,001 and over

Twenty plus one for each 100, or fraction thereof over 1,001

3. Accessible parking spaces required by this section shall count toward fulfilling automobile parking requirements.

G. Bicycle Parking Requirements. Provide permanently anchored bicycle racks within 100 feet of the visitors’ entrance for five percent of automobile spaces required. Bicycle parking facilities shall be stationary storage racks or devices designed to secure the frame and wheel of the bicycle.

H. Motorcycle Off-Street Parking Requirements. Motorcycle parking areas shall be provided for all uses, except residential, at the following rate:

1. Uses with 25 to 100 automobile parking spaces shall provide one designated area for use by motorcycles;

2. Uses with more than 100 automobile parking spaces shall provide motorcycle parking areas at the rate of one motorcycle parking area for every 100 automobile parking spaces provided.

I. Loading Space Requirements. Loading spaces shall be provided at the following rate for all commercial and manufacturing uses unless determined to be unnecessary by the Director of Development Services:

1. One loading space shall be provided for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.

2. One additional loading space shall be provided for each additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or its fraction greater than 10 percent. (Ord. 728 § 11, 2011; Ord. 674 §§ 46 – 49, 2008; Ord. 662 § 3, 2007; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 414 § 2, 1993; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 8.2), 1983)

17.42.040 Property development standards – Generally.
The property development standards set out in PMC 17.42.050 and 17.42.060 shall apply to all land, buildings, and uses authorized by the zoning development ordinance. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 8.3), 1983)

17.42.050 Property development standards – General requirements.
The following are minimums unless otherwise stated:

A. Residential (in feet):

1. Covered in a garage or carport, 10 feet by 20 feet, each space,

2. Uncovered, nine feet by 18.5 feet, each space;

B. Parallel parking spaces, eight by 22 feet, each space;

C. All others, 8.5 feet by 18.5 feet, each space; where spaces are located at the end of parking aisles which are terminated by landscaping, buildings, or other structures, such spaces shall be nine and one-half feet wide to provide additional room for maneuvering;

D. Loading space, 10 by 35 by 14 feet in height, each space;

E. One-way traffic, double-loaded aisles:

Parking Bay Width

Angle (in degrees)

Bay Width (in feet)

30

43

45

50

60

56

90

62



F. One-way traffic, single-loaded aisles:

Parking Bay Width

Angle (in degrees)

Bay Width (in feet)

30

28

45

32

60

37

90

43.5



G. Two-way traffic, double-loaded aisles:

Parking Bay Width

Angle

(in degrees)

Bay Width

(in feet)

30

51

45

57

60

60

90

62



H. Two-way traffic, single-loaded aisles:

Parking Bay Width

Angle

(in degrees)

 

Bay Width

(in feet)

 

30

36

45

39

60

41

90

43.5



I. Motorcycle parking space, four-foot by eight-foot;

J. Bicycle parking space, two-foot by six-foot;

K. Automobile, handicapped, motorcycle, and bicycle. All parking stalls and maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt, concrete, concrete pavers, or any other all-weather surfacing approved by the Director of Development Services and subject to current City standards;

L. Striping and Identification.

1. Automobile. All parking stalls shall be clearly outlined with double lines on the surface of the parking facility.

2. Handicapped. All handicapped spaces shall be striped and marked according to the applicable State standards.

3. Motorcycle. All motorcycle spaces shall have bollards installed and appropriately spaced to prevent automobile usage of the motorcycle area. Motorcycle spaces shall be marked so that they can be clearly identified for motorcycle usage.

4. Bicycle. All bicycle spaces shall be clearly identified. (Ord. 773 § 16, 2015; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 172 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 8.3(A)), 1983)

17.42.060 Property development standards – Special requirements.
Special development standards shall be as follows:

A. One 15-gallon tree, per City specifications, shall be provided for every three parking spaces. Said tree shall be so located to provide shade cover for the vehicles (see exhibit below).



B. Any unused space resulting from the design of the parking area shall be used for landscaped purposes.

C. All parking lot landscaped islands shall have a minimum inside dimension of four feet and shall contain a 12-inch-wide walk adjacent to parking stall and be separated from vehicular areas by a six-inch-high, six-inch-wide Portland concrete cement curbing.

D. All landscaping areas shall be irrigated automatically and kept in a healthy and thriving condition free from weeds, debris and trash.

E. All parking facilities shall have lighting in accordance with the current City standards. The lighting shall be designed and installed so as to confine direct rays to the site. Freestanding light posts located on projects which contain less than 15 acres shall be no taller than 18 feet. On projects which are 15 acres or larger in size freestanding light posts not exceeding 30 feet in height may be permitted; provided, that the property is located in an area which is already lighted by street lights or adjacent development. Parking lot lights shall be directed away from all property lines and shall comply with PMC 17.08.220(L) and 17.10.150(H).

F. All parking facilities, shall be graded and drained so as to provide for the disposal of all surface water on the site.

G. In any R zone except the RC and RA parking of motorized and nonmotorized vehicles shall be subject to the following requirements and those shown in the example below:

1. No motorized or nonmotorized vehicle shall be parked, stored or kept in the front yard as shown below except on land adjacent to the driveway or in the driveway. In all cases the surface shall be Portland concrete cement.

2. If motorized or nonmotorized vehicles are to be parked, stored, or kept on the lot, as permitted in subsection (G)(1) of this section, they must be for the personal use of the resident.



(Ord. 788 §§ 6, 7, 2016; Ord. 674 §§ 50, 51, 2008; Ord. 204 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 192 § 1 (Exh. A), 1986; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 8.3(B)), 1983)

17.42.070 Performance standards.
A. All parking facilities required by this chapter shall be maintained in good operating condition for the duration of the use requiring such facilities. Such facilities shall be used exclusively for the parking of vehicles. The parking facilities shall not be used for the storage of merchandise, or for the storage or repair of vehicles or equipment. Parking facilities shall not be used for the sale of merchandise, except on a temporary basis pursuant to PMC 17.26.020 through 17.26.070.

B. All shopping centers that use shopping carts shall provide convenient and safe on-site storage areas for the shopping carts.

C. Handicap, motorcycle and carpool parking areas, when required, shall be located within 100 feet of the entrance to the facility. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 8.4), 1983)

Chapter 17.44
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS*
Sections:

17.44.010    Purposes.

17.44.020    Nonconforming structures.

17.44.030    Nonconforming uses.

17.44.040    Abatement of nonconforming uses and structures.

17.44.050    Removal of illegal nonconforming structures and uses.

17.44.060    Nonconforming lots.

 

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 113, 252, 262 and 425.

17.44.010 Purposes.
A. This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the City and its citizens by prohibiting or limiting nonconforming uses and structures considered harmful or detrimental to the orderly and creative development of surrounding land uses.

B. While permitting the use and maintenance of existing nonconforming uses and structures, this chapter is intended to establish the criteria under which they may be continued, moved or possibly expanded, and to provide for the correction or removal of the land use nonconformities determined incompatible in an equitable, reasonable and timely manner. (Ord. 462, 1996)

17.44.020 Nonconforming structures.
A structure which was lawfully erected, but which no longer conforms to the applicable code requirements because of a change in zone boundaries or a change of regulations for the zone in which it is located is a legal nonconforming structure, and may remain subject to the following restrictions and requirements. A structure shall not be deemed nonconforming due to failure to conform to design guidelines contained in the Poway road specific plan.

A. Restoration of Damaged Structure.

1. Whenever a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, or any other calamity, to the extent of 50 percent or less, the structure may be restored provided that restoration is started within one year and diligently pursued to completion. When the destruction exceeds 50 percent or the structure is voluntarily razed or is required by law to be razed, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with the property development standards for the zone in which it is located except that any residential structure(s), including multifamily may be reconstructed up to the original size, placement and density regardless of the extent to which it is damaged provided that restoration/reconstruction is started within one year and diligently pursued to completion.

2. The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Official and shall be based on the minimum cost of construction in compliance with the building code.

B. Maintenance and Repair. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on nonconforming structures. Structural elements may be modified or repaired only if the Building Official determines that such modification or repair is immediately necessary to protect the health and safety of the public or occupants of the nonconforming structure, or adjacent property, and the cost does not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of the legal nonconforming structure based on the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as determined by the Building Official based on the minimum cost of construction in compliance with the building code. However, improvements required to reinforce nonreinforced masonry structures, shall be permitted without replacement cost limitations, provided that such retrofitting is strictly limited to compliance with earthquake safety standards.

C. Alterations and Additions.

1. Except for single-family residences in residential zones, no nonconforming structure shall be moved, altered or enlarged so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the property development standards unless required by law or unless the moving, alteration or enlargement will reduce or eliminate the nonconformity or except that changes to interior partitions or other nonstructural improvements may be made provided that the cost of the improvements shall not exceed one-half of the replacement cost of the nonconforming structure over any consecutive five-year period.

2. No structure housing a commercial use in a residential zone may be altered so as to install exterior lighting other than porch lighting at entrances and motion-activated security lighting of a type normally associated with single-family dwellings. (Ord. 462, 1996)

17.44.030 Nonconforming uses.
A nonconforming use is one which was lawfully established but which is no longer permitted in the zone in which it is located due to a change in zoning boundaries or regulations.

A. Residential Uses. In any zone, an existing residential use may be permitted to continue provided that the number of dwelling units shall not be increased.

B. Commercial Uses in Commercial Zones. Nonconforming commercial uses in commercial zones may continue to operate in the location where they were legally established in perpetuity subject to the following:

1. Such uses may maintain and install equipment and may expand into adjacent portions of the same building which were not occupied by the use at the time it became nonconforming. The area occupied by the nonconforming use may be expanded onto portions of the same property not previously occupied by the nonconforming use subject to approval of a conditional use permit for the entire nonconforming use including the expansion.

2. Such uses may add activities which are permitted by right within the land use district in which they are located. Such uses may add activities which are permitted by conditional use permit subject to approval of a conditional use permit for the entire nonconforming use including the additional activity or activities.

3. If the building in which the nonconforming use is housed is destroyed to any extent, the nonconforming use may be reestablished provided that the reconstruction or restoration of the building is started within one year and diligently pursued to completion.

4. If a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming use, the nonconforming use may not be resumed.

C. Mini-Warehouses and Gasoline Service Stations in Commercial Land Use Districts. Nonconforming mini-warehouses and gasoline service stations in commercial land use districts may continue to operate in the location where they were legally established subject to the following:

1. Such uses may maintain and install equipment and otherwise conduct routine maintenance and repair activities but may not expand.

2. Reestablishment of the use after destruction by fire, or other calamity, shall be according to the provisions established for nonconforming structures in PMC 17.44.020(A).

3. If a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming use, no nonconforming use may be resumed.

D. Other Nonconforming Uses. Nonconforming uses other than residential uses, nonconforming commercial uses in commercial land use districts, mini-warehouses and gasoline service stations shall not be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any part of the structure or site or another structure or site which it did not occupy at the time it became a nonconforming use, or in such a way as to displace any conforming use occupying a structure or site.

1. If the nonconforming use is discontinued, a similar nonconforming use or a conforming use is permitted; however, no intervening alternative nonconforming use will be permitted.

2. If a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming use, the nonconforming use may not be resumed.

3. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a nonconforming use.

E. Nonresidential Uses and Nonresidential Structures in Residential Zones. Nonconforming nonresidential uses and nonconforming nonresidential structures in residential zones may continue to operate in the location where they were legally established, except that such a use or structure cannot continue once it is abandoned. For purposes of this section, a nonconforming use or structure will be deemed abandoned in the following circumstances:

1. When the use or the structure is converted to a conforming use or structure; or

2. When the use or the use of the structure is discontinued for a period of 180 days or more. (Ord. 656 § 2, 2007; Ord. 462, 1996)

17.44.040 Abatement of nonconforming uses and structures.
A. Calculation of Time. The time period for any required removal or alteration of the structure shall be computed from the effective date of the change in zone boundaries or regulations.

B. Abatement. Legal nonconforming uses and/or structures shall be discontinued, altered or removed within the following specified time limits:

1.    A nonconforming use which does not occupy a structure or a use occupying a structure having an assessed value of less than $500.00

5 years

2.    Nonconforming structures having an assessed value of less than $500.00

5 years

3.    The nonconforming use of a conforming structure within any residential land use district

15 years

C. Harmful Uses. In any zone any nonconforming use or structure determined to be a health, safety or environmental (including noise impacts) hazard to the surrounding land uses may be ordered terminated by the City Council within a period of time less than otherwise specified in this section, provided that the City Council finds that said termination can reasonably be accomplished and that a reasonable amortization period is provided. (Ord. 462, 1996)

17.44.050 Removal of illegal nonconforming structures and uses.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or implied so as to allow for the continuation of illegal nonconforming structures and uses. Said structures and uses shall be removed immediately subject to the provisions of this chapter and State law. (Ord. 462, 1996)

17.44.060 Nonconforming lots.
An existing legal lot shall not be deemed nonconforming if it does not meet the minimum lot width, depth or lot size for the zone in which it is located. Additionally, no existing legal lot with RR-A, RR-B or RR-C zoning shall be deemed nonconforming if it does not meet the slope criteria for the RR-A, RR-B or RR-C zones. (Ord. 462, 1996)

Chapter 17.45
HISTORICAL STRUCTURES
Sections:

17.45.010    Purpose and intent.

17.45.020    Definitions.

17.45.030    Categorization.

17.45.040    Designation of historic landmark.

17.45.050    Criteria for designation as a Poway historic landmark.

17.45.060    Historic district designation procedures.

17.45.070    Certificate of historical significance required.

17.45.080    Criteria for granting a certificate of historical significance.

17.45.090    Demolition of historic landmarks.

17.45.100    Procedure for removing landmark designation.

17.45.110    Incentives for preserving historic/ cultural resources.

17.45.120    Duty to keep in good repair.

17.45.130    Appeals.

17.45.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to:

A. Protect, enhance and perpetuate historic/cultural resources, sites, and districts that represent or reflect elements of the City’s cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history for the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the City;

B. Safeguard the City’s historic heritage as embodied and reflected in its historic/cultural resources, sites, historic districts;

C. Stabilize and improve values;

D. Foster civic pride in the character and accomplishments of the past;

E. Strengthen the City’s economy by protecting and enhancing the City’s attractions to residents, tourists, and visitors and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry;

F. Enhance the visual character of the City by encouraging the preservation of unique and established architectural traditions;

G. Promote historic landmarks and districts for the use, education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City; and

H. Permit historic sites to be identified, documented, and recorded by written and photographic means and allow an opportunity for voluntary preservation of historic sites, all without infringing on the ability and right of a property owner to control the use of property or structures. (Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.020 Definitions.
A. “A,” “B,” “C” and “D” resources are defined in PMC 17.45.030.

B. “Certificate of historical significance” means a certificate issued by the Director of Development Services approving restoration, construction, removal, relocation in whole or in part, of or to a historic landmark or to a historic place.

C. “Development” means any exterior change or modification through public or private action, or any historic landmark or place including, but not limited to, exterior changes to or modification of structure, architectural details or visual characteristics such as paint color and surface texture, grading, surface paving, new structures, cutting or removal of trees and other natural features, and the placement or removal of any exterior objects such as signs, plaques, light fixtures, street furniture, walls, fences, steps, plantings and landscape accessories affecting the exterior visual qualities of the property.

D. “Facade” means the exterior face of a building which is the architectural front, sometimes distinguished from other faces by elaboration or architectural or ornamental details.

E. “Fixture” means a decorative or functional device permanently affixed to a site or the exterior of a structure and contributing to its ability to meet historic designation criteria. Permanently affixed shall include, but not be limited to, attachment by screws, bolts, pegs, nails or glue, and may include such attachment methods as rope, glass or leather if such material is integral to the design of the device. Fixtures include, but are not limited to, lighting devices, murals, molding, leaded glass or other decorative windows and decorative hardware.

F. “Historic district” means any area which contains a number of structures or natural features having a similar character of historical, cultural, architectural, community or aesthetic value as part of the heritage of the City, region, State or the United States, and which has been designated pursuant to this chapter.

G. “Historic landmark” means any historic/cultural resource which has been designated pursuant to PMC 17.45.040.

H. “Historic/cultural resources” means areas, streets, places, buildings, structures, or outdoor works of public art, natural features and other objects having a special historical, cultural, architectural, community or aesthetic value.

I. “Improvement” means any place, building, structure, natural feature or object constituting a physical addition to real property or a structure on real property, or any part of such addition or facade.

J. “Natural feature” means any tree, plant life, or geological element.

K. “Owner” means the person appearing on the last equalized assessment roll of the County of San Diego.

L. “Person” means any individual, association, partnership, firm, corporation, public agency or political subdivision.

M. “Removal” means the removal, displacement, demolition, or modification from a historic landmark or site that the historic landmark occupies, or any device, feature, fixture, hardware, structural or decorative material which contribute to the cultural, historic, or architectural character of the historic/cultural resource.

N. “Secretary of the Interior’s Standards” means the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, 1983 Edition, or such later edition as adopted by the City Council.

O. “Survey” means Poway Historical Survey: Historic/Cultural Resources Inventory. This survey should document structures and artifacts related to the area’s history from the establishment of Poway in 1887 up through 1940 including all areas within the corporate limits. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.030 Categorization.
The City has conducted a preliminary historic/cultural resources inventory covering 33 sites in the City. In order to change the categorization of an identified resource, or to add a building, structure, place or object to the inventory, the following criteria for evaluating historic/cultural resources have been established:

A. Description of Categories. Four categories of resources are identified and classified A through D.

Category A: This category is reserved for those structures, buildings, sites, or objects of major significance. The resource must meet one or more of the following criteria:

It is the site of, or reflects special elements or events of the City’s cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering or architectural history; or

It is associated with persons or events important in regional, State or national history; or

It is a rare or particularly fine example of a certain architectural style or construction technique associated with a particular period of history; or

It is the work or an architect, engineer, or designer who has substantially influenced regional, State, or national trends or the development of the North County region; or

Owing to its unique location or singular physical characteristics, it represents an established feature of the neighborhood or City whose removal would adversely affect the appearance or spatial and design relationships of the area.

Category B: Structures, buildings, sites, or objects in this category must have one of the following characteristics:

It is associated with important persons, events, or eras in the City, regional, or State history;

Its original design, architecture, aspect or function of the resource is significant but has been altered, affecting its integrity;

It is a good (but not rare or particularly outstanding) example of certain style or construction technique, or of the work of a prominent architect, engineer, or designer.

Category C: Structures, buildings, sites, or objects in this category must have one of the following characteristics:

It is a good example of a period of architecture design or construction; however, the design is more commonplace and there are many similar structures, buildings, sites or objects in the City;

It is an important resource; however, substantial alterations have severely compromised its historic, cultural, or architectural significance.

Category D: Structures, buildings, sites, or objects in this category are:

Built prior to 1940, and clearly not significant in terms of architectural style, appearance, design, construction, or association with important persons or events in City history.

B. Change of Category. Further research on any building, structure, site, or object may yield information on their roles in history. This information may warrant their inclusion in a different category.

Applications to change the categorization of an identified resource or to add a resource to the survey shall be submitted to the City Development Services Department. The application should contain information which provides justification for adding a historic/cultural resource to the survey or changing its category designation. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.040 Designation of historic landmark.
Historic landmarks shall be established in the following manner:

A. Any person or group may request the designation of an A or B category, historic/cultural resource for designation as a historic landmark by submitting a written request to the Development Services Department.

B. Any such request shall be filed with the Planning Services Department upon a prescribed application and shall include the following data:

1. The name and address of the property owner and assessor’s parcel number and address of the site;

2. A description of the proposed site including special aesthetic, cultural, architectural, or engineering interest or value of a historic nature, information about the architecture, notable features, construction, age, and other information demonstrating that the site meets the historic designation criteria established by PMC 17.45.050;

3. Sketches, photographs or drawings;

4. A statement of the condition of the site or structures;

5. An explanation of any known threats to the site or structures;

6. Information to allow the Development Services Department to make the findings required by PMC 17.45.050;

7. Additional information, including at least a site plan in appropriate scale, a legal description of the property, photographs, proposed uses, existing zoning, past, and present occupants, and a chain of title;

8. Evidence that the property owner has consented to designating the historic/cultural resource as an historic landmark.

C. After a request for designation and subsections (B)(1) through (8) of this section have been submitted, a notice of the request for designation as a historic landmark shall be forwarded to the Building Department and no building or demolition permits for any alteration to any improvement, fixture, or facade of the proposed site shall be issued while the matter is pending final decision.

D. The Development Services Department shall hold a hearing and review the application according to the criteria of PMC 17.45.050. Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication, at least once no later than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. In addition, notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing shall be mailed to the owner of the proposed historic landmark at least 10 days prior to the date of hearing.

E. Once a property has been designated as an historic landmark, the Director of Development Services shall cause a covenant regarding real property to be recorded against the title of the property indicating that it has been so designated. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.050 Criteria for designation as a Poway historic landmark.
A. Following adoption of a survey of historic/cultural resources, the Development Services Department must act upon an application and may designate historic landmarks by finding that a historic/cultural resource is of local, regional, State, or national significance, and is designated as a category A or B historic/cultural resource. In addition, the Development Services Department shall find that the historic/cultural resource meets one of the following criteria:

1. Its location is the site of a historic event having major significance to the City, State or United States;

2. Its identification with a person or persons who have made a significant social, cultural or scientific contribution to the City, region, State or the United States;

3. Its quality as one of the finest examples in the City of the work of an architect of major importance;

4. Its identification as the work of a person or persons whose work has exerted a major influence on the heritage of the City, region, State or the United States;

5. Its exemplification of an extraordinary class of architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship;

6. Its potential of yielding historic/cultural information of major importance;

7. Its integrity as a natural feature that has made a major contribution to the community;

8. Other attributes of the historic/cultural resource which are consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards.

B. The findings shall be supported by substantial evidence presented to the Development Services Department. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.060 Historic district designation procedures.
The City Council may establish an historic district within the City following the criteria for designating historic landmarks. The specific details of any historic district shall be developed as the need arises, to preserve the integrity of historic/cultural resources within the district. (Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.070 Certificate of historical significance required.
A. No development (as defined in PMC 17.45.020) of a historic landmark shall be permitted without a certificate of historical significance issued by the Director of Development Services.

B. The Development Services Department Director shall approve any request for a certificate of historical significance for any project that meets the requirements of PMC 17.45.080.

C. If the Development Services Department Director denies a certificate of historical significance, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such denial. The notice shall set forth the findings supporting the denial.

D. The Council may reverse the decision of the Development Services Department only upon finding that denial of the applicant’s request would impose extreme hardship as demonstrated by the applicant or upon finding that the Development Services Director has misapplied the criteria for granting a certificate of historical significance. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.080 Criteria for granting a certificate of historical significance.
A. The City Manager shall determine which departments regularly issue permits that may potentially affect historic landmarks. Each designated department shall maintain a current record of designated historic landmarks. The departments shall require any application for development on designated historic landmark to be preceded by an application for a certificate of historic significance.

B. If no development permit is required to pursue work on a designed historic landmark tenant, resident, property owner, or other responsible party shall apply for the certificate of historical significance directly.

C. An application for certificate of historical significance shall be filed with the Development Services Department and shall contain the following materials and information:

1. A clear statement of the proposed work;

2. Plans describing the size, height, and appearance of the proposed work;

3. A site plan showing all existing buildings, improvements, landscape features, and the proposed work;

4. Evidence that any conditions of incentives utilized or to be utilized pursuant to PMC 17.45.110 are being or will be followed;

5. Evidence that the applicant has considered means of preserving the historic landmark. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.090 Demolition of historic landmarks.
A. No demolition permit for any A or B historic/cultural resource or any historic landmark shall be issued until the provisions of this section have been followed.

B. All applicants for a demolition permit shall provide the following information to the Director of Development Services:

1. A description and location of the structure to be demolished;

2. Whether the structure is designated as an A historic/cultural resource, a B historic/cultural resource, or an historic landmark;

3. The reason for the demolition;

4. If the structure is an historic landmark, evidence that any incentives granted during the landmark designation process are fully exhausted and do not benefit the structure to be demolished in any way;

5. Evidence that the applicant has considered means of preserving the historic/cultural resource or historic landmark;

6. An evaluation of alternatives to the demolition of the structure, evidence that those alternatives have been reviewed, and a statement as to why those alternatives are unacceptable.

C. Not earlier than 45 days, not later than 50 days following the receipt of the above information, the Director of Development Services shall act upon the application for a demolition permit.

D. If the Director of Development Services denies a demolition permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing of such denial. The notice shall set forth the findings supporting the denial. The findings shall be limited to a failure to submit the information required by subsection B of this section.

E. The Council may reverse the decision of the Director of Development Services only upon finding that denial of the applicant’s request would impose extreme hardship as demonstrated by the applicant or upon finding that the Director of Development Services has misapplied the criteria for granting a demolition permit. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.100 Procedure for removing landmark designation.
Any time a historic/cultural resource has been designated an historic landmark by this chapter, the property owner may apply to the Director of Development Services for removal of the designation by showing that the property will not benefit any further from incentives granted pursuant to PMC 17.45.110 during the landmark designation process. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.110 Incentives for preserving historic/ cultural resources.
In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, the Development Services Department shall develop and recommend to the City Council a program of economic and other incentives to support the preservation, maintenance and appropriate rehabilitation of historic landmarks. These incentives may be granted at any time after an historic/cultural resource is designated as an historic landmark. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.120 Duty to keep in good repair.
A. The owner, occupant, or other person legally responsible for a historic landmark, shall keep in good repair all portions of the historic landmark to prevent deterioration and decay. All repairs, alterations, reconstructions, restorations or changes in use including the demolition of existing improvements, shall conform to requirements established by this chapter, and all other applicable City codes.

B. Whenever any development of the site occurs contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Director of Development Services shall order the action stopped by notice in writing served on any person or persons engaged in such action and any such person shall stop such alteration until authorized by the Director to proceed.

C. It is unlawful for any person to carry out any work on any building, structure or site when a stop work order has been issued.

D. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

17.45.130 Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Development Services may appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk not more than 10 days following the decision. The appeal shall state the reasons why the decision is contested. An appeal fee shall be established by City Council resolution from time to time and shall be paid when the appeal is filed.

B. Upon receiving an appeal, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing to consider the matter and uphold, notify or reverse the decision. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the appellant and published once in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days before the hearing. (Ord. 683 § 68, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 296 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 17.46
AMENDMENTS
Sections:

17.46.010    Purpose.

17.46.020    Repealed.

17.46.030    Application – Procedure.

17.46.040    Application – Fee.

17.46.050    Public hearing by City Council.

17.46.060    Investigation and report.

17.46.070    City Council action – Generally.

17.46.080    City Council action – Rehearing.

17.46.090    General plan consistency and alternate classification in lieu of proposed classification.

17.46.100    New application.

17.46.110    Change of zoning map.

17.46.120    Minor changes to development approvals.

17.46.010 Purpose.
The zoning map and zoning development regulations may be amended by changing the boundaries of any zone or by changing any zoning development regulation or any other provision of this title in accord with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.1), 1983)

17.46.020 City-initiated amendments.
Repealed by Ord. 773. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011)

17.46.030 Application – Procedure.
A property owner or his authorized agent, desiring to propose a change in the boundaries of the zone in which his property is located, may file with the Development Services Director an application for a change in zone boundaries on a form prescribed by the Development Services Director and shall include the following data:

A. Name and address of the applicant;

B. Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of the property for which the change in zone boundaries is proposed;

C. Address and legal description of the property;

D. An accurate scale drawing of the site and the surrounding area showing existing streets and property lines, and existing and proposed zone boundaries, for a distance determined by the

Development Services Director to be necessary to illustrate the relationship to and impact on the surrounding area, but not less than 300 feet nor more than 600 feet from the property proposed for rezoning;

E. Complete environmental assessment information on forms supplied by the Development Services Director;

F. A property ownership list, listing the names, addresses and Assessor’s parcel number of all property owners within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property; the list shall be obtained from the latest equalized assessment roll issued by the San Diego County Assessor;

G. A radius map drawn on the Assessor’s parcel maps, indicating the subject property with a 500-foot radius drawn around the property;

H. The Development Services Director may require additional information or maps if they are necessary to enable the Council to determine whether the change is consistent with the objectives of this title. The Development Services Director may authorize omission of the map required by this chapter if it is not necessary. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.4), 1983)

17.46.040 Application – Fee.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of processing the application as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.4), 1983)

17.46.050 Public hearing by City Council.
The City Council shall hold a public hearing on each application for a change in zone boundaries or for a change of the zoning development regulations. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed below:

A. The City Clerk shall set the time and place of the public hearing required by this title; the Council may continue the time or place of a hearing. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on a rezoning request, or an amendment within 40 days after the compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Section 21000 through and including Section 21176 and amendments thereof.

B. Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City. When the hearing concerns a matter other than an amendment to the text of this title, notices of public hearings before the City Council shall be mailed to all persons whose names appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the County as owning property within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property that is the subject of the hearing. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.5), 1983)

17.46.060 Investigation and report.
The Development Services Director shall make an investigation of the application or proposal and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the City Council and to the applicant prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.6), 1983)

17.46.070 City Council action – Generally.
The City Council shall calendar a public hearing on an application or a proposal within 40 days after compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act, Sections 21000 through 21176 inclusive of the Public Resources Code.

A. If the Council finds that the change is consistent with the objectives of this title, the general plan and development policies of the City, it shall introduce an ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning development regulations, whichever is appropriate.

B. If the Council finds that the change is not consistent with the objectives of this title, the general plan and development policies of the City, it may deny the application, continue it for changes to be consistent, or reject the proposal. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.7), 1983)

17.46.080 City Council action – Rehearing.
The decision of the City Council is final and effective within 10 calendar days unless a request for a rehearing is filed in accordance with Chapter 2.21 PMC. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 492 § 7, 1998; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.8), 1983)

17.46.090 General plan consistency and alternate classification in lieu of proposed classification.
When the Council determines, following a public hearing on a change in the boundaries of any zone, that a change to a zone classification other than the proposed classification specified in the hearing notice is desirable, the Council may adopt an alternate classification to a proposed classification in accord with the following schedule:

Proposed Land Use Category in Public Hearing

Alternate Zone That May Be Considered

RR-A through C

OS-R, OS-RM

RS-1

RR-A through C, OS-R, OS-RM

RS-2

RR-A through C, OS-R, OS-RM

RS-3

RR-A through C, RS-2, OS-R, OS-RM

RS-4

RR-A through C, RS-2, RS-3, OS-R, OS-RM

RS-7

RR-A through C, RS-2, RS-3, RS-4, OS-R, OS-RM

RC

RR-A through C, RS-2, RS-3, RS-4, RS-7, OS-R, OS-RM

RA

Any other R zone, OS-R, OS-RM

CO

None

CN

None

CB

None

MU

CB, TC

CG

CO, TC, A/GC

A/GC

CG

TC

CG

MHP

RS-7, RC

OS-R

None

OS-RM

None

PRD

RR-A through C, OS-R, OS-RM

PC

RR-A and existing underlying zone

HC

None

PF

None

In order to more properly accommodate these alternate zone classifications, the notice of public hearing shall indicate the alternate classifications, if any, which City Council could consider. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 674 § 52, 2008; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.9), 1983)

17.46.100 New application.
Following the denial of an application for a change in zone boundaries or a change in the zoning development regulations, an application or request for the same or substantially the same change shall not be filed within one calendar year of the date of denial. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.10), 1983)

17.46.110 Change of zoning map.
A change in zone boundaries shall be indicated by listing on the zoning map the number of the ordinance amending the map. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.0.11), 1983)

17.46.120 Minor changes to development approvals.
After a development review, conditional use permit, variance, or any modification thereof or amendment thereto is approved at a public hearing, such approval may only be amended, changed or modified at a public hearing, unless the Director of Development Services finds that the proposed modification is minor and would have no significant adverse effect upon the public interest or any private interest in real property within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property. (Ord. 723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 311 § 2, 1990)

Chapter 17.47
SPECIFIC PLAN REGULATIONS
Sections:

17.47.010    Authorization and purpose.

17.47.020    City-initiated specific plan.

17.47.030    Application – Procedure.

17.47.040    [Reserved]

17.47.050    City Council report.

17.47.060    Specific plan content.

17.47.070    City Council action.

17.47.080    City Council action – Rehearing.

17.47.090    Amendment of specific plan.

17.47.100    Specific plan deed restriction.

17.47.010 Authorization and purpose.
A. The California Government Code provides for the preparation and adoption of specific plans for all or any part of the area covered by the general plan to ensure its systematic implementation. Each specific plan must be consistent with the general plan and under no circumstances shall the specific plan allow land uses more intensive than those described in the general plan for each land use designation.

B. The specific plan is intended to regulate development within the City in accordance with the general plan by allowing the creation of specific development criteria for those properties where development might otherwise be incompatible with surrounding land uses as a result of noise, odor, light, glare, traffic, geology, or soils conditions, aesthetics, building architecture, building scale or other similar reasons. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

17.47.020 City-initiated specific plan.
The City Council may initiate the preparation of a specific plan on property by resolution. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011)

17.47.030 Application – Procedure.
A. A property owner or his authorized agent, desiring to propose a specific plan, may file with the Development Services Director an application for a specific plan on a form prescribed by the Development Services Director.

B. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of processing the application as prescribed in this chapter.

C. Where the City has initiated and prepared a specific plan, a fee may be imposed after its adoption upon persons seeking City approvals which are required to be consistent with the adopted specific plan. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

17.47.040 [Reserved]
(Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

17.47.050 City Council report.
The Director of Development Services shall prepare the specific plan and a report thereon which shall be submitted to the City Council and to the applicant prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

17.47.060 Specific plan content.
A. The specific plan may establish a list of specific uses, with definitions pertaining thereto; however, except for the Old Poway specific plan, no use may be included which is not a permitted or conditional use within the applicable land use designation and zone.

B. The specific plan document shall include sufficient text, diagrams and maps identifying land uses, development standards, performance standards, and all special requirements determined to be necessary by the City Council.

C. The specific plan document shall be adopted by resolution or by ordinance by a majority vote of the City Council and, at a minimum, shall include the following information:

1. A legal description of all properties involved, and a map identifying the subject property and all properties within 1,000 feet of the subject property;

2. An analysis of the subject property’s physical characteristics, related planning information and surrounding land uses;

3. An analysis of the existing land use designation and zoning for the subject property;

4. A listing of specific land use and development standards including, but not limited to: building setbacks, parking setbacks, landscaping, lot coverage, building height, noise attenuation measures, lighting, parking, architectural building style, building materials, signage, and public improvements. If appropriate, standards may be established by reference to the Poway Municipal Code;

5. The associated environmental review for the proposed specific plan. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 567 § 2, 2002; Ord. 314 § 1, 1990; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

17.47.070 City Council action.
The City Council shall hold a public hearing on each application for a specific plan. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed below:

A. The City Clerk shall set the time and place of the public hearing required by this chapter; the Council may continue the time or place of a hearing.

B. Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City. Notice of the public hearing before the City Council shall be mailed to all persons whose names appear on the latest adopted tax roll of San Diego County as owning property within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property that is the subject of the hearing.

C. If the City Council finds that the specific plan is consistent with the purposes of this chapter, the general plan, and development policies of the City, it shall adopt a resolution or ordinance approving the specific plan.

D. If the City Council finds that the specific plan is not consistent with the purposes of this chapter, the general plan and development policies of the City, it may either deny the application or continue it to allow changes to be made which would cause that specific plan to be consistent. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 567 § 3, 2002; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

17.47.080 City Council action – Rehearing.
The decision of the City Council is final and effective within 10 calendar days unless a request for a rehearing is filed in accordance with Chapter 2.21 PMC. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 492 § 8, 1998; Ord. 334 § 25, 1991; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

17.47.090 Amendment of specific plan.
An amendment to a specific plan adopted by the City Council may be processed after submittal of an application by the applicant or adoption of a resolution by City Council. Specific plan amendments shall be reviewed and approved in the same manner, either by resolution or ordinance, as the initial application and approval. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 567 § 4, 2002; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

17.47.100 Specific plan deed restriction.
Following the City Council’s approval of a specific plan, a deed restriction indicating that the specific plan approval runs with the subject property shall be recorded. (Ord. 724 § 2, 2011; Ord. 239 § 1, 1987)

Chapter 17.48
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REGULATIONS
Sections:

17.48.010    Purpose.

17.48.020    Application – Data and maps required.

17.48.030    Application – Fee.

17.48.040    Public hearing.

17.48.050    Investigation and report.

17.48.060    City Council action.

17.48.070    Findings required before granting or altering permit.

17.48.080    Lapse of a use permit.

17.48.090    Pre-existing conditional uses.

17.48.100    Modification of conditional use.

17.48.110    Suspension and revocation.

17.48.120    New applications.

17.48.130    Use permit to run with the land.

17.48.150    Annual review.

17.48.010 Purpose.
A. In order to give the use regulations the flexibility necessary to achieve the objectives of this title, in certain zones conditional uses are permitted, subject to the granting of a conditional use permit or a minor conditional use permit. Because of their unusual characteristics, conditional uses require special consideration so that they may be located properly with respect to the objectives of the zoning development regulations and with respect to their effects on surrounding properties. In order to achieve these purposes, the City Council is empowered to grant and to deny applications for use permits for such conditional uses in such zones as are prescribed in the zone regulations and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of conditional use permits or a minor conditional use permit.

B. When the subject of the application for a conditional use permit is protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution: (1) only the definite, objective guidelines and standards of this chapter shall apply; (2) no general health, safety and welfare requirement shall apply; (3) the requirements of PMC 17.48.060(A)(12) and (15) shall not apply; (4) the requirements of subsections E, G, I and J of PMC 17.48.070 shall not apply; the requirements of this chapter which may not be constitutionally applied shall be severed from the requirements which may be constitutionally applied and those applicable shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 492 § 9, 1998; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 175 § 1, 1985; Ord. 162 § 1, 1985; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.1), 1983)

17.48.020 Application – Data and maps required.
Application for a conditional use permit or a minor conditional use permit shall be filed with the Development Services Director on a form prescribed by the Development Services Director and shall include the following data and maps:

A. Name and address of the applicant;

B. Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of the property on which the use is proposed to be located. This provision shall not apply to a proposed public utility right-of-way;

C. Address and legal description of the property;

D. Statement indicating the precise manner of compliance with each of the applicable provisions of this title, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit, prescribed, in PMC 17.48.070;

E. A list of all owners of property located within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property; the list shall be keyed to a map showing the location of these properties;

F. Plot plans and elevations, fully dimensioned, indicating the type and location of all buildings and structures, parking and landscape areas and signs. Elevation plans shall be of sufficient detail to indicate the type and color of materials to be employed and methods of illumination for signs; screening, landscape and irrigation plans shall be included in the plans;

G. The Development Services Director may waive requirements of this section or require additional data as deemed necessary to the decision-making process. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.2), 1983)

17.48.030 Application – Fee.
A. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of handling and processing the application as prescribed in this chapter.

B. The Director of Development Services may advance the requirement for a minor conditional use permit to a conditional use permit or lower the requirement for a conditional use permit to a minor conditional use permit for conditional uses as are prescribed in the zone regulation and based upon the following criteria:

1. Public benefit;

2. Impact upon public services and facilities;

3. Impact upon adjacent properties;

4. Floor or site square footage;

5. Intensity of use;

6. Operating characteristics. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.3), 1983)

17.48.040 Public hearing.
The City Council shall calendar a public hearing on each application for a conditional use permit or a minor conditional use permit. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.46.050. At the public hearing, the Council shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in PMC 17.48.070. (Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.4), 1983)

17.48.050 Investigation and report.
The Development Services Director shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the City Council and made available to the applicant prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.5), 1983)

17.48.060 City Council action.
A. The Council may grant by resolution a conditional use permit or a minor conditional use permit as the permit was applied for or in modified form, or the application may be denied. A conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may be granted subject to such conditions as the Council may prescribe. Conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:

1. Requiring special yards;

2. Open spaces;

3. Buffers;

4. Fences;

5. Walls;

6. Requiring installation and maintenance of landscaping;

7. Requiring street dedications and improvements;

8. Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress;

9. Regulation of traffic circulation;

10. Regulation of signs;

11. Regulation of hours of operation and methods of operations;

12. Control of potential nuisances;

13. Prescribing standards for maintenance of buildings and grounds;

14. Prescription of development schedules and development standards; and

15. Such other conditions as the Council may deem necessary to ensure compatibility of the use with surrounding developments and uses and to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare.

B. Variations from regulations prescribed elsewhere in this chapter for fences, walls, hedges, screening and landscaping; site area, width and depth; front, rear and side yards; coverage; height of structures; distances between structures; usable open space; signs; off-street parking facilities or frontage on a public street, shall be separately administered in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 17.50 PMC. The decision of the City Council is final and effective within 10 calendar days unless a request for rehearing is filed in accordance with Chapter 2.21 PMC. (Ord. 492 §§ 10, 11, 1998; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.6), 1983)

17.48.070 Findings required before granting or altering permit.
The City Council shall make the following findings before granting or modifying a conditional use permit or a minor conditional use permit:

A. That the proposed location size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed use is in accord with the title and purpose of this title, the purpose of the zone in which the site is located, the City general plan and the development policies and standards of the City;

B. That the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed use will be compatible with and will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to adjacent uses, residents, buildings, structures or natural resources;

C. That the harmony in scale, bulk, coverage and density is consistent with adjacent uses;

D. That there are public facilities, services and utilities available;

E. That there will not be a harmful effect upon desirable neighborhood characteristics;

F. That the generation of traffic will not adversely impact the capacity and physical character of surrounding streets and/or the circulation element of the general plan;

G. That the site is suitable for the type and intensity of use or development which is proposed;

H. That there will not be significant harmful effects upon environmental quality and natural resources;

I. That there are no other relevant negative impacts of the proposed use that cannot be mitigated;

J. That the impacts, as described in subsections A through I of this section, and the proposed location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity nor be contrary to the adopted general plan; and

K. That the proposed conditional use will comply with each of the applicable provisions of this title, except for approved variances. (Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.7), 1983)

17.48.080 Lapse of a use permit.
A. A conditional use permit or a minor conditional use permit shall lapse and shall become void two years following the date on which the use permit was approved, unless prior to the expiration of two years:

1. A building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the use permit application; or

2. A certificate of occupancy is issued for the structure which was the subject of the use permit application; or

3. The site is occupied in accordance with conditional use, if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required; or

4. The use which was the subject of the use permit application is commenced; provided, that a use permit for a public utility installation may be valid for a longer period if specified by the City Council.

B. If the use, business or service for which the conditional use permit or a minor conditional use permit was issued terminates or ceases operation for a continuous period of time in excess of 180 calendar days except for:

1. Destruction or damage by acts of God; or

2. Destruction or damage by malicious acts; or

3. Remodeling or rehabilitation requiring prolonged closure; such remodeling or rehabilitation shall be continuously and diligently pursued.

The use permit shall expire; the permit shall thereafter be of no further force or effect. (Ord. 311 § 2, 1990; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.8), 1983)

17.48.090 Pre-existing conditional uses.
A. A major, minor, or conditional use legally established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or prior to the effective date of subsequent amendments to the regulations or zone boundaries, shall be permitted to continue; provided, that it is operated and maintained in accord with the conditions prescribed at the time of its establishment, if any; and provided, that it meets the requirements of PMC 17.48.080.

B. Alteration or expansion of a pre-existing major, minor or conditional use shall be permitted only upon the granting of a conditional use permit as prescribed in this chapter. Alterations or expansions of less than 10,000 square feet or 25 percent of the existing square footage of site or building area, whichever is more restrictive, shall be permitted upon granting of a minor conditional use permit. Minor alterations as determined by the Director of Development Services shall be permitted without the granting of a use permit. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 492 § 12, 1998; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.9), 1983)

17.48.100 Modification of conditional use.
PMC 17.48.020 through 17.48.080 shall apply to an application for modification, expansion, or other change in a conditional use; provided, that minor revisions or modifications may be approved by the Development Services Director if it is determined that the changes would not affect the findings prescribed in PMC 17.48.070. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.10), 1983)

17.48.110 Suspension and revocation.
If in the opinion of the Director of Development Services, a violation of any applicable provision of this title; or, if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions; or that, as a result of evidence now available and not available at the prior hearing when permit was granted and could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence at that hearing, the findings made, pursuant to PMC 17.48.070, can no longer be made; or that the permit was obtained by fraud, a conditional use permit or a minor conditional use permit shall be set for public hearing for possible revocation. The City Council shall hold a public hearing within 40 days, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in PMC 17.48.040. If the City Council is not satisfied that the regulation, general provision or condition is being complied with, they may revoke the use permit or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision or condition. The decision of the City Council is final and effective within 10 calendar days unless a request for a rehearing is filed in accordance with Chapter 2.21 PMC. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 492 § 13, 1998; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.11), 1983)

17.48.120 New applications.
Following the denial of a use permit application or the revocation of a use permit, no application for a use permit for the same or substantially the same conditional use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial or revocation of the use permit. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.12), 1983)

17.48.130 Use permit to run with the land.
A use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site, business, service, use or structure which was the subject of the use permit application. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.1.13), 1983)

17.48.150 Annual review.
Conditional use permits and minor conditional use permits shall be subject to annual review by the Director of Development Services for compliance with the conditions of approval and to address concerns that may have occurred during the past year. If the Director determines the use is not in compliance with the conditions of approval, the required annual review shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council, to consider modification or revocation of the use permit. (Ord. 674 § 53, 2008; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 252 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 17.50
VARIANCES
Sections:

17.50.010    Purposes and authorization.

17.50.020    Application – Data and maps required.

17.50.030    Application – Fee.

17.50.040    Public hearing.

17.50.050    Investigation and report.

17.50.060    City Council action.

17.50.070    Findings.

17.50.080    Signs – Additional findings.

17.50.090    Parking – Additional findings.

17.50.100    City Council action – Rehearing.

17.50.110    Lapse of variance.

17.50.120    Revocation.

17.50.130    New application.

17.50.140    Variance related to plans submitted.

17.50.010 Purposes and authorization.
A. Variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning development ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the deviation thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.

B. The power to grant variances does not extend to use regulations. Flexibility to the zoning regulations is provided in the conditional uses provisions of this title.

C. The City Council may grant variances to the zoning development regulations prescribed by this title in accord with the procedure prescribed in this chapter, with respect to fences, walls, hedges, screening and landscaping; width, and depth; front, rear, and side yards; coverage; height of structures; distances between structures; usable open space; signs; off street parking facilities, or frontage on a public street. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.1), 1983)

17.50.020 Application – Data and maps required.
Application for a variance shall be filed with the Development Services Director on a form prescribed by the Development Services Director and shall include the following data and maps:

A. Name and address of the applicant;

B. Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of the property on which the variance is being requested;

C. Address and legal description of the property;

D. Statement of the precise nature of the variance requested and the practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning regulations that would result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a variance, prescribed in PMC 17.50.070;

E. An accurate scale drawing of the site and any adjacent property affected, showing, when pertinent, the contours at intervals of not more than five feet, and all existing and proposed locations of streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking facilities and landscaped areas;

F. A list of all owners of property located within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property; the list shall be keyed to a map showing the location of these properties;

G. The Development Services Director may require additional information or plans, if they are necessary, to enable a determination as to whether the circumstances prescribed for the granting of a variance exist; the Development Services Director may authorize omission of any or all of the plans and drawings required by this section if they are not necessary. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.2), 1983)

17.50.030 Application – Fee.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of handling and processing the application as prescribed in this chapter. A single application may include requests for variances from more than one regulation applicable to the same site, or for similar variances on two or more adjacent sites with similar characteristics. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.3), 1983)

17.50.040 Public hearing.
The City Council shall calendar a public hearing on an application for a variance. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.46.050. At a public hearing, the Council shall review the application, statements and drawings submitted therewith and shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the variance, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in PMC 17.50.070. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.4), 1983)

17.50.050 Investigation and report.
The Development Services Director shall make an investigation of each application that is the subject of a public hearing and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the City Council and made available to the applicant prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.5), 1983)

17.50.060 City Council action.
The Council may grant by resolution a variance as was applied for or in modified form, or the application may be denied. Variance for signs may be conditioned to expire with the change of copy for the use, be reviewed on a periodic basis or be required to conform upon change of ownership, and/or shall automatically expire upon any designated period of time. (Ord. 492 § 14, 1998; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.6), 1983)

17.50.070 Findings.
The City Council may grant a variance to a regulation prescribed by this title with respect to fences, walls, hedges, screening or landscaping; width, or depth; front, rear, or side yards, coverage; height of structures; usable open space, or frontage on a public street, as the variance was applied for or in modified form, if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the Council makes findings of fact that establish that the circumstances prescribed in subsections A through F of this section do apply.

A. That there are special circumstances applicable to the property, (size, shape, topography, location or surroundings) or the intended use of the property, and because of this, the strict application of the zoning development ordinance deprives the property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity under identical zoning classification; and

B. That granting the variance or its modification is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and zone and denied to the property for which the variance is sought; and

C. That granting the variance or its modification will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in such vicinity and zone in which the property is located; and

D. The granting of this variance does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated; and

E. The granting of this variance does not allow a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning development regulation governing the parcel of property; and

F. That granting the variance or its modification will not be incompatible with the City general plan. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.7), 1983)

17.50.080 Signs – Additional findings.
The City Council may grant a variance for sign location and other similar performance standards except area and height as the variance was applied for or in modified form, if on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the Council makes findings of fact that establish that the circumstances prescribed in PMC 17.50.070 apply and the following circumstances also apply:

A. That the granting of the variance will not detract from the attractiveness or orderliness of the City’s appearance or the surrounding neighborhood;

B. That the granting of the variance will not create a hazard to public safety. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.8), 1983)

17.50.090 Parking – Additional findings.
The City Council may grant a variance to a regulation prescribed by this title with respect to off-street parking facilities as the variance was applied for or in modified form if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the Council makes findings of fact that establish that the circumstances prescribed in PMC 17.50.070 apply and the following circumstances also apply:

A. That neither present nor anticipated future traffic volumes generated by the use of the site or the uses of sites in the vicinity reasonably require strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation; and

B. That the granting of the variance will not result in the parking or loading of vehicles on public streets in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic on the streets; and

C. That the granting of the variance will not create a safety hazard or any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of this title. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.9), 1983)

17.50.100 City Council action – Rehearing.
The decision of the City Council is final and effective within 10 calendar days unless a request for a rehearing is filed in accordance with Chapter 2.21 PMC. (Ord. 492 § 15, 1998; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.10), 1983)

17.50.110 Lapse of variance.
A variance shall lapse and shall become void two years following the date on which the variance became effective unless prior to the expiration of two years, a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the variance application, or a permit is issued authorizing occupancy of the site or structure which was the subject of the variance application, or the site is occupied if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required. (Ord. 311 § 2, 1990; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.11), 1983)

17.50.120 Revocation.
A. If in the opinion of the Director of Development Services, a violation of any applicable provision of this title; or, if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions; or that, as a result of evidence now available and not available at the prior hearing when permit was granted and could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence at that hearing, the findings made, pursuant to PMC 17.50.070, 17.50.080 and/or 17.50.090, can no longer be made; or that the variance was obtained by fraud, the variance shall be set for public hearing for possible revocation.

B. The City Council shall hold a public hearing within 40 days, in accordance with procedure prescribed in PMC 17.50.040.

C. If the City Council is not satisfied that the regulation, general provision or condition is being complied with, they may revoke the variance or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision or condition.

D. The decision shall become final on the date set by the City Council unless request for rehearing has been filed within the prescribed period, in which case PMC 17.46.080 shall apply. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.12), 1983)

17.50.130 New application.
Following the denial or revocation of a variance application, no application for the same or substantially the same variance on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year of the date of denial or revocation of the variance. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.13), 1983)

17.50.140 Variance related to plans submitted.
Unless otherwise specified at the time a variance is granted, it shall apply only to the plans and drawings submitted as part of the application. (Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 10.2.13), 1983)

Chapter 17.52
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURE
Sections:

17.52.010    Purpose.

17.52.020    Applicability.

17.52.030    Plans and drawings submission.

17.52.040    Review and evaluation.

17.52.050    Action by Director.

17.52.060    Action by City Council.

17.52.090    Conditions.

17.52.100    Revocation or modification of development review approval for cause.

17.52.110    Automatic revocation of development review approval.

17.52.120    Expiration and extension.

17.52.010 Purpose.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the development review procedure.

B. The City finds that a development review process supports the implementation of the City general plan. The City further finds that the quality of residential, commercial, industrial and public/quasipublic uses has a substantial impact upon the visual appeal, environmental soundness, economic stability, and property values of the City. This chapter is not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather to focus on design principles which can result in creative imaginative solutions for the project and quality design for the City. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to:

1. Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and provide a method by which the City may implement this interdependence to its benefit;

2. Encourage the orderly and harmonious appearance of structures and property within the City along with associated facilities, such as but not limited to signs, landscaping, parking areas and streets;

3. Maintain the public health, safety and general welfare, and property throughout the City;

4. Assist private and public developments to be more cognizant of public concerns for the aesthetics of developments;

5. Reasonably ensure that new developments, including residential, commercial, industrial, and public/quasipublic developments, do not have an adverse aesthetic, health, safety or architecturally related impact upon existing adjoining properties, or the City in general;

6. Ensure that the proposed development complies with all of the provisions of the zoning ordinance and the general plan. (Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.1), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.020 Applicability.
In order to safeguard and enhance the appearance and quality of development of the City, development review approval shall be required prior to the issuance of any building permit for single-family subdivision developments; single-family homes (custom); multiple-family developments; mobile home parks; commercial or industrial establishments, and public/quasipublic uses, including additions, alterations and redevelopment thereof. (Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.2), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.030 Plans and drawings submission.
In addition to meeting all of the other requirements of the zoning ordinance, any applicant for a building permit for the establishment of single-family subdivision developments; single-family homes (custom); multiple-family developments; the establishment of commercial; industrial, public/quasipublic uses; including additions, alterations and redevelopment thereof shall submit the following plans and drawings to the Director of Development Services for review:

A. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of structures and other improvements including, where appropriate, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking areas, landscaped areas, fences, and walls; the site plan shall indicate the locations of off-street parking areas including entrances and exits and the direction of traffic flow into and out of off-street parking areas;

B. A conceptual landscape plan, drawn to scale, showing the locations of existing trees proposed to be removed or retained on the site, the location and design of landscaped areas and the varieties and sizes of plant materials to be planted therein, and other landscape features as may be necessary to illustrate the landscape concept;

C. Architectural drawings drawn to scale, including floor plans in sufficient detail to permit computation of yard requirements and all elevations of the proposed structures as they will appear upon completion; all exterior surfacing materials and colors shall be specified;

D. Accurate scale drawings of all signs indicating their size, material, color, and illumination, if any;

E. Conceptual grading and drainage plans;

F. Such other data as may be required by the Director of Development Services to ensure that the purposes of this section are satisfied. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.3), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.040 Review and evaluation.
The Director shall review and evaluate the development plans that are submitted in accordance with the following guidelines:

A. Scope. The Director shall review and evaluate development plans for conformance with the development review standards and criteria set forth in the pertinent sections of the zoning ordinance.

B. Modifications Required for Approval of the Development Plan. The Director may specify modifications, changes, and additions to the development plan in his recommendation or requirements for its approval. Such recommendations may be suggested by the Director to eliminate or mitigate significant adverse environmental effects disclosed by any environmental impact report or modifications, changes and additions that are necessary to meet the purpose of this chapter.

C. Improvements Required for Approval of the Development Plan. The Director shall ensure that all development plans provide for on-site and off-site improvements which may be required to implement the purposes of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, the general plan and all policies of the City Council.

D. Affordable Housing Set-Aside. Residential apartment development review, the application for which was not complete until after the effective date hereof, shall provide that 15 percent of the units created shall be set aside for low-income housing by recorded deed restriction providing such set-aside. Such a development review project which does not so provide shall be denied as inconsistent with the housing element of the general plan. (Ord. 674 § 54, 2008; Ord. 370 § 2, 1992; Ord. 350 § 2, 1992; Ord. 349 § 2, 1991; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.4), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.050 Action by Director.
A. The Director shall have the authority to approve, deny or modify applications for minor development review projects as designated below:

1. Single-family homes not within a tract subdivision, i.e., custom homes.

2. Construction of an addition to a single-family home, a detached accessory building and/or reconstruction of a single-family home which results in more than an additional 750 square feet of habitable space. This section shall also apply to multiple additions if, in any 12-month period, a building permit is issued for more than one addition to a single-family home or detached accessory building and the total square footage of the approved additions results in more than an additional 750 square feet of habitable space. If the construction of an addition that is less than 750 square feet of habitable space has received final approval from the City at least one year prior to the submittal of a request for a new addition of habitable space, the square footage of the prior addition shall not count toward the 750-square-foot threshold.

3. On lots less than two net acres in size, the construction of a detached nonhabitable accessory building that does not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of the living space of the main residence on the lot but is greater than 1,500 square feet gross floor area, as allowed pursuant to PMC 17.08.180(C)(1).

4. Remodeling, alterations or additions of commercial and industrial buildings that total less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or 25 percent of the gross floor area of an existing building on the site, whichever is more restrictive.

5. Construction or alteration of utility facilities in, on, over, upon, across, and along the public streets and public rights-of-way within the City of Poway shall require approval of a minor development review permit from the Director of Development Services if the facilities include a surface-mounted cabinet with a dimension (width, height, or length) greater than 36 inches, or where more than one cabinet of any size is located closer than 100 feet to another cabinet of any size. Exempt from this requirement are facilities placed underground. The applicant shall comply with the “Guidelines for the Placement of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way.”

B. For all other development review approvals, the Director shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of said application in a report to the City Council. (Ord. 773 § 18, 2015; Ord. 679 § 6, 2008; Ord. 660 § 3, 2007; Ord. 307 § 2, 1989; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.5), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.060 Action by City Council.
Within 60 days of the date that application is deemed complete by the Director, the City Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application, or shall request the applicant to revise said applications. Failure of the Council to act within 60 days shall be deemed approval of the application unless the applicant shall consent to an extension of time. (Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.6), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.090 Conditions.
Development reviews may be approved or modified subject to the performance of such conditions, including the provision of required improvements as the Council, or the Director in the case of a minor development review, shall deem to be reasonable and necessary, or advisable under the circumstances, so that the objectives of the zoning ordinance, general plan and City Council policies shall be achieved. Such conditions shall be imposed and enforced as follows:

A. Security May be Required to Ensure Performance. In order to ensure the performance of conditions imposed concurrent with the granting or modification of a development plan, the applicant may be required to furnish security in the form of money or surety bond in the amount fixed by the authority granting or modifying the development plan. Such security shall be furnished as required by local ordinance.

B. Provision of Required Improvements. Whenever a development review approval is granted or modified subject to the condition that specified improvements be provided by the applicant, such improvements shall be installed by the applicant and approved and accepted by the cognizant City authority, the applicant shall execute an agreement with the cognizant City authority pursuant to local ordinance to make such improvements prior to the time or events specified in the development review approval.

C. Condition Declared Void. Whenever there becomes final any judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction declaring one or more of the conditions of a development review approval to be void or ineffective, or enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the enforcement or operation of one or more of such conditions, said development review approval shall cease to be valid and all rights or privileges granted thereby shall lapse, as provided by PMC 17.52.110.

D. Violation of Condition. Whenever a development review is approved or modified by the approving authority subject to a condition or conditions, use or enjoyment of the development review approval in violation of or without observance of any such conditions shall constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance and said development review approval may be revoked or modified as provided in PMC 17.52.100. (Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.9), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.100 Revocation or modification of development review approval for cause.
A development review approval may be revoked or modified by the approving authority for cause as provided by the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the modification of a development review approval may include the modification of the terms of the development review approval itself or the waiver, alteration, or imposition of new conditions pursuant to PMC 17.52.090.

A. Grounds for Revocation or Modification. A development review approval may be revoked or modified by the approving authority pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon a finding of any one or more of the following grounds:

1. That such development review approval was obtained or extended by fraud;

2. That one or more of the conditions upon which such development review approval was granted have been violated;

3. That the use for which the development review approval was granted is so conducted as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or as to be a nuisance;

4. That construction on the subject property is not in conformance with the development review approval or other applicable requirements.

B. Notification. The Director shall notify the owner of the property of his action in the same manner as specified in the building code for revocation of a building permit, or by written notice to the owner of the subject property as shown on the latest assessment roll or as indicated by later information available to the Director.

C. Appeal. Revocation or modification of a development review approval may be appealed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 674 § 55, 2008; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.10), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.110 Automatic revocation of development review approval.
If a development review is approved or modified subject to one or more conditions, such development review approval shall cease to be valid, and all rights or privileges granted thereby shall lapse, notwithstanding any other provisions of the zoning ordinance to the contrary. Whenever there becomes final any judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction declaring one or more of such conditions to be void or ineffective, or enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the enforcement or operation of one or more of such conditions said development review approval shall also cease to be valid. (Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.11), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

17.52.120 Expiration and extension.
Any approval of a development review or minor development review shall expire within two years of such approval except where building permit has been issued and construction or use of the property in reliance on such development review approval has commenced prior to its expiration. (Ord. 311 § 2, 1990; Ord. 113 §§ 1 (Exh. A 10.3.12), 2, 1983; Ord. 44 § 3 (Exh. A), 1981)

Chapter 17.53
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REGULATIONS FOR CONSIDERATION
Sections:

17.53.010    Authority for adoption.

17.53.011    Applications – Forms and information.

17.53.012    Applications – Fees.

17.53.013    Applications – Qualification as an applicant.

17.53.014    Applications – Proposed form of agreement.

17.53.015    Applications – Review of application.

17.53.020    Notice and hearing – Duty to give notice.

17.53.021    Notice and hearing – Requirements for form and time of notice of intention to consider adoption of development agreement.

17.53.022    Notice and hearing – Failure to receive notice.

17.53.023    Rules governing conduct of hearing.

17.53.024    Notice and hearing – Irregularity in proceedings.

17.53.030    Standards of review, findings and decisions – Decision by City Council.

17.53.031    Standards of review, findings and decisions – Approval of development agreement.

17.53.040    Amendment and cancellation of agreement by mutual consent – Initiation of amendment or cancellation.

17.53.041    Amendment and cancellation of agreement by mutual consent – Procedure.

17.53.050    Recordation of development agreement amendment or cancellation.

17.53.060    Periodic review – Time for and initiation of review.

17.53.061    Periodic review – Notice of periodic review.

17.53.062    Periodic review – Public hearing.

17.53.063    Periodic review – Findings upon public hearing.

17.53.064    Periodic review – Procedure upon findings.

17.53.070    Modification or termination – Proceedings upon modification or termination.

17.53.071    Modification or termination – Hearing on modification or termination.

17.53.010 Authority for adoption.
These regulations are adopted under the authority of Government Code Section 65864 through 65869.5, 1985 Edition. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.011 Applications – Forms and information.
A. The Department of Development Services shall prescribe the form for each application, notice and documents provided for or required under these regulations for the preparation and implementation of development agreements.

B. The Department of Development Services may require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as the Director considers necessary to process the application. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.012 Applications – Fees.
The City Council shall by separate resolution fix the schedule of fees and charges imposed for the filing and processing of each application and document provided for or required under these regulations. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.013 Applications – Qualification as an applicant.
Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person(s) who has the entire legal interest in the real property or a person(s) who has the entire equitable interest in the real property and is joined by the legal interest holder in the application. The Director of Development Services shall require an applicant to show proof of interest in the real property in the form of a title report by a California Title Insurance Company and proof of the authority of the agent, if any, to act for the applicant. Before processing the application, the Director of Development Services shall obtain the opinion of the City Attorney as to the sufficiency of the applicant’s interest in the real property to enter into the agreement. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.014 Applications – Proposed form of agreement.
Each application shall be accompanied by the City’s standard form of development agreement and including any specific proposals for changes in or additions to the language of the standard form by the applicant. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.015 Applications – Review of application.
The Director of Development Services shall endorse on the application the date it is received. The Director shall review the application and may reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for processing within 30 calendar days of the date it is received. If the Director finds that the application is complete it shall be accepted for filing. The Director shall review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to complete processing of the agreement. After receiving the required information, staff shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the City Council stating whether or not the agreement as proposed or in an amended form would be consistent with ordinances and policies of the City of Poway, the general plan and any applicable specific plan or planned community. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.020 Notice and hearing – Duty to give notice.
The Director of Development Services shall give notice of intention to consider adoption of development agreement and of any other public hearing required by law or this chapter. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.021 Notice and hearing – Requirements for form and time of notice of intention to consider adoption of development agreement.
A. Form of Notice. The form of the notice of intention to consider adoption of development agreement shall contain:

1. The time and place of the hearing;

2. A general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description of the area affected; and

3. Other information required by specific provision of these regulations or which the Director of Development Services considers necessary or desirable.

B. Time and Manner of Notice. The time and manner of giving notice is by:

1. Publication or Posting. Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the City of Poway.

2. Mailing. Mailing of the notice to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 500 feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement. If the number of owners to whom notice is to be mailed is greater than 1,000, the Director of Development Services may as an alternative provide notice in the manner set forth in Sections 65090 through 65095 of the Government Code, 1985 Edition.

C. Additional Notice. The City Council may direct that notice of the public hearing to be held before it shall be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by State law.

D. Declaration of Existing Law. The notice requirements referred to in subsections (a) and (b) are declaratory of existing law (Government Code Section 65867 and Sections 65854, 65854.5 and 65856 as incorporated by reference). If State law prescribes a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.022 Notice and hearing – Failure to receive notice.
The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or these regulations does not affect the authority of the City to enter into a development agreement. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.023 Rules governing conduct of hearing.
The public hearing shall be conducted as nearly as may be in accordance with the procedural standards adopted under Government Code Section 65804 for the conduct of zoning hearings. Each person interested in the matter shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The applicant has the burden of proof at the public hearing on the proposed development agreement. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.024 Notice and hearing – Irregularity in proceedings.
No action, inaction or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission (“error”) as to any matter pertaining to petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is not presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if error is shown. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.030 Standards of review, findings and decisions – Decision by City Council.
After the City Council completes the public hearing, it may not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan and finds that the development agreement:

A. Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan or planned community;

B. Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district in which the real property is located;

C. Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good land use practice;

D. The development will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare;

E. The development will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property valued. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.031 Standards of review, findings and decisions – Approval of development agreement.
If the City Council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by adoption of an ordinance, or by resolution if authorized by State law.

After the ordinance or resolution approving the development agreement takes effect, the City may enter into the agreement. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.040 Amendment and cancellation of agreement by mutual consent – Initiation of amendment or cancellation.
Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.041 Amendment and cancellation of agreement by mutual consent – Procedure.
The procedure for proposing and adoption of an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance.

However, where the City initiates the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the property owner of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least 30 calendar days in advance of the giving of notice of intention to consider the amendment or cancellation required by PMC 17.53.021. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.050 Recordation of development agreement amendment or cancellation.
A. Within 10 calendar days after the City enters into the development agreement, the City Clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder.

B. If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65868, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65865.1 for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.060 Periodic review – Time for and initiation of review.
The City shall review the development agreement every 12 months from the date the agreement is entered into. The time for review may be modified either by agreement between the parties or by initiation in one or more of the following ways:

A. Recommendation of the City staff;

B. Affirmative vote of at least three members of the City Council. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.061 Periodic review – Notice of periodic review.
The Director of Development Services shall begin the review proceeding by giving notice that the City intends to undertake a periodic review of the development agreement to the property owner. The Director of Development Services shall give the notice at least 10 calendar days in advance of the time at which the matter will be considered by the City Council. (Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.062 Periodic review – Public hearing.
The City Council shall conduct a public hearing at which the property owner must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue is upon the property owner. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.063 Periodic review – Findings upon public hearing.
The City Council shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the property owner has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.064 Periodic review – Procedure upon findings.
A. It the City finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded.

B. If the City finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the City may modify or terminate the agreement. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.070 Modification or termination – Proceedings upon modification or termination.
If, upon a finding under PMC 17.53.064(B), the City determines to proceed with modification or termination of the agreement, the City shall give notice to the property owner of its intention to do so. The notice shall contain:

1. The time and place of the hearing;

2. A statement as to whether or not the City proposes to terminate or to modify the development agreement;

3. Other information which the City considers necessary to inform the property owner of the nature of the proceeding. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

17.53.071 Modification or termination – Hearing on modification or termination.
At the time and place set for the hearing on modification or termination, the property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The City Council may impose those conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the City. The City Council may modify, amend or terminate the development agreement if the applicant has not complied in good faith with the terms of the agreement or upon any other grounds authorized by State law. The decision of the City Council is final. (Ord. 177 § 1 (Exh. A), 1985)

Chapter 17.54
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

17.54.010    Enforcement by City office.

17.54.020    Actions deemed nuisance.

17.54.030    Remedies.

17.54.040    Violation – Penalty.

17.54.010 Enforcement by City office.
The City Council, the City Attorney, the City Manager, the Police Chief, the Development Services Director, the Director of Community Services, the City Clerk, and all officials or their designees charged with the issuance of licenses or permits shall enforce the provisions of this title. Any permit, certificate, or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be void. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 518, 1999; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.6(A)), 1983)

17.54.020 Actions deemed nuisance.
All erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures within the City of Poway shall be in conformance with the Poway Municipal Code as determined by the Development Services Director or their designee. Any building or structure erected hereafter, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of a duly approved development permit, minor development review, variance, conditional use permit, or administrative permit, and/or this title, is unlawful and a public nuisance per se and subject to abatement, citations and penalties in accordance with Chapters 1.08, 1.10, 8.72 and 15.32 PMC. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.6(B)), 1983)

17.54.030 Remedies.
All remedies concerning this title shall be cumulative and not exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person or responsible person, as defined in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 PMC, shall not relieve such persons from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions or removing prohibited buildings, structures, signs, or improvements, and shall not prevent the enforced correction or removal thereof. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.6(C)), 1983)

17.54.040 Violation – Penalty.
Any responsible person, partnership, organization, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provisions of this title or violating or failing to comply with any order or regulation made under this title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or assessed other penalties and, upon conviction or determination thereof, shall be punishable as provided by Chapters 1.08, 1.10, 8.72 and 15.32 PMC. (Ord. 827 § 2 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 113 § 1 (Exh. A 1.6(D)), 1983)

Chapter 17.56
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Sections:

17.56.010    Purpose.

17.56.020    Definitions.

17.56.030    Permits required.

17.56.040    Approval authority.

17.56.050    Appeal from Director decision.

17.56.060    Application requirements.

17.56.070    Findings.

17.56.080    Objective standards and operating conditions.

17.56.090    Objective siting requirements.

17.56.100    Large wireless communication facilities.

17.56.110    Preemption and severability.

17.56.120    Reservation of rights to review permit.

17.56.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes a wireless communication facility permit, and sets forth definitions, permitting requirements and application processes for wireless communication facilities within the public right-of-way in the City, including reasonable, uniform and objective aesthetic standards. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.020 Definitions.
A. “Applicant” means the entity applying for the wireless communication facility permit, and any of its future lessees or assigns. Should the applicant later sell a wireless communication facility constructed pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter, the term “applicant” shall apply to that subsequent owner.

B. “Batch wireless communication facility application” means an application for multiple wireless communication facilities at multiple locations, or multiple applications for separate facilities at multiple locations submitted at once.

C. “Director of Development Services” means the City’s Director of Development Services, or his/her appointed designee.

D. “Existing support structure” means a structure, such as a street light, that is existing prior to the City’s receipt of an application for a wireless communication facility permit, that will not have to be replaced or substantially modified to support the installation of a wireless communication facility. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in-kind replacement structures are considered existing support structures for the purposes of this chapter. Existing overhead utility poles or lines are not permitted existing support structures.

E. “In-kind replacement structure” means a new structure that replaces existing vertical infrastructure in the right-of-way that is constructed to support the other parts of the wireless communication facility, and is identical to the existing vertical infrastructure it replaces with respect to size, height, diameter, style, and exterior materials.

F. “Master communication site license agreement” means an agreement between the applicant and the City, approved by the City Council in accordance with Chapter 17.53 PMC, and all supporting and related documentation, including but not limited to insurance certificates and lease terms. Full cost recovery for staff time and direct costs associated with the agreement shall be part of a developer deposit, as set forth in the City’s master fee schedule, as updated and amended from time to time.

G. “New support structure” means a structure that is constructed solely to support the other parts of the wireless communication facility.

H. “Replacement support structure” means a new structure that replaces existing vertical infrastructure in the right-of-way that is constructed solely to support the other parts of the wireless communication facility, except for in-kind replacement structures.

I. “Single wireless communication facility application” means an application for a single wireless communication facility at a single location.

J. “Street light” means a light illuminating a road, mounted on a tall pole and within the public right-of-way. The term “street light” excludes overhead utility poles and lines.

K. “Support structure” means either an existing support structure, new support structure, or replacement support structure, which are all considered part of a wireless communication facility.

L. “Wireless communication facility” means a facility for the provision of wireless communications or other similar utility services, and all antennas and equipment associated with the overall facility that are necessary for the function of the facility, including the support structure. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.030 Permits required.
A. Prior to the construction or installation of any wireless communication facility in the public right-of-way, the applicant shall obtain a wireless communication facility permit pursuant to the procedures, requirements and restrictions of this chapter, in addition to a review for structural calculations and public right-of-way permit application pursuant to the requirements set forth in PMC 12.04.030. An improvement plan and inspection is required for a new support structure or a replacement support structure. Approval of a master communication site license agreement is required prior to approval of any batch wireless communication facility application.

B. Pursuant to PMC 17.52.050(A), any wireless communication facility that includes a surface-mounted cabinet with any dimension greater than 36 inches, or where more than one cabinet of any size is located closer than 100 feet to another cabinet of any size, shall also obtain a minor development review permit from the Director of Development Services, unless the cabinet(s) are placed underground.

C. Nothing in this chapter affects the City’s authority to require a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.48 PMC for a proposed wireless communication facility outside of the public right-of-way. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.040 Approval authority.
The Director of Development Services shall be the approval body for all wireless communication facility permits. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.050 Appeal from Director decision.
A. Only an applicant may appeal a decision of the Director of Development Services regarding a wireless communication facility permit request. In such case, the appeal shall go before the hearing officer for review and action in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 2.20 PMC.

B. A decision of the hearing officer under Chapter 2.20 PMC is final. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.060 Application requirements.
A. Before receiving a wireless communication facility permit, the applicant must submit an application in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

B. The applicant shall comply with the City’s “Guidelines for the Placement of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way,” as may be amended from time to time by City Council resolution.

C. Before submitting an application, all applicants are advised and strongly urged to participate in a wholly voluntary pre-application meeting with appropriate staff, scheduled in advance.

D. All applications for wireless communication facility permits shall include the following information:

1. A completed Planning Division general application. This form may be updated by the Director of Development Services from time to time, in his/her reasonable discretion. At a minimum, the following application materials shall be required:

a. A draft master communication site license agreement, if applicable.

b. Detailed plans, including a site plan and elevation plans, showing and describing the layout and design of the proposed project, including a depiction of the boundaries of the site on which the project will be developed.

c. Documentation that the facility will comply with all Federal and State regulations and guidelines, including, where applicable, FCC regulations and guidelines.

d. Site justification letter(s) justifying the need or requirement for the proposed location and design of the wireless communication facility, and whether or not co-location of additional facilities owned by different carriers is feasible, in compliance with PMC 17.56.090. The letter shall include other sites that were analyzed but not selected, with an explanation as to why the analyzed sites did not meet the objectives (including engineering, coverage and location justification), and why the co-location of the proposed wireless communication facility with others in the area cannot be accomplished.

e. A utility plan showing equipment layout and utility connections.

f. A report specifying the facility’s compliance with the FCC’s maximum possible exposure (MPE) levels in inhabited areas within 500 feet of the facility prepared by a qualified electrical engineer licensed by the State of California. Proof of compliance shall be a certification provided by the engineer who prepared the original based upon measurements after the facility is in operation, but prior to City final engineering inspection.

g. Mechanical engineering specifications of the facilities specifying maximum noise exposure levels of the facility to be in compliance with the City’s noise ordinance, set forth in Chapter 8.08 PMC.

h. Where the wireless communication facility also requires a minor development review permit pursuant to PMC 17.52.050, the application shall include documents required for minor development reviews and applicable fees and deposits.

2. Payment of all deposits or fees as required for processing of the associated permits as outlined in the City’s master fee schedule, as may be amended from time to time.

E. The applicant shall agree in writing to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its designees, employees, and assigns, from any and all liability resulting from the City’s approval of the wireless communication facility, the operation of the wireless communication facility, and/or the City’s enforcement of this chapter as it relates to any wireless communication facility owned and/or operated by the applicant.

F. The applicant shall submit a security in accordance with Chapter 16.20 PMC in an amount to be determined by the City Engineer to cover the removal of the facility in the event the site becomes abandoned or is otherwise vacated by the applicant.

G. When submitting a batch wireless communication facility application, the applicant shall submit separate materials as specified in subsections (D)(1)(b) through (h) of this section for each facility that is a part of the application. A separate fee is required for each facility, as applicable. If some of the facilities require a minor development review permit and others do not, the City will process the facilities requiring minor development review each as a separate application. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.070 Findings.
A. Prior to issuance of a wireless communication facility permit pursuant to this chapter, the following findings shall be made to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services:

1. A complete application has been submitted to the satisfaction of the Development Services Director as required by this chapter.

2. The proposed wireless communication facility and applicant satisfies the requirements set forth in this chapter, specifically including PMC 17.56.080 and 17.56.090.

3. The proposed wireless communication facility satisfies the requirements set forth in the City’s wireless communication policy, to the extent applicable, as may be amended by the City Council from time to time.

4. The proposed wireless communication facility is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare.

5. The proposed wireless communication facility is designed to match existing street infrastructure within the surrounding area, and conceals or minimizes visual impacts of the facilities.

6. Opportunities for co-location were maximized as a part of the project.

7. The proposed wireless communication facility is proposed to function in compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local regulations, including (where applicable) regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.

8. The applicant has paid all necessary City fees and deposits associated with the application, and the proposed wireless communication facility.

B. Where the Director of Development Services issues a wireless communication facility permit, the approval shall be conditioned on a requirement that the applicant comply with all of the standards, conditions and other requirements articulated in this chapter on an ongoing basis.

C. If the Director of Development Services, or on appeal, the hearing officer, cannot make the required findings, the approval authority shall deny the permit with a written explanation as to why any such finding could not be made. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.080 Objective standards and operating conditions.
A. The support structure, including all added antennas, shall not be more than 50 feet in height or 10 percent taller than other adjacent vertical infrastructure. The wireless communication facility must not extend the height of an existing support structure by more than five feet.

B. The wireless communication facilities shall be architecturally integrated with support structures and screened from view to the largest extent feasible. The wireless communication facilities shall consist of the smallest, least visually intrusive antennas, components and other necessary equipment available. No portion of a wireless communication facility placed on a street light shall be more than five feet above the light pole portion of the street light. Each portion of the wireless communication facility shall be designed at a diameter proportionately similar to, and no more than three times diameter of, the existing support structure. Associated equipment shall not be ground mounted, but instead, placed underground, unless the Director of Development Services determines that no other feasible alternative exists based on clear and convincing evidence provided by the applicant.

C. Antennas and equipment shall be painted to match the color of the surface of the support structure to which they are attached unless determined otherwise by the Director of Development Services.

D. No portion of a wireless communication facility is permitted to obstruct the view of any traffic sign, way-finding sign, traffic signal, or similar facility, nor be located within the sight triangle as shown in PMC 17.22.100.

E. The fire hydrant port that runs perpendicular to the street center line must remain unobstructed.

F. The wireless communication facility must not be designed in such a way that it requires antenna structure registration under Part 17 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

G. Each facility shall include emergency contact information visible from the sidewalk with the wireless carrier, the frequency band, a single point of contact in the applicant’s engineering and maintenance departments (name, phone number, fax number, and email address), and a 24-hour phone number to which interference problems may be reported.

H. The antennas shall be activated and energized upon preliminary approval of the wireless communication facility by the Director of Development Services to allow for proof of compliance certification provided by the engineer who prepared the original MPE report based upon measurements after the facility is in operation, but prior to the City’s final engineering inspection.

I. All wireless communication facilities and related equipment and improvements shall be maintained in good repair. Any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible so as to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight.

J. The owner or operator of a wireless communication facility shall routinely and regularly inspect the site to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in the permit.

K. Any substantial modification, removal or relocation of a wireless communication facility shall require submittal, review, and approval of a wireless communication facility permit pursuant to this chapter to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services.

L. The owner or operator of a wireless communication facility shall remove, at its sole responsibility and expense, all portions a wireless communication facility and restore the existing support structure to its original condition, subject to approval of the Director of Development Services, within 60 days of ceasing operation of the permitted wireless communication facility.

M. The owner or operator of a wireless communication facility shall be required to modify, remove, or relocate its facility, or portion thereof, without cost or expense to the City, within 60 days of the City’s notice, if and when made necessary, in the City’s discretion, by:

1. Any public improvement project, including, but not limited to, the construction, maintenance, or operation of any underground or aboveground facilities including but not limited to sewers, storm drains, conduits, gas, water, electric, or other utility systems or pipes owned by the City or any other public agency;

2. Any abandonment of any street, sidewalk, or other public facility;

3. Any change of grade, alignment or width of any street, sidewalk, or other public facility; or

4. A determination by the Director of Development Services that the wireless communication facility has become a risk to public health, safety, welfare, or the public’s use of the public right-of-way.

N. In the case of an emergency or other similar exigent circumstances where the facility poses a threat of bodily harm, death, or harm to real property, or otherwise creates a safety hazard, the City may modify, remove, or relocate a wireless communication facility without prior notice to the applicant provided the applicant is notified within 30 days thereafter. The City shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the applicant prior to such emergency removal. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.090 Objective siting requirements.
A. In furtherance of the City’s goals to underground existing utilities throughout the City, wireless communication facilities shall not be located on existing overhead utility poles or lines, as set forth in PMC 17.56.020(D).

B. The applicant must make all commercially reasonable efforts to co-locate wireless communication facilities on existing support structures that already support other wireless communication facilities. If such co-location is not feasible, the applicant must provide the documentation required by PMC 17.56.060(D). In the event co-location is not feasible, the applicant must design the wireless communication facility in such a way that co-location of at least one additional wireless communication facility is feasible on the same support structure in the future.

C. The preferred support structure for all wireless communication facilities is existing street lights, or other qualified existing support structures. The applicant must make all commercially reasonable efforts to utilize a street light or other qualified existing support structure. If a new or replacement support structure is required, the applicant must provide the documentation required by PMC 17.56.060(D) demonstrating the same to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services. Further, the applicant must explore and document the infeasibility of a replacement support structure before a wireless communication facility requiring a new support structure will be approved.

D. Required Setbacks for New Support Structures, Replacement Support Structures and Equipment and Accessory Structures Associated with a Wireless Communication Facility.

1. All portions of a wireless communication facility must be set back a minimum of 48 inches from any traffic signal facilities.

2. The setback for all portions of a wireless communication facility from any tree shall be a minimum of 48 inches, unless a qualified arborist can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of Development Services that a lesser setback would not harm the tree.

3. A minimum of four feet of pedestrian clearance from any portion of a wireless communication facility, free of all obstacles for an unobstructed walkway, must be maintained at all times.

4. All portions of a wireless communication facility must be set back a minimum of seven feet from any fire hydrant, driveway, curb ramp or blue zone parking space.

5. Replacement support structures shall be located a maximum of five feet from the structure they replace. However, if the applicant can demonstrate that this limit would cause the facility to physically interfere with existing underground utilities, this distance can be expanded to no more than 10 feet.

6. All new support structures and replacement support structures shall provide the same setbacks as adjacent structures of a similar style. However, if the applicant can demonstrate that this limit would cause the facility to physically interfere with existing underground utilities, the setback can be modified, provided the facility otherwise complies with setback regulations set forth in this subsection D and all pertinent laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act.

7. Any new support structure must be located a minimum of 50 feet away from any residential structure, and shall not be located along the street frontage adjacent to any school, daycare center, recreational area or park. New support structures may not be located within 75 feet of any pre-existing vertical infrastructure exceeding 10 feet in height or any preexisting wireless communication facility, as measured along a horizontal line between the closest points of the subject piece of infrastructure and closest portion of the proposed wireless communication facility. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.100 Large wireless communication facilities.
The Director of Development Services may, in his or her discretion, impose additional requirements and restrictions on wireless communication facilities where the antenna exceeds three cubic feet in volume, where all other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment on the structure, exceeds 28 cubic feet in volume, or otherwise do not meet the definition of “small wireless facility” set forth in applicable Federal regulations. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.110 Preemption and severability.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, an applicant may request an exemption to excuse it from having to comply with any portion of this chapter on the grounds that the requirement or action taken by the City would violate State or Federal law. The City shall grant the exemption or excuse an applicant from compliance with all or a portion of this chapter, if it finds based on substantial evidence in the record that the challenged requirement or action is, in fact, preempted by State or Federal law. Such an exemption shall not affect the enforceability of the remainder of this chapter. If any provision of this chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, void or for any reason unenforceable, it shall be deemed severable from, and shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of, the remaining provisions of this chapter, which shall be enforced to the fullest extent possible. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)

17.56.120 Reservation of rights to review permit.
The City reserves the right to reconsider the permit at the end of a 10-year time period from the date of the original permit approval. Reconsideration items to be reviewed may include, but are not limited to, conformance with all objective standards, availability of new technologies, conformance with the objective concealment standards imposed on the facility, operation of applicable radio frequency standards and regulations (as they may be amended from time to time), and compliance with Federal, State and local regulations, including the City’s noise ordinance. (Ord. 829 § 2, 2019)