General Provisions
1-1
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS1
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1.1 How Code Designated and Cited
§ 1.2 Definitions and Rules of Construction
§ 1.3 Provisions Considered as Continuations of Existing Ordinances
§ 1.4 Effect of Repeal of Ordinances
§ 1.5 Severability of Parts of Code
§ 1.6 Titles
ARTICLE II CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 1.7 Code Violations
§ 1.8 Definitions
§ 1.9 Administrative Citation
§ 1.10 Notice of Violation Format
§ 1.11 Administration Citation Format
§ 1.12 Amount of Fines
§ 1.13 Payment of the Fine
§ 1.14 Appeal and Hearing Request
§ 1.15 Hearing Officer
§ 1.16 Hardship Waiver
§ 1.17 Hearing Procedure
§ 1.18 Decision on Appeal
§ 1.19 Recoverable Administrative Costs
§ 1.20 Failure to Pay Administrative Fines, Penalties, & Costs
§ 1.21 Recovery of Administrative Citations Fine(s), Penalties, & Costs
§ 1.22 Lien Procedure
§ 1.23 Public Hearing and Protests of Proposed Liens
§ 1.24 Recording of Lien
§ 1.25 Satisfaction of Lien
§ 1.26 Method of Service
1 For charter provisions as to enactment, etc., of ordinances, see Char. §2.12.
For state law as to power of city to codify ordinances, see Gov. C.A., §§50022.1 to 50022.8.
For constitutional provisions of state relative to cities generally, see Const. of Calif., Art. XI, §1 et seq.
General Provisions
1-2
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 1.1. HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be
designated "The Code of the City of Piedmont, California, 1959," and may be so cited.
SEC. 1.2. DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be
observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City
Council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
1.2.1. City. The words "the City" or "this City" shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of Piedmont."
1.2.2. Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean "The Code of the City of
Piedmont, California, 1959."
1.2.3. Computation of Time.2 The time in which any act provided by law is to be done
is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is
a holiday, and then it is also excluded.
1.2.4. Council. Whenever the word "Council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the
City Council of the City of Piedmont, California.
1.2.5. County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of
Alameda.
1.2.6. Day.3 A day is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.
1.2.7. Daytime, Nighttime.4 "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and
sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
1.2.8. Department, Board, Commission, Office, Officer, or Employee. Whenever any
department, board, commission, office, or officer or employee is referred to it
shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the
City unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
1.2.9 Director-Defined. For purposes of this Section, "Director" means the City
2 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §6800.
3 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §6806.
4 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §6807.
General Provisions
1-3
Administrator or the head of any City department which is charged with
responsibility for enforcement of any provision of this Code.
1.2.10. Gender.5 The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
1.2.11. In the City. The words "in the City" or "within the City" shall mean and include
all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction
for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.
1.2.12 Joint Authority.6 All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or
officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons
or officers.
1.2.13. Month.7 The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
1.2.14. Number.8 The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
1.2.15. Oath.9 "Oath" includes affirmation.
1.2.16. Official Time. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean Pacific
Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time whichever may be in current use in the
City.
1.2.17. Or, And. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense
requires it.
1.2.18. Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
1.2.19. Person.10 "Person" includes any person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business trust, corporation or company.
1.2.20. Personal Property.11 includes every species of property except real property, as
defined in this section.
1.2.21. Preceding, Following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before
5 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §12.
6 See C.C., §12.
7 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §6804.
8 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §13.
9 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §15.
10 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §17.
11 See C.C., §14.
General Provisions
1-4
and next after, respectively.
1.2.22. Process.12 "Process" includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial
proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.
1.2.23. Property.13 The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
1.2.24. Real Property.14 Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
1.2.25. Roadway. "Roadway" is that portion of a highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
1.2.26. Shall, May.15 "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
1.2.27. Signature or Subscription.16 "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when
the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being
written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or
subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged
or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two
witnesses so sign their own names thereto.
1.2.28. State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of
California.
1.2.29. Tenant or Occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or
land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies
the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
1.2.30. Tenses.17 The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future,
the present.
1.2.31. Week.18 A "week" consists of seven consecutive days.
1.2.32. Writing.19 "Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of
comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement
or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the
English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
12 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §22.
13 See C.C., §14.
14 See C.C., §14.
15 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §14.
16 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §16.
17 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §11.
18 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §6805.
19 For similar state law, see Gov. C.A., §8.
General Provisions
1-5
1.2.33. Year.20 The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise
provided.
SEC. 1.3 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING
ORDINANCES
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing
at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not
as new enactments.
SEC. 1.4 EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the
ordinance repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any
offense committed under the ordinance repealed.
SEC. 1.5. SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
SEC. 1.6 TITLES
The titles at the beginning of the various sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords
to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be any part of the
section itself, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the titles, are amended or re-enacted.
20 For state law definition of "year", see Gov. C.A., §6803. For charter provisions as to fiscal year, see Char.,
§4.01.
General Provisions
1-6
ARTICLE II CODE ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 1.7 CODE VIOLATIONS
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any
requirement the Piedmont City Code, or any City ordinance. Each and every day, or
portion thereof, during which a violation is committed, continued, or permitted by any
person, shall be a separate violation. Each responsible person determined to be
responsible for a violation shall be jointly and severally liable for a code violation.
B. In addition to administrative citations, as set forth below, the City may enforce any code
violation by any one or more of the following methods at the City’s discretion:
1. Criminal penalty
2. Civil injunction
3. By the denial of permits or the forfeiture or revocation of permits
4. Public nuisance abatement (per Chapter 6 of the Piedmont City Code)
5. Any other legal means available
C. The remedies provided for in this article are cumulative and not exclusive and shall not
preclude the City from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled
under law or equity. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017, Ord. 509 N.S., 3/1989)
SEC. 1.8 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
“Administrative citation” means a citation for a money fine issued to a responsible person in
accordance with this article.
“City Compliance Officer” means the City officer, animal control officer, employee, or
contractor designated by the City Administrator for enforcing the Piedmont City Code.
“Hearing Officer” means a person designated by the City Administrator to serve as the presiding
officer for hearings on matters related to an administrative citation, subject to the requirements of
Section 1.15.
“Notice of violation” means written notice of a code violation issued to a responsible person in
accordance with this article.
“Owner” means the record owner of real property according to Alameda County’s latest
equalized property tax assessment roll or the person who owns or is in control of personal
property.
General Provisions
1-7
“Person” means and includes a natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority
stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, and general partners of a legal entity.
“Property” means any real or personal property located within the City and any improvement,
structure, building or portion thereof located on real property.
“Responsible person” means the owner or any person or persons in charge of the property on
which a violation of the Piedmont City Code exists, or the person or persons responsible for an
event or incident that constitutes a violation of the Piedmont City Code, and shall include, but is
not limited to, any of the following: (1) a person who, by action or inaction (whether acting alone
or with one or more other persons), causes, maintains, permits, or allows a code violation; (2) a
person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor, by action or inaction, causes,
maintains, permits, or allows a code violation; (3) an owner of real property on which a code
violation occurs; (4) a lessee or sub-lessee with the current right of possession of real property on
which a code violation occurs; (5) the person or persons in charge of the property where the
violation occurs; (6) the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, general
partners and any other person with the legal authority to act for a legal entity that is a responsible
person under subsections (1) through (5) above; ; and (7) any person owning, having an interest
in, or having control or custody or possession of any animal, which is the subject of a code
violation. If the responsible person is a minor or incompetent, the parents or guardians of such
minor persons shall be deemed responsible persons. (Ord. 51 N.S., 10/1907; Ord. 735 N.S.,
10/2017; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 1.9 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION
Whenever a City Compliance Officer determines that a code violation has occurred, the City
Compliance Officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any responsible
person. An administrative citation shall not be issued unless a prior written notice of violation
has been provided to the responsible person or persons by the City Compliance Officer.
Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, a City Compliance Officer shall have the
authority to issue an administrative citation to any responsible person without providing prior
written notice when:
1. The violation requires immediate correction, due to an immediate danger to public
health or safety; or
2. The responsible person has been given prior written notice of violation or an
administrative citation for a violation of the same section of the Piedmont City
Code within one year of the date of the new violation.
3. The responsible person has violated Section 3.4 or Chapter 4 of the Piedmont City
Code, which requires immediate correction due to the potential threat to public
health and safety caused by the violation. (Ord. 630 N.S. 6/2002; Ord. 735 N.S.,
10/2017; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
General Provisions
1-8
SEC. 1.10 NOTICE OF VIOLATION FORMAT
A. A notice of violation issued by the City Compliance Officer shall substantially comply
with the following format:
[Name and address of responsible person]
NOTICE OF VIOLATION
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you have been identified as the party responsible
for a violation of the Piedmont City Code. The violation is on property commonly
known as [insert address or other legal property description] and more specifically
described by the Alameda County Assessor as [APN # ______].
The City Compliance Officer has observed the following conditions, which constitute a
violation of the Piedmont City Code: [description of violation]
The observed conditions violate the following provisions of the Piedmont City Code:
[cite code section]
YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED TO REMEDY SAID VIOLATION within
[reasonable time to remedy violation, not less than ten (10) days] calendar days from
the issuance date of this order. The issuance date is specified below. You may remedy
the violation by [desired action which, if taken, will adequately remedy the situation].
FAILURE TO REMEDY THE VIOLATION WITHIN THE SPECIFIED TIME WILL
RESULT IN THE ISSUANCE OF A FINE IN THE AMOUNT OF [amount of fine].
Each day for which the violation remains after the specified date shall constitute a new
violation and may result in additional fines without further notice. Nonpayment of the
fines may result in additional administrative penalties and costs, as well as a lien being
assessed on your property, to be collected by the County Auditor along with municipal
taxes and other assessments. [Optional: The City will seek to recover its attorneys’ fees
as a result of any administrative proceeding resulting from this violation.]
If you have any questions regarding this matter, you may direct them to the City
Compliance Officer issuing this notice at the address or telephone number listed below.
ISSUANCE DATE: _____________
[Insert: name, title, address and telephone number of the City Compliance Officer
issuing this notice.]
B. A Notice and Order to Abate substantially complying with the format set forth in Section
6.5 of the Piedmont City Code shall have the same force and effect as a notice of
violation for the purposes of this article.
General Provisions
1-9
C. The City Compliance Officer shall maintain records detailing the instance or instances of
the violation(s), including such information as photographic evidence, a chronological
account of inspections made, identification of conditions noted, and witness statements, if
any, all of which support the issuance of the notice of violation. The records shall be
made available upon request to the responsible person. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.11 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION FORMAT
A. If a responsible person fails to remedy a violation within the time period allotted in a
notice of violation, the City Compliance Officer may issue an administrative citation. An
administrative citation shall substantially comply with the following format:
[Name and address of responsible person]
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION
On [Issuance Date of notice of violation] the City of Piedmont issued you a notice of
violation naming you as the responsible person for a violation of the Piedmont City
Code, and ordering you to remedy the violation. The violation is on property
commonly known as [insert address or other legal property description] and more
specifically described by the Alameda County Assessor as [APN # ].
The City Administrator or his/her designee has observed the following conditions,
which constitute a violation of the Piedmont City Code: [description of nuisance]
The observed conditions violate the following provisions of the Piedmont City Code:
[cite code section]
THE AMOUNT SET FORTH AS THE FINE FOR SUCH A VIOLATION OF THE
CITY CODE IS $___________. Each day for which this violation goes unremedied
shall constitute a new violation and a new fine of $__________ without additional
notice.
YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED TO IMMEDIATELY REMEDY THE VIOLATION
AND PAY THE FINE AMOUNT WITHIN 30 DAYS. Failure to make the full
payment may result in additional fines, penalties, and costs. Nonpayment of the fines
may also result in a lien being assessed on your property, to be collected by the County
Auditor along with municipal taxes and other assessments. [Optional: The City will
seek to recover its attorneys’ fees as a result of any administrative or court proceeding
resulting from this violation.]
Payment must be submitted to the City Clerk at the following address:
General Provisions
1-10
City Clerk
City of Piedmont
120 Vista Avenue
Piedmont, CA 94611
Payment of the fine shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated
occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of this administrative citation.
YOU ARE FURTHER PROHIBITED FROM CONTINUING OR REPEATING THE
VIOLATION. Failure to remedy the violation or repeated occurrences will result in
additional fines.
YOU MAY APPEAL THIS ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION, but any such appeal
must be brought within ten calendar days of the issuance date of this administrative
citation. The appeal must be in writing; specify the reasons for the appeal; contain your
name, address, and telephone number; be accompanied by an appeal fee of
_____________________ dollars ($____________) and advanced payment of the fine
amount listed above; and be submitted to the City Clerk.
One who is legally indigent may apply for a waiver of the appeal fee and advanced
payment of the fine. Upon timely receipt of the appeal and accompanying fee and fine
payment, or waiver, the City Clerk will cause the matter to be set for hearing and notify
you of the date and location of the hearing.
FAILURE TO FILE A TIMELY APPEAL SHALL BE CONSTRUED AS A WAIVER
OF THE RIGHT TO AN APPEAL AND A FAILURE TO EXHAUST
ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.
If you have any questions regarding this matter, you may direct them to the City
Compliance Officer issuing this citation at the address or telephone number listed
below.
ISSUANCE DATE: _____________
(Insert: name, title, address, and telephone number of the City Compliance Officer
issuing this notice.) (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.12 AMOUNT OF FINES
A. The amounts of the fines for code violations imposed pursuant to this article shall be set
forth in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the City Council.
B. The schedule of fines may specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same
code provision by the same person within a specified monthly period from the date of an
administrative citation.
General Provisions
1-11
C. The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any late payment penalties imposed for
the payment of a fine after its due date. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.13 PAYMENT OF THE FINE
A. The fine shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the
administrative citation.
A. Payment of a fine under this article shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or
repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation.
C. Fines shall continue to accrue for each day during the course of any appeal except that
late payment penalties shall not accrue during the course of an appeal. Fines due after an
appeal shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision.
(Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.14 APPEAL AND HEARING REQUEST
A. Any recipient of an administrative citation may appeal. The appeal must be in writing, be
delivered to the City Clerk within ten calendar days of the issuance date of the
administrative citation, specify the grounds upon which the appeal is taken, and contain
the name, address, and telephone number of the appellant.
B. The appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal application fee and advanced payment of
the fine amount. If the Hearing Officer finds there is no violation or the appellant was
not the responsible person, the appeal fee and advanced payment of the fine amount shall
be promptly refunded to the appellant without the payment of any interest that could have
accrued.
C. The appeal application fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
D. Failure to submit the completed fee waiver forms or pay the appeal fee and make
advanced payment of the fine amount shall cause the appeal request to be automatically
denied.
E. Upon the filing of a timely and complete appeal, the matter will be set for hearing. The
City Clerk will notify the parties in writing of the date, time, and location of the hearing
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.
F. Records of the City Compliance Officer concerning the notice of violation and
administrative citation prepared pursuant to Section 1.10(C), if intended to be submitted
to the Hearing Officer for consideration at the hearing, shall be copied and served on the
person requesting the hearing at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing.
General Provisions
1-12
G. Failure to file a timely appeal shall be construed as a waiver of the right to an appeal and
a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
H. At any time the City Compliance Officer may choose to withdraw a previously issued
notice of violation or administrative citation. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.15 HEARING OFFICER
For each appeal of an administrative citation, the City Administrator shall designate the Hearing
Officer for the appeal. The Hearing Officer shall not be the City Compliance Officer who issued
the notice of violation that is the subject of the appeal. The employment, performance
evaluation, compensation, and benefits of the Hearing Officer shall not be directly or indirectly
conditioned upon the Hearing Officer upholding or denying any appeal to a notice of violation.
(Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.16 HARDSHIP WAIVER
A. Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest an administrative citation and
who is financially unable to pay the appeal application fee and fine amount in advance as
required, may request a hardship waiver. A request for a hardship waiver shall be
submitted to the City Clerk along with advanced prepayment of the fine amount and the
appeal application fee, within ten calendar days of the issuance date of the administrative
citation.
B. The City Clerk may approve a hardship waiver only if the applicant has submitted a
sworn affidavit demonstrating his or her inability to pay the application fee and make
advanced prepayment of the fine amount, together with any supporting documents or
materials that demonstrate proof of enrollment in a State of California public assistance
program, such as Medi-Cal, to the satisfaction of the City Clerk.
C. Within ten days of submission of the request for a hardship waiver and supporting
documents, the City Clerk shall issue a written determination to approve or not approve
the hardship waiver. If the City Clerk approves the hardship waiver, the application fee
and advanced prepayment of the fine amount shall be refunded at the time of the written
decision. The written determination of the City Clerk shall be final and shall be served
upon the person who applied for the hardship waiver. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.17 HEARING PROCEDURE
A. The hearing date shall be no sooner than ten (10) days and no more than sixty (60) days
from when the notice of the hearing is given to the party contesting the administrative
citation.
B. The appellant shall be given the opportunity to (1) testify and present witnesses; (2)
introduce relevant evidence; (3) cross-examine and/or rebut any witness testifying in
General Provisions
1-13
support of the declaration of the code violation; and (4) be represented by anyone who is
designated by the appellant.
C. The City Compliance Officer will bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the responsible person violated the Piedmont City Code. The California
Evidence Code shall not apply to the administrative hearing. All relevant evidence may
be considered, and the Hearing Officer has the discretion to exclude evidence found to be
irrelevant or redundant.
D. The administrative citation and any additional records submitted by the City Compliance
Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those
documents.
E. The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from
the City Compliance Officer or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision.
F. If the responsible person fails to appear at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
automatically uphold the determination of the City Compliance Officer set forth in the
administrative citation. The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to
appear at the appeal hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust his or her administrative
remedies. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.18 DECISION ON APPEAL
A. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing
Officer shall, within thirty (30) days, issue a written decision to uphold, modify or
dismiss the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that
decision.
B. In the written decision, the Hearing Officer may uphold or reduce the amount of the fine
taking any or all of the following factors into consideration:
1. The duration of the violation;
2. The frequency, recurrence, and number of violations, related or unrelated, by the
same responsible person;
3. The seriousness of the responsible person;
4. The good faith efforts of the responsible person to come into compliance;
5. The economic impact of the violation on the community;
6. Such other factors as justice may require.
C. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be in writing, be based on the record, and
include a statement of the factual and legal basis of the decision. The decision of the
Hearing Officer shall be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the
conclusion of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be sent by first-class mail to the
appellant at the address specified in the appeal, and by mail to each responsible person
appearing at the hearing.
General Provisions
1-14
D. The Hearing Officer’s decision is final on the date the decision is filed with the City
Clerk. If the responsible person wishes to appeal further, the responsible person must
initiate legal action in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4(b) by filing a
petition with the Superior Court within twenty (20) days of the date of the Hearing
Officer’s decision. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.19 RECOVERABLE ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS
A. The Hearing Officer may assess administrative costs against the violator when the
Hearing Officer determines that a violation has occurred and that compliance was not
achieved. Recoverable administrative costs shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
1. Any applicable fines and collection costs.
2. Any time spent by a City employee for activities related to the code violation,
including, but not limited to, inspections and re-inspections, abatement actions,
police services, administration, bookkeeping and accounting, legal services,
supervision, preparing for and attending hearings. Costs based on time spent by
City employees or contractors shall include salary, benefits, and overhead;
3. Any fees incurred by the City in employing contractors for activities related to the
code violation, including but not limited to, inspections and re-inspections,
abatement actions, police services, administration, bookkeeping and accounting,
legal services, supervision, preparing for and attending hearings;
4. Costs related to the enforcement including, but not limited to, cost of abatement,
notices, administrative costs, and court costs;
B. In in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding, the prevailing party
shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees, but only if the City elects in
writing, at the initiation of the action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own
attorneys’ fees. In no event shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed
the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the action or proceeding.
The City may recover its attorneys’ fees in the same manner as other costs pursuant to
this article. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.20 FAILURE TO PAY ADMINISTRATIVE FINES, PENALTIES AND COSTS
Failure to pay the assessed administrative fines, penalties and/or recoverable costs specified in a
Hearing Officer’s decision may be enforced as:
1. A personal obligation of the responsible person; and/or
2. If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property in
accordance with this article, which shall remain in effect until all of the
administrative fines, penalties, and recoverable costs are paid in full; and/or
3. A criminal misdemeanor; and/or
General Provisions
1-15
4. Any other available legal means. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.21 RECOVERY OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION FINE(S), PENALTIES, AND
COSTS
A. The procedures set forth in this section for the recovery of citation fines, penalties, and
recoverable costs are adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 which
allows the City Council to establish a procedure to govern the collection of administrative
fines, penalties, and recoverable costs. It is intended that persons violating the code, and
not the taxpayers, bear the financial costs of the City’s code enforcement efforts.
B. The City may collect the assessed administrative fines, penalties, and recoverable costs
by use of all available legal means, including recordation of a lien pursuant to the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.22 LIEN PROCEDURE
A. Whenever the amount of any fines, penalties, and/or recoverable cost imposed pursuant
to this article in connection with real property have not been satisfied in full within sixty
(60) days after imposition of the fine, administrative penalty, and/or recoverable cost
becomes final, unless tolled by a timely request for judicial review pursuant to
Government Code Section 53069.4 or reversed by court order, this obligation may
constitute a lien against any real property involved where any violation was determined
to concern the condition of that real property.
B. The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the County
Recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and
priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section
697.340 and may be extended as provided in Code of Civil Procedure Sections 683.110
through 683.220.
C. Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied
pursuant to law.
D. Prior to recording any such lien the following must occur:
1. A report shall be prepared and filed with the City Clerk stating the amounts due
and owing.
2. The City Clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing such report and any
protests or objections thereto by the City Council.
3. A written notice to be served on each property owner whose interest is disclosed
by the current County equalized assessment roll not less than ten (10) days prior
to the time set for the hearing.
4. The City Council shall adopt a resolution approving the amount of the lien at least
thirty (30) days prior to recordation. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
General Provisions
1-16
SEC. 1.23 PUBLIC HEARING AND PROTESTS OF PROPOSED LIENS
A. Any person owning a legal or equitable interest in real property proposed to be subject to
a lien pursuant to this article may file a written protest with the City Clerk and/or may
protest orally at the City Council hearing.
B. Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the
protesting party has a legal or equitable interest and the grounds of such protest or
objection. The grounds for protest or objection, and any evidence or testimony submitted
in support or in opposition to the imposition of a lien, shall be limited to whether the
amount of any fine, administrative penalty, and/or administrative cost imposed was
satisfied in full within the time allowed by law and/or was successfully challenged by a
timely writ of mandate.
C. The City Council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging, or
modifying the amount of the lien based upon evidence produced at the hearing. (Ord. 735
N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.24 RECORDING OF LIEN
Thirty (30) days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council imposing a lien, the
City Clerk may file the same as a judgment lien in the Office of the County Recorder of Alameda
County. The lien may carry such additional administrative fines, penalties, and recoverable costs
as set forth by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.25 SATISFACTION OF LIEN
Once payment in full is received by the City for outstanding penalties and costs, the City Clerk
shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide any property owner or financial institution
having a legal or equitable interest in the property with a notice of satisfaction so they may
record this notice with the Office of the County Recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel
the City’s lien. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
SEC. 1.26 METHOD OF SERVICE
Unless otherwise provided by this article, all notices or documents served pursuant to this article
shall be served by one or more of the methods described below:
1. Certified Mail. Certified mail shall be addressed to the owner at the address
shown on the last equalized assessment roll or as otherwise known, and addressed
to anyone known to the City Compliance Officer to be in possession of the
property at the street address of the property being abated or a responsible person.
Simultaneously, the notice of violation must be sent by regular mail. Service is
deemed completed on the day the notice is sent Certified and regular mail. Where
a notice of violation or administrative citation is served by certified mail, the
General Provisions
1-17
issuance date listed in the notice of violation or administrative citation shall be the
date the document is sent by certified and regular mail.
2. Personal Service. Personal service is deemed complete on the date the notice is
personally served. Where a notice of violation or administrative citation is served
by personal service, the issuance date listed in the notice of violation or
administrative citation shall be the date the document is personally served.
3. Posting and Publishing. Where the owner’s address is unknown, service may be
accomplished by posting and publication. Posting of the notice and order shall be
conspicuously on or in front of the property. If the property has no frontage,
posting shall be on the portion of the property nearest to a street, highway, or
road, or most likely to give actual notice to the owner. Within five (5) days of
posting the notice on or in front of the property, the notice shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City of Piedmont. The failure of a
person to receive a properly addressed service shall not affect the validity of the
proceedings. Service is deemed complete on the day the notice is posted on or in
front of the property. Where a notice of violation or administrative citation is
served by posting and publishing, the issuance date listed in the notice of violation
or administrative citation shall be the date the document is published. (Ord. 735
N.S., 10/2017)
Rev. 2018-10-04 (Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
Administration
2-1
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§2.1 Military leaves of absence-Defined-Application for reinstatement
§2.2 Military leaves of absence-Status of replacement personnel
ARTICLE II. PLANNING COMMISSION
REVOKED: Ordinance No. 395 N.S., 3/80, See Chapter 25
ARTICLE III. RECREATION COMMISSION
REVOKED: Ordinance No. 395 N.S., 3/80, See Chapter 25
ARTICLE IV. SPECIAL GAS STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
§2.20 Created
§2.21 Moneys to be paid into fund
§2.22 Expenditure of moneys in fund
ARTICLE V. CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM
Division 1. Generally
§2.23 Definition of commission
§2.24 Authority of Council and officers concerned with personnel matters
§2.25 Adoption of system
§2.26 Scope of Article
§2.27 Retroactive provision
§2.28 Personnel rules-Adoption, etc.
§2.29 Personnel rules-Establishment of specific procedures and regulations
§2.30 Contracts for carrying out duties, etc., under article
§2.31 Appropriations
Division 2. Civil Service Commission
§2.32 Composition of civil service commission
§2.33 Ineligibility of municipal employees
§2.34 Functions
§2.35 Classification plan shall be provided by commission subject to Council approval
Administration
2-2
Division 3. Personnel Officer
§2.36 Office created
Division 4. Appointments in the Competitive Service
§2.37 Appointments
Division 5. Suspensions and Other Similar Official Actions
§2.38 Disciplinary actions
§2.39 Political activities, etc., by City employees, etc.
ARTICLE VI. CALIFORNIA PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§2.77 Adopted
ARTICLE VII. MORAGA PARK QUARRY FIELD USE RESTRICTIONS
(Dracena Field Use Restrictions passed by Ord. No. 470 N.S., 12/85 and revoked by Ord. No. 538
N.S., 10/92)
REVOKED: Ord. No. 569 N.S., 10/97, See Chapter 3
ARTICLE VIII. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
REVOKED: Ordinance No. 505 N.S., 11/88, See Chapter 6
ARTICLE IX. PARK COMMISSION
REVOKED: Ordinance No. 395 N.S., 3/80, See Chapter 25
ARTICLE X. SPECIAL BOND DEPOSIT FUND
§2.137 Created - Composition - Rights of depositor to claim money
§2.138 Expenditure of money in fund
ARTICLE XI. PEACE OFFICER RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING
§2.139 Desire of city to qualify to receive state aid - Adherence to state standards
ARTICLE XII. SPECIAL FUNDS
§2.140 Creation and expenditures
Administration
2-3
ARTICLE XIII. HOLIDAYS
§2.141 Established
ARTICLE XIV. PENSION FUND INVESTMENT
§2.142 Terms "Board" and "Pension Fund" defined
§2.143 Exclusive control of board
§2.144 Investment counsel - Persons not eligible for employment
§2.145 Same - Conditions of employment
§2.146 Mortgage servicing institution agreement; Fee; Monthly postings of cash transactions
§2.147 Manner of investing funds by board
§2.148 REVOKED
§2.149 Authorization of board to employ custodian of securities and investments of funds;
Duties of custodian
ARTICLE XV. PURCHASING AND BIDS
§2.150 General Provisions
§2.151 Purchasing Officer Responsibilities & Procedures
§2.152 City Administrator Authority
§2.153 Bidding
§2.154 Exceptions
§2.155 Purchase for $5,000.00 or Less
§2.156 Purchases Exceeding $5,000.00, not Exceeding $75,000.00
§2.157 Minimum Number of Bids – Informal Solicitation
§2.158 Notice Inviting Bids – Informal Solicitation
§2.159 Written bids
§2.160 Purchasing exceeding $75,000.00
§2.161 Notice Inviting Bids – Formal Solicitation
§2.162 Bidder's Security
§2.163 Bid Opening Procedure
§2.164 Rejection of Bids
§2.165 Award of Contracts
§2.166 Tie Bids
§2.167 Performance Bonds
§2.168 Estimates of Requirements
§2.169 Modifications of Public Works Contracts
§2.170 Purchase Orders
§2.171 Encumbrance of Funds
§2.172 Inspection and Testing
§2.173 Appeal from Decision to Purchase
Administration
2-4
ARTICLE XVI. LIBRARY SERVICES COMMISSION
REVOKED: Ord. 395 N.S., 3/80 See Chapter 25)
2.175 Claims Procedures
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 2.1 MILITARY LEAVES OF ABSENCE - DEFINED; APPLICATION FOR
REINSTATEMENT
Any officer or employee of the City who volunteers for or is ordered on active duty in the
military service within the meaning of the Act of Congress of the United States cited as the
Soldier's and Sailor's Relief Act of 1940, shall be granted a leave of absence by the City Council
and shall retain his status as such officer or employee, except his right to draw his salary and
wages, during the period of such active duty, and shall be reinstated to such position, upon
written application, and a showing to the satisfaction of the City Council that he is physically
and mentally equipped to perform the duties of his previous City employment. The written
application and showing of physical and mental fitness shall be filed with the City Council at any
time within ninety days after the termination of such military duty. (Ord. No. 96 N.S., 5/41)
SEC. 2.2 SAME - STATUS OF REPLACEMENT PERSONNEL
The appointment of any person temporarily employed to perform the duties of any such officer
or employee volunteering for or ordered on such active duty, as referred to in the preceding section,
shall specifically include a provision that such temporary appointee holds his position
subject to revocation, upon the favorable action, by the City Council, on the application of the
former occupant of such position. (Ord. No. 96 N.S., 5/41)
ARTICLE II. PLANNING COMMISSION
REVOKED: Ordinance No. 395., N.S., 3/80, See Chapter 25.
ARTICLE III. RECREATION COMMISSION
REVOKED: Ordinance No. 395, N.S., 3/80, See Chapter 25.
Administration
2-5
ARTICLE IV. SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
SEC. 2.20 CREATED1
To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the State Streets and
Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereby by Chapter 642,
Statutes of 1935, there is hereby created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the
"special gas tax street improvement fund." (Ord. No. 34 N.S., 11/35)
SEC. 2.21 MONEYS TO BE PAID INTO FUND
All moneys received by the City from the state under the provision of the State Streets and
Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein or for the construction,
maintenance of improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into
the fund created by the preceding section. (Ord. No. 34 N.S., 11/35)
SEC. 2.22 EXPENDITURE OF MONEYS IN FUND
All moneys in the fund created by section 2.20 shall be expended exclusively for the purposes
authorized by, and subject to, all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the State
Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. No. 34 N.S., 11/35)
ARTICLE V. CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM2
Division 1. Generally
SEC. 2.23 DEFINITION OF "COMMISSION"
As used in this article, the word "commission" shall be deemed to be the civil service
commission created by this article. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49)
SEC. 2.24 AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL AND OFFICERS CONCERNED WITH
PERSONNEL MATTERS
The Council and any other officer in whom is vested by law the authority to make transfers,
promotions, demotions, reinstatements, lay-offs and to suspend or dismiss employees shall retain
such authority, subject to the provisions of this article and subject to the provisions of Article V
of the Charter of the City, it being the intent and spirit of this article to provide a fair and just
1 For state law as to special gas tax street improvement fund, see Sts. and H.C.A., ?196; see also, generally, Sts.
& H.C.A., ??180 to 207.
2 For charter provisions as to personnel system, see Char., Art. V. For state law authorizing city to establish a
personnel system, see Gov. C.A., ?45001. As to military leaves of absence, see ??2.1, 2.2 of this Code.
Administration
2-6
approach to municipal employment in order that City employees may be selected and promoted
on a merit basis, but in no sense to impair the efficiency of the public service. (Ord. No. 129
N.S., 3/49)
SEC. 2.25 ADOPTION OF SYSTEM
A civil service system is hereby adopted and provisions are hereby made for the establishment,
maintenance and regulation of such system, for the selection, tenure, promotion, suspension and
removal of appointive officers and employees of the City, and for the appointment and
promotion of those in the classified service of the city to be made according to merit and fitness
to be ascertained by competitive examination. (Ord. No. 129, N.S., 3/49)
SEC. 2.26 SCOPE OF ARTICLE3
The civil service system of the City shall govern the employment and personnel management of
all appointive officers and employees of the City except members of boards and commissions,
the city attorney, the city administrator, the city engineer, the city clerk, the director of finance,
the director of planning, the director of recreation, the director of public words, the chief of
police, the fire chief, all part-time and temporary employees, and those persons rendering
professional, technical or expert services of any occasional or exceptional character. All of the
officers and employees excepted from the civil service system shall serve at the pleasure of the
City Council. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
SEC. 2.27 RETROACTIVE PROVISION
All appointive officers or employees of the City, other than the employees who have temporary
or probationary appointments, who, under the provisions of Article V of the Charter of the City
are placed under the civil service system, and who shall have served in such position
continuously for a period of at least six months prior to the time Article V shall have become
effective, and all such officers or employees who are on leaves of absence at the time Article V
became effective, are thereby automatically inducted into such office or employment, under civil
3 For state law as to which officers and employees may be included in a personnel system, see Gov. C.A.,
?45002.
service and inducted into such office or employment, under civil service and without examination
or investigation, as completely and effectively as if such person had been permanently
appointed thereto under civil service, after examination and investigation. (Ord. No. 129 N.S.,
3/49; Ord. No. 452, N.S., 12/83)
SEC. 2.28 PERSONNEL RULES - ADOPTION, ETC.
In addition to such others matters as may be necessary and proper to carry out the intent and
purposes of this article, rules shall be formulated by the civil service commission and shall be
adopted by the City Council in the form as submitted or as changed by the City Council. (Ord.
No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
Administration
2-7
SEC. 2.29 SAME - ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIFIC PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS
The rules required by the preceding section shall establish specific procedures and regulations
governing the following phases of the personnel system:
(a) The preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position
classification plan covering all positions in the classified service.
(b) The formulation of minimum standards and qualifications for each class of
position.
(c) The public announcement of vacancies and examinations and the
acceptance of applications for employment.
(d) The preparation and conduct of examinations and the establishment an use
of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment.
(e) The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists to fill
vacancies and the making of temporary and emergency appointments.
(f) The evaluation of employees during the probationary period.
(g) The transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of persons in the
classified service.
(h) The maintenance and use of necessary records and forms. (Ord. No. 129
N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
SEC. 2.30 CONTRACTS FOR CARRYING OUT DUTIES, ETC., UNDER ARTICLE4
The City Council may contract for any competent governmental or other agency for the
performance by such agency of such technical service in connection with the establishment of
the civil service system or with its operation, as may be desired. The contract may include the
delegation to such agency of the responsibility for the performance of the duties imposed in this
article upon the civil service commission and the personnel clerk, but shall not include the
delegation to such agency of the powers and duties vested in the City Council; provided,
however, that there shall be no derogation of the powers of authority vested in the civil service
commission by the terms of this article. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
4 For authority of City to contract for the conducting of competitive examinations and any other service in
connection with personnel selection and administration, see Gov. C. ?45008.
Administration
2-8
SEC. 2.31 APPROPRIATIONS
The City Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this
article. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
Division 2. Civil Service Commission
SEC. 2.32 COMPOSITION OF CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
The civil service commission shall consist of five members, each residing in Piedmont, who
shall be appointed by the City Council. The commission shall be organized and function in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 25.10 through 25.16 of this Code and Article VI of
the Piedmont City Charter. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 417 N.S., 3/81; Ord. No. 452
N.S., 12/83)
SEC. 2.33 INELIGIBILITY OF MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES
No person shall be appointed to the commission who holds any other public office or
employment of the City. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
SEC. 2.34 FUNCTIONS
The functions of the commission shall be:
(a) To consider and recommend to the Council rules and amendments of
rules, not contrary to any provisions in the Charter, to provide for the examination, appointment,
promotion, supervision and control of those within the classified service; for the administration
of the civil service system; a position classification plan; and other rules to carry out the
provisions of this article, revisions and amendments hereto, and the provisions of the Charter.
(b) To act in an advisory capacity to the Council on problems concerning civil
service administration.
(c) As provided by this article and by the rules adopted pursuant thereto, to
hear appeals submitted by any person in the classified service relative to his employment status,
or condition of employment, or any situation connected therewith.
(d) to make investigations concerning any matter relating to the civil service
system or its administration. In any investigation or hearing conducted by the commission, it
shall have the power to examine its witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or the
production of evidence before it by subpoenas issued in the name of the City and attested by the
city clerk. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause all such subpoenas to be served, and
refusal of a person to attend or to testify in answer to such a subpoena shall subject such person
to prosecution in the same manner set forth by law for failure to appear before the Council in
response to a subpoena issued by the Council. Each member of the civil service commission
Administration
2-9
shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses.
(e) To perform such other duties with reference to administration of the civil
service system not inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter as the Council may require by
ordinance.
(f) To hold hearings and make recommendations to the Council on the
adoption or revision of the position classification plan and class specifications and revisions
thereof, allocate and reallocate positions in the classified service to classes. (Ord. No. 129 N.S.,
3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
SEC. 2.35 CLASSIFICATION PLAN SHALL BE PROVIDED BY COMMISSION
SUBJECT TO COUNCIL APPROVAL
The commission shall provide for the standardization and classification of all positions and
employments in the classified service of the City. Such classification may be in groups and
subdivisions and may be based upon and graded according to duties and responsibilities and so
arranged as to promote the filling of the higher grades so far as practicable through promotion.
The classification plan, either as submitted by the commission or as changed by the Council,
shall be adopted by the Council. Changes in the classification plan which the Council deems
desirable may be recommended and adopted from time to time in the manner as herein provided
for the original adoption of the classification plan. The council shall have the authority to
withdraw the position of an appointive officer or employee from the operation of the civil service
system if the Council finds the existence of a shortage of funds or a material change in duties or
in the organization of the delivery of city services. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S.,
12/83)
Division 3. Personnel Clerk
SEC. 2.36 PERSONNEL OFFICER5
The Council may appoint a personnel officer who shall be responsible for supervising the
administration of the civil service system. The personnel officer shall perform the following
duties:
1. The personnel officer shall act in the capacity of clerk for the civil service
system. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
2. The personnel officer shall attend all meetings of the civil service
commission. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
3. The personnel officer shall administer all the provisions of this article and
5 For state law authorizing City to provide for appointment of a personnel officer and delegate his powers relative
to the personnel system, see Gov. C. ?45004.
Administration
2-10
the rules established hereunder not specifically reserved to the Council or the commission. (Ord.
No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
4. The personnel officer shall, under the direction of the commission, prepare
rules, and revisions and amendments thereof, for the consideration of the commission. (Ord. No.
129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
5. The personnel officer shall, under the direction of the commission, prepare
a position classification plan an class specifications and revision thereof, for the consideration of
the commission. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
SEC. 2.37 APPOINTMENTS
Appointments to vacant position sin the classified service shall be made in accordance with the
rules established under this article. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
Division 4. Suspensions and Other Similar Official Actions
SEC. 2.38 DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
Disciplinary actions against persons in the civil service shall be taken in accordance with the
rules established under this article. (Ord. No. 452 N.S., 12/83)
SEC. 2.39 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES, ETC., BY CITY EMPLOYEES, ETC.6
No officer, agent, clerk or employee of the City, and no candidate for any city office shall,
directly or indirectly, engage in any form of political activity during working hours on the
premises of city property, nor while in uniform. (Ord. No. 129 N.S., 3/49; Ord. No. 452 N.S.,
12/83)
ARTICLE VI. CALIFORNIA PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM
SEC. 2.77 ADOPTED
An amendment to the contract between the City Council of the City of Piedmont, and the Board
of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement system is hereby authorized, a copy
of said amendment being marked as 'Exhibit A' to his section and by such reference made a part
hereof as though herein set out in full. (Ord. No. 322 N.S., 9/74; Ord. No. 449 N.S., 11/83)
ARTICLE VII. MORAGA SPORTS FIELD USE RESTRICTIONS
6 For state law protecting and limiting the political activities of city personnel, see Gov. C. ??3201 et seq.
Administration
2-11
(Dracena Quarry Use Restrictions rescinded by Ord. 538 N.S., 10/92)
REVOKED: Ord. 569 N.S., 10/97, See Chapter 3
ARTICLE VIII. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES7
REVOKED: Sections 126-131, Ordinance No. 505 N.S., 11/88.
ARTICLE IX. PARK COMMISSION
REVOKED: Ordinance No. 395 N.S., 3/80, See Chapter 25.
ARTICLE X. SPECIAL BOND DEPOSIT FUND
SEC 2.137 CREATED - COMPOSITION - RIGHTS OF DEPOSITOR TO CLAIM MONEY
There is created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the "bond deposit fund" into
which shall be placed all security deposits, guarantee deposits, and faithful performance deposits
of every kind. All moneys deposited with the City to assure faithful performance may be
claimed by the depositor at any time following the performance and acceptance thereof by the
City. All other moneys so deposited with the City and placed in such fund may be claimed by
the depositor one year after the completion of all work done by such depositor in the City for
which such deposit applied. Such deposit must be claimed by the depositor within four years
following the completion of all work done by such depositor in the City or such deposit shall be
forfeited to the City and the amount thereof will be transferred from the bond deposit fund to the
general fund of the City. (Ord. No. 232 N.S., 12/62)
SEC. 2.138 EXPENDITURE OF MONEY IN FUND
Money deposited in the bond deposit fund shall be held in such fund and shall not be disbursed
except (1) upon claim properly made, pursuant to section 2.137 or (2) upon the resolution of the
City Council following a showing that such depositor, be expended for the purpose for which
they were deposited in which case such resolution shall direct that such funds be paid for such
work as may be required to make the necessary corrections, or otherwise reimburse the City for
its damage. (Ord. No. 232 N.S., 12/62)
7 For state law as to nuisances in cities, see Gov. C.A., ?38771.
Administration
2-12
ARTICLE XI. PEACE OFFICER RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING
SEC. 2.139 DESIRE OF CITY TO QUALITY TO RECEIVE STATE AID; ADHERENCE
TO STATE STANDARDS
The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of
chapter 1 of title 4 of the California Penal Code.
Pursuant to section 13522 of such chapter 1, the City while receiving aid from the state pursuant
to such chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the
state commission on peace officer standards and training, and any other similar standards set by
state law.
Pursuant to Sec. 832.6(B) of the California Penal Code, all existing reserve officers who possess
a Level I certificate issued by the Commission on Peace Officers Standards and Training, shall
continue as Class I reserve police officers after January 1, 1981.
The police chief only shall possess the authority to issue weapons permits to police reserve
officers who are in an off-duty capacity, and such permits shall be in writing. (Ord. No. 247
N.S., 6/64; Ord. No. 414 N.S., 11/80)
ARTICLE XII. SPECIAL FUNDS8
SEC. 2.140 CREATION AND EXPENDITURES
There are hereby created in the City treasury in accordance with state statutes the following
funds; expenditures from such funds shall be made only in accordance with such statues:
(a) The special gas tax engineering fund in accordance with section 2107.5 of the Streets
and Highways Code.
(b) The motor vehicle license fee fund in accordance with section 11005 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code.
(c) The traffic safety fund in accordance with section 1463 of the Penal Code and Section
42200 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. No. 250 N.S., 9/64)
8 For state law as to funds of cities generally, see Gov. C.A., ?43400 et seq. As to transfers between funds, see
Gov. C.A., ?53791.
Administration
2-13
ARTICLE XIII. HOLIDAYS
SEC. 2.141 ESTABLISHED
The holidays in this City are New Year's Day (January 1st), Washington's Birthday (third
Monday in February), Good Friday from 1:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m., Memorial Day (last Monday
in May), Independence Day (July 4th), Labor Day (first Monday in September), Columbus Day
(second Monday in October), Veteran's Day (fourth Monday in October), Thanksgiving Day
(fourth Thursday in November), the Friday after Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day
(December 25th). If any of the above holidays falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday will be a
holiday, and if any of the above holidays falls on a Sunday, the following Monday will be a
holiday. (Ord. No. 265 N.S., 10/66; Ord. No. 289 N.S.; Ord. No. 292 N.S., 12/70)
ARTICLE XIV. PENSION FUND INVESTMENT
SEC. 2.142 TERMS "BOARD" AND "PENSION FUND" DEFINED
The term "board" as used herein shall mean the board of any pension plan to which the City is
required to make contributions; the term "pension fund" as used herein shall mean a pension
fund to which the City is required to make contributions. (Ord. No. 274 N.S., 1/68)
SEC. 2.143 EXCLUSIVE CONTROL OF BOARD
The board shall have the exclusive control of the investment and reinvestment of the pension
funds and the means by which such investment and reinvestment are made; provided, however,
that the board shall be precluded from doing business with any person, firm or investment
counselor which shall have in its employ or be making commission payments to any member of
the City Council or any member of the city pension board. (Ord. No. 275 N.S., 12/67)
SEC. 2.144 INVESTMENT COUNSEL - PERSONS NOT ELIGIBLE FOR EMPLOYMENT
No person engaged in business as a broker or securities dealer, or who has a direct pecuniary
interest in any such business, and who receives commissions for transactions performed as agent
for the board, shall be eligible for employment as investment counsel for the board. (Ord. NO.
275 N.S., 12/67)
SEC. 2.145 SAME - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
The Board may employ investment counsel to render service in connection with the board's
investment program, but the board shall not engage investment counsel unless: (a) the principal
business of the person selected by the board consists of rendering investment supervisory
services, that is, the giving of continuous advice as to the investment of funds on the basis of the
individual needs of each client; (b) the principal ownership and control of such person rests with
individuals who are actively engaged in such business for a period of ten or more years; (c) such
Administration
2-14
person is registered as an investment advisor under the laws of the United States of America
from time to time in effect; (d) the contract between the board and the investment counsel is of
no specific duration and is voidable at any time by either party. (Ord. No. 466 N.S., 6/85)
SEC. 2.146 MORTGAGE SERVICING INSTITUTION AGREEMENTS; FEE; MONTHLY
POSTINGS OF CASH TRANSACTIONS
The board may enter into servicing agreements with qualified mortgage servicing institutions for
the handling of mortgage service details, and may reimburse such services the customary fee
charged by the trade, but in no event shall the fee exceed one-twelfth of one-half percent per
month of the unpaid balance of the loan or loans serviced under a servicing agreement. The
services shall furnish the board, or its investment counsel, each month, with respect to each
mortgage serviced, postings of all cash transactions affecting each mortgage. Neither the board
nor the City shall undertake to service any mortgage investment unless no mortgage servicing
institution can be found to service mortgages by the pension fund upon the conditions required
by this section, and in such event, the board may undertake such mortgage servicing pending a
sale of all such mortgages. (Ord. No. 274 N.S., 1/68)
SEC. 2.147 MANNER OF INVESTING FUNDS BY BOARD
The board may invest the moneys and assets of the pension fund and may sell any of its
investment, either to raise cash or for the purpose of reinvesting in other assets, as the board shall
from time to time provide by resolutions. (Ord. No. 466 N.S., 6/85)
SEC. 2.148 REVOKED (Ord. No. 466 N.S., 6/85)
SEC. 2.149 AUTHORIZATION OF BOARD TO EMPLOY CUSTODIAN OF SECURITIES
AND INVESTMENTS OF FUND; DUTIES OF CUSTODIAN
The board is authorized to employ a trust company or the trust department of a bank, at the
expense of the pension fund, and to act as custodian of the securities and investments of the fund
and to present interest coupons, and matured bonds for payment, maintain records and accounts,
deliver sold securities, and perform other services of a like nature for the board. (Ord. No. 275
N.S.)
ARTICLE XV. PURCHASING
SEC. 2.150 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(a) This Article shall be known as the City of Piedmont City Purchasing Ordinance.
Pursuant to the provisions of the City’s Charter, the provisions of this Article shall prevail over any
conflicting state law. In the event of a conflict between a provision of the City’s Charter and this
Article, the City’s Charter provision shall prevail.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures and policies for
Administration
2-15
purchasing goods, materials, equipment, supplies, and services (including Professional Services and
Public Works of Improvement). It is the policy of the City of Piedmont to utilize Competitive
Bidding Processes to obtain the best quality and prices for Public Works Projects and needed goods,
materials, equipment, supplies and services, except as specifically provided in this Article. The
City’s purchasing functions shall be governed by this Article and by the City’s Administrative
Purchasing Policy, which shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council, as may be amended
from time to time.
(c) City Council Approval Requirement. City Council approval is required for all
contracts unless otherwise specified in this Article, or in another provision of federal or state law.
(d) Definitions
“Bid” means a response to a solicitation for the performance of a Public Works
Project, or for a purchase of goods, materials, equipment, or supplies including, without
limitation, a bid, a proposal, and/or a statement of qualifications and experience.
“Bidder” means a person or company that submits a bid, proposal, or any response to a
solicitation for a bid.
“Change Order” means a change or addendum to an executed contract.
“Competitive Bidding Process” means a selection process where contractors, service
providers and/or vendors compete for contracts to supply the City goods, materials,
equipment, supplies, and services, and are selected through a formal or informal process that
allows full, fair and open competition for all qualified contractors and/or vendors with
selection based on specified criteria established to best meet the needs of the City. Invitations
for bids, requests for proposals, and requests for statement of qualifications and experience
are examples of competitive bidding processes. A competitive bidding process that awards a
contract to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder after public advertisement is referred to
as a competitive bidding process by formal solicitation.
“Contract” means a written agreement between the City and a contractor, the City and
a service provider, and/or the City and a vendor. “Contract” includes, but is not limited to, a
purchase order, a contract for services, a contract for maintenance, leasing of property or
equipment, an addendum or change order, a letter agreement, a memorandum of
understanding or memorandum of agreement.
“Cooperative Contracts” means a contract already solicited and/or awarded by other
public agencies, often under the sponsorship of non-profit cooperative contract associations,
allowing the City to purchase goods, services and equipment that have already been
competitively bid or assessed pricing, without the need for the City to undertake a separate
solicitation request action.
“Emergency” means a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and
Administration
2-16
imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of
life, health, property, or essential public services. (Reference: Public Contract Code Section
1102).
“Formal Competitive Bidding Process” means a competitive bidding process that may
award a contract to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder after public advertisement by
formal solicitation.
“Informal Competitive Bidding Process” means a competitive bidding process that
may award a contract to the lowest competitive bidder after solicitation of bids without public
advertisement by informal solicitation.
“Master Services Agreement” means a contract for consulting and general services to
be provided on an “as-needed” rather than a continuous basis, with a total compensation
stated as a maximum limit, which establishes a general scope of work and payment
parameters and includes the terms and conditions common to most City contracts.
“Professional Services” means services that require a professional license or high level
of technical skill including, without limitation, economic and financial services, attorneys,
actuaries, psychologists, medical doctors, claims consultants, insurance brokers, internet and
related technology services, consultants and experts for litigation in which the City or any of
the boards, commissions, officers or employees are involved, architect, landscape architect,
engineer, environmental project development and permit processing, land surveying, land use
planning, and construction project management.
“Proprietary Material” means material or information which has been delineated in
writing by the contractor, Professional Service provider, service provider, or vendor as being
proprietary, and which meets the criteria under state or federal law for qualifying as
proprietary material or information.
“Public Work of Improvement” or “Public Works Project” means a project that is paid
for, in whole or in part, from public funds, and done under contract with the City or performed
by City forces as authorized pursuant to the City Charter or this Article, and that involves at
least one of the following:
(i) A project for the construction, erection, improvement, painting, demolition, or
repair of public buildings and works;
(ii) Work in or about streams, bays, waterfronts, embankments, or other work for
protection against overflow; or
(iii) Street or sewer work except maintenance or repair.
“Responsible Bidder” means a bidder who has demonstrated the attribute of
trustworthiness, as well as quality, fitness, capacity and experience, specified in notice
Administration
2-17
inviting bids, including the project specifications, prepared for the project bid by the City, to
satisfactorily perform the professional services contract including the Public Works project.
(Reference: Public Contract Code Section 1103).
“Sole Source” means procurement which is only available from a single manufacturer
or source.
“Standing Supply/Services Purchase Order Agreement” means a contract for supplies
or services common to one or several departments on an “as-needed” basis, with a total
compensation stated as a maximum limit, which establishes a general order and payment
parameters and includes the terms and conditions common to most City contracts.
“Urgent Purchases” mean immediate purchases of goods, materials, equipment,
supplies or services made when an urgent circumstance exists, and procurement should not be
delayed by use of normal competitive and financial procedures. Lack of planning shall not
constitute justification for an urgent purchase.
(e) Contract Price
(1) Whenever a Contract estimated cost or Contract price is referred to in this Article,
for the purpose of determining the appropriate purchasing procedure, that cost or price
excludes sales tax and freight.
(2) No Contract shall be subdivided or separated into two or more Contracts to avoid
the requirements of this Article.
(f) Written Contracts
(1) All Contracts entered into by the City pursuant to this Article shall be in writing
and shall be executed by the City Administrator or other duly authorized officer or
employee of the City.
(2) All Contracts shall require the contracting party, to the maximum extent allowed
by law, to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its officers, officials,
employees, and consultants upon the terms specified by the City as being sufficient
to cover all damages and loss related to the work, service or purchase provided by
the contracting party or its subcontractors or employees.
(3) All Contracts shall require the contracting party to obtain and maintain such
insurance coverage as is specified by the City as being sufficient to protect the City,
its officers, officials, employees, and consultants from damages and loss related to
the work, service or purchase provided by the contracting party or its subcontractors
or employees.
(4) All Contracts shall require the contracting party to obtain and shall maintain all
Administration
2-18
licenses, including City business licenses and permits as may be required to provide
the contracted goods, materials, equipment, supplies, and services.
(g) City Not Liable / No Waiver.
The City shall not be liable for payment or other obligation for a Contract, service, or
purchase that was subject to, but failed to comply, with, this Article. No provision of this
Article shall impose a mandatory duty of enforcement on the City or on any of its officers,
officials, employees, boards or councils. If any section purports to impose a mandatory duty
of enforcement, said section shall be deemed to invest the City, and appropriate officer,
official, employee, board or council with discretion to enforce the section or not enforce it.
These procedures are for the City’s sole and exclusive benefit. The City’s failure to follow,
enforce, or expressly include the provisions of this Article in any Contract shall not
constitute a waiver of this Article’s requirements or the City’s right of enforcement. (Ord.
No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.151 PURCHASING OFFICER RESPONSIBILITY AND PROCEDURES
The City Administrator is appointed the purchasing officer of the City. The duties of the purchasing
officer may be combined with those of any other City officer or position. The purchasing officer or
the purchasing officer’s designated representative shall have the duties prescribed by the City’s
Administrative Purchasing Policy. The City Administrator or City Administrator’s designated
representatives may sign contracts on behalf of the City when authorized by ordinance, resolution, or
other City Council action and may establish rules and regulations as the City Administrator finds
necessary to administer this Article and the Administrative Purchasing Policy.
The City Administrator or his/her designated representative shall have authority to:
(a) Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment required by any department
or agency within the City in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this
Article XV, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt for the
internal management and operation, and such other rules and regulations as are prescribed by
the City Council by resolution;
(b) Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies,
services and equipment;
(c) Negotiate and recommend to the Council execution of contracts for Professional
Services;
(d) Act to procure for the City the needed quality in supplies, services and equipment
at least expense to the City;
(e) Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition
as possible on all purchases;
Administration
2-19
(f) Prepare and recommend to the Council rules governing the purchase of supplies,
services and equipment for the City;
(g) Prepare and recommend to the Council revisions and amendments to the
purchasing rules.
(h) Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market
conditions and new products;
(i) Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this
Article XV and other rules and regulations;
(j) Supervise the inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased to
insure conformance with specifications; and
(k) Where practical, maintain a prospective Bidders list or require departments to
maintain their own prospective Bidders lists and maintain vendors catalog files and
records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division.
(l) Utilize other procurement methods as provided in this Article XV when to do so is
more beneficial, economical, and in the City’s best interests.
(m) Authorize in writing any City department or agency to purchase or contract for
specified supplies, services and equipment, but shall require that such purchases or
contracts be made in conformity with the procedures established by this Article XV, and
shall further require periodic reports from the City department on the purchases and
contracts made under written authorization. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S.,
4/17)
SEC. 2.152 CITY ADMINISTRATOR AUTHORITY
(a) The City Administrator shall have authority to award contracts for the purchase of
materials, supplies, equipment, or services without the City Council approval if the purchase
is in the amount of $75,000 or less, and sufficient funds for such purchase have been
appropriated in the City’s budget. These purchases shall be subject to procurement
procedures set forth in this Article.
(b) The City Administrator shall have authority to award contracts for professional
services or Public Works projects greater than $5,000 but less than $75,000, without City
Council approval, if sufficient funds for such services have been appropriated in the City’s
budget. These purchases shall be subject to procurement procedures set forth in this Article.
Administration
2-20
(c) The City Administrator shall have authority to approve change orders for City
Council approved Public Works projects not to exceed the Estimated Project Construction
Budget.
(d) In the event of an emergency or urgent circumstances, the City Administrator may
authorize the expenditure of any unencumbered moneys from the operating reserve,
notwithstanding the fact that such moneys may not have been appropriated for such purpose.
Bid procedures set forth in Sections 2.156 through 2.167 shall not apply to these purchases.
The City Administrator shall report to the City Council any emergency or urgent purchase
made at the next City Council meeting following such action.
(e) The City Administrator may delegate in writing the authority to purchase or contract
for specified supplies, services, and equipment as long as such purchases or contracts are
made in conformity with the procedures established by this Article.
(f) The City Council shall receive a report listing all contracts approved by the City
Administrator at a minimum on an annual basis. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S.,
4/17)
SEC. 2.153 BIDDING
Except as otherwise provided in this Article XV or the Purchasing Policy and Procedures, purchases
of supplies, professional services, and equipment shall be made by the bid procedures set forth in
Sections 2.156 through 2.167. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.154 EXCEPTIONS
Bid procedures set forth in Sections 2.156 through 2.167 do not apply to purchases of supplies,
services, and equipment in the following circumstances:
(a) The amount involved does not exceed $5,000.
(b) Emergency or Urgent Purchases.
(c) Supplies, services, or equipment that can only be obtained from a sole source.
(d) The procurement of professional services. However, the City Council may require
the bid procedure by resolution in a particular instance;
(e) A gift of funds is made to the City with conditions specifying particular goods,
services, or equipment, or a particular provider of same. Where such a conditional gift is
used to fund only a portion of a purchase or project, the balance of the purchase or
contract shall conform to the bidding requirements of this Article XV.
Administration
2-21
(f) The City has already awarded a bid for supplies, services, and equipment,
following normal bidding procedures pursuant to Sections 2.156 through 2.167 hereof
and purchases the same or substantially the same supplies, services, and equipment for
the same amount previously bid or within 1% of the amount previously bid with the same
supplier, provider or manufacturer awarded the original bid.
(g) In any cooperative arrangement with the United States Government or any agency
or division thereof, the State of California, County of Alameda or any other governmental
jurisdiction in which the City is able to obtain favorable prices based on bids or proposals
made for supplies, services and equipment to the other governmental agency, the City is
authorized to enter into appropriate written agreements with the other governmental
entity to achieve this purpose.
(h) Where another governmental entity has obtained or awarded a bid for supplies,
services and equipment based on its own bidding procedures, the City may purchase the
same or substantially the same supplies, services, and equipment for the same amount of
the bid to the other governmental entity or within 1% of such amount with the same
supplier, provider or manufacturer the bid was awarded to by the other governmental
entity.
(i) Alternative methods for procuring supplies, services and equipment, and
exceptions to Competitive Bidding Processes as set forth herein:
(1) Design-Build Authorization. Subject to authorization of the City Council, the
City may utilize an alternate procedure for bidding on building construction projects
in excess of $75,000 pursuant to the procedures in California Public Contract Code
Section 22160, et seq., and specifically incorporated herein, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(2) City’s Best Interest. Except where otherwise required by federal law or by
reason of the source of funding for the project, goods, materials, equipment, supplies,
and services may be obtained by negotiated Contract and without a Competitive
Bidding Process, when the City Council determines that, due to the nature of the
goods, materials, supplies, equipment, or services, (1) a Competitive Bidding Process
is not likely to serve the best interests of the City or to result in the lowest price, or
(2) there is a less expensive alterative (e.g., State contract, used equipment, etc.) that
will serve the City equally as well . Such motion shall be approved unanimously by
the Council.
Administration
2-22
(3) Other. Competitive Bidding Processes may be dispensed with in accordance
with any other section of the City Charter or this Article that provides such an
exemption.
(4) Purchases Not Susceptible to Competitive Bidding Process. Except where
otherwise required by federal law or by reason of the source of funding for the
project, goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services may be obtained by
negotiated Contract and without a Competitive Bidding Process, where such
purchases are not readily adaptable to the open market and bidding processes. Such
purchases include, but shall not be limited to: (1) utility services (telephone, gas,
water, sewer and electricity) provided to City buildings and facilities, (2) franchises
awarded by the City Council, (3) insurance or bond premiums, (4) subscriptions,
memberships, software licenses, advertisements and travel expenses.
(5) Master Service Agreements. Master Service Agreements may be made with
specific vendors to provide services over time. The Master Service Agreement will
establish the basic contractual terms and purchase or task orders with specific scopes
of work and payment terms shall be required for purchases made through Master
Service Agreements.
(6) Standing Supply/Service Purchase Order Agreements. Standing Supply
Purchase Order Agreements may be made with specific vendors for purchase of
repetitive-use goods, materials, equipment, and/or supplies common to one or several
departments. The Standing Supply Purchase Order Agreements will establish the
basic contractual terms and purchase orders with specific goods, materials,
equipment and/or supplies and payment terms shall be required for purchase made
through Standing Supply Purchase Order Agreements.
(j) Use of City Forces. City employees may be used to perform services in
accordance with the City’s Charter and shall not be subject to the terms of this Article.
(Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. No. N.S. 503, 10/88, Ord. No. 716 N.S., 02/15, Ord. 727
N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.155 PURCHASES FOR $5,000.00 OR LESS
Purchases of services, supplies or equipment for $5,000 or less and for which an
appropriation is included in the Adopted Budget, shall be approved by individual Department
Head requiring the services, supplies, or equipment. Additional purchasing procedures shall
be established by City’s Administrative Purchasing Policy. (Ord. No. 716 N.S., 02/15, Ord.
727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.156 PURCHASES EXCEEDING $5,000.00, NOT EXCEEDING $75,000.00
Except as otherwise provided in this Article XV, budgeted purchases of services, supplies and
equipment of an estimated value of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and not
Administration
2-23
exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) may be made to the lowest responsive,
responsible bidder after informal solicitation in the open market without public advertisement
pursuant to the procedure prescribed in Sections 2.156 through 2.159. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87,
Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.157 MINIMUM NUMBER OF BIDS – INFORMAL SOLICITATION
Open market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three bids of record
and shall be awarded to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87,
Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.158 NOTICE INVITING BIDS – INFORMAL SOLICITATION
The purchasing officer or designee shall solicit bids from prospective providers by one or more
of the following methods: written request, telephone, or public notice posted on a public bulletin
board in City Hall. (Ord. No. 433, N.S. 2/83, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.159 WRITTEN BIDS
The purchasing officer shall keep a record of all open market orders and bids for a period of one
year after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, and subject
to Proprietary Material, shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. No. 716 N.S., 02/15, Ord. 727
N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.160 PURCHASES EXCEEDING $75,000.00
Except as otherwise provided in this Article XV, purchases and contracts for supplies, services,
and equipment of a value greater than seventy-five thousand ($75,000.00) dollars shall be
entered into after a Competitive Bidding Process by formal solicitation, and awarded to the
lowest responsive, qualified responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedure prescribed in Sections
2.160 through 2.166 hereof. (Ord. No. 482, N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.161 NOTICE INVITING BIDS – FORMAL SOLICITATION
(a) For any Public Works Project, the estimated cost of which is more than seventy-five
thousand dollars ($75,000), the City Administrator or City Administrator’s designee may
solicit from prospective Bidders Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) in a manner consistent
with the procedures in the Purchasing Policy and in conformance with this Article.
Prospective Bidders shall complete fully the SOQ, which when completed, shall be
submitted as a declaration under penalty of perjury. Advertisement of the SOQ to
prospective Bidders shall be made in the manner of advertising public notice inviting Bids.
Said responses shall be submitted in sealed envelopes as provided in the SOQ and shall be
identified as responses to the SOQ for the designated project. Whenever prequalification is
required of any Bidder for a Contract, it shall be required for all prospective Bidders for that
Contract.
Administration
2-24
(b) Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the services, supplies, or
equipment to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured,
and the time and place for opening bids.
(1) Publication. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten working days
before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City;
(2) Prospective Bidders List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids
from responsible prospective suppliers, prequalified Bidders, and/or those Bidders
who have requested their names to be added to a bidders list; and
(3) Bulletin Board. The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending purchases
by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in City Hall. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87,
Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.162 BIDDER'S SECURITY
When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder's security may be prescribed in the
notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security, provided that the
successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract
within ten days after the notice of the award of contract has been mailed unless the City is
responsible for the delay. The City Council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to
execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder; the amount of the lowest
bidder's security shall be applied by the City to the difference between the low bid and the
second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. (Ord. No. 482
N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.163 BID OPENING PROCEDURE
Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer in accordance with procedures provided
in the notice inviting bids, and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened
in public at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. Unless provided otherwise in the
notice inviting bids, a tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during
regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening.
(Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.164 REJECTION OF BIDS
In its discretion, the Council may reject any and all bids presented and proceed with a new notice
of inviting bids. In the alternative, the City Council may authorize negotiations with one or more
bidders for purchase of services, supplies and equipment at a price lower than the original bid
without making substantial changes in specifications. This provision shall apply to all purchases
for supplies, equipment, or services. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
Administration
2-25
SEC. 2.165 AWARD OF CONTRACTS
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this Article XV, Contracts shall be awarded by the
City Council to the lowest responsive, responsible qualified bidder.
(b) Determination of Lowest Responsible Bidder. In determining the "lowest responsible
bidder," the following factors may be considered in addition to price.
(1) The Bidder’s ability, capacity, and skill to perform the Contract or provide
the service required.
(2) The Bidder’s character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency.
(3) The quality of performance of previous Contracts or services for the City or
other contracting parties.
(4) The Bidder’s previous and existing compliance with the laws and ordinances
relating to a Contract or service.
(5) The sufficiency of the Bidder’s financial resources.
(6) The Bidder’s ability to provide future maintenance and service for the use of
the subject of the Contract.
(7) Any other criteria appropriate for the type of Contract to be awarded.
(c) Selection of a Professional Services provider shall be made on the basis of
demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the
satisfactory performance of the services required. The City Administrator or City
Administrator’s designee may solicit from prospective professional service providers
Statements of Qualifications (SOQ) to assure that the professional services are engaged on
the basis of demonstrated competence and professional qualifications necessary for the type
of services to be performed and at a fair and reasonable price to the City. Prospective
professional service providers shall complete fully the SOQ, which when completed, shall be
submitted as a declaration under penalty of perjury. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S.,
4/17)
Administration
2-26
SEC. 2.166 TIE BIDS
If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service
being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of new notice inviting bids, the
Council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie
bidders at the time of bid opening. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.167 PERFORMANCE BONDS
The Council shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract in
such amounts as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. If the City
Council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the
notice inviting bids. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.168 ESTIMATES OF REQUIREMENTS
All City Departments and agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements of supplies,
services and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the
purchasing officer prescribes. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.169 MODIFICATIONS OF PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
Alterations, deviations, additions or deletions from the original scope of work for Public Works
Projects, which are determined by the City to be necessary during the progress of the work, shall
be documented by written change orders.
(a) The City Administrator or designated representative may authorize change orders not
to exceed the Estimated Project Construction Budget.
(b) The cost of each change order shall be determined by a fair and reasonable valuation,
agreed to in writing by the Public Works Director or his/her designee, and an authorized
representative of the contractor, and shall be deducted from the contingency budget. (Ord.
No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.170 PURCHASE ORDERS
In addition to other provisions included in this Article, purchase of supplies, services and
equipment in an amount exceeding $5,000 but less than or equal to $25,000 shall be made only
by purchase order (including confirming purchase orders when goods are purchased on an
emergency basis). Check request forms may be substituted for purchase orders when the
purchasing officer considers it necessary. (Ord. No. 482 N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
Administration
2-27
SEC. 2.171 ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS
Except in cases of emergency and urgent procurement, the purchasing officer shall not issue any
purchase order for supplies, services or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered
appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. Any emergency or
urgent procurement shall first be approved by the City Administrator or designee. (Ord. No. 482
N.S., 2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.172 INSPECTION AND TESTING
The purchasing officer shall require the receiving department to inspect supplies and equipment
delivered and contractual services performed to determine their conformance with the specifications
set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to require
chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are
necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Ord. No. 482 N.S.,
2/87, Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
SEC. 2.173 APPEAL FROM DECISION TO PURCHASE
Bidders aggrieved by the purchasing officer's decision may appeal or protest in writing as
provided in the notice inviting bids within the time limits in the notice inviting bids or no later
than ten (10) working days from date of award, whichever period is shorter. The purchasing
officer or his designee shall review the appeal or protest and issue a written determination within
ten (10) working days. The written decision from the purchasing officer or his designee shall be
final. (Ord. 727 N.S., 4/17)
ARTICLE XVI. LIBRARY SERVICES COMMISSION
REVOKED: Article XVI Library Services Commission, Ord. No. 395 N.S., 3/80,
See Chapter 25.
SEC 2.175 CLAIMS PROCEDURES.
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of the State of
California, the following claims procedures are established for those claims against the City for
money or damages not now governed by state or local laws.
a. Notwithstanding the exemption set forth in Section 905 of the
Government Code of the State of California, all claims against the City for damages or money,
when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws,
shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Section 910
through 915.2 of the Government Code of the State.
b. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945
through 946 of the Government Code of the State relating to the prohibition of suits in the
Administration
2-28
absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the Council. (Ord. No. 551 N.S.,
1/94)
Rev. 2017-04-05
Parks
3 - 1
Chapter 3
PARKS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§3.1 Purpose of Chapter
§3.2 Definitions
§3.3 General Regulations
§3.4 Dogs in Parks
§3.5 Tennis Courts
ARTICLE II. PARK USE RESTRICTIONS
§3.6 Crocker Park Use Restrictions
§3.7 Dracena Park Use restrictions
§3.8 Linda-Beach Playfield Use Restrictions
§3.9 Coaches Playfield Use Restrictions
§3.9A Skate Park Rules and Use Restrictions
§3.10 Piedmont Sports Field (Hampton Field) Use Restrictions
§3.11 Piedmont Park Use Restrictions
ARTICLE III. TREES IN GENERAL
§3.12 Trees obstructing sewers
ARTICLE IV. TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
§3.13 Intent
§3.14 City Approval Required
§3.15 Designation of Appropriate Trees
§3.16 Planting Trees in Parking Strips
§3.17 Pruning Trees in Parking Strips
§3.18 Removal of Trees in Parking Strips
§3.19 Unauthorized Treatment
§3.20 Violations and Penalties
ARTICLE V. TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§3.21 Removal of Hazardous Trees
§3.22 Viewshed
ARTICLE VI. ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER
§3.23 Administration of Regulations
§3.24 Signs Required
§3.25 Amendments to Chapter
§3.26 Violations of Chapter an Infraction
Parks
3 - 2
§§3.27-3.30 Not Used
ARTICLE VII. BAY FRIENDLY LANDSCPAE REQUIREMENTS
§3.30 Bay-Friendly Landscaping Regulations for City Facilities
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 3.1 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER
This chapter is intended to regulate the use of municipal parks, playgrounds and other
recreational facilities which are provided for the use and enjoyment of the residents of Piedmont
and to ensure that residents of Piedmont shall have priority in the use of such facilities; and to
regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of trees in the city.
SEC. 3.2 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain terms
and words are defined as follows:
a. At Large. A dog on or upon any public street, alley or other public place, or in or
upon any unenclosed lot or premises within the city, or on private property not
belonging to its owner, and not under restraint by leash, rope, or chain securely
and continuously held by a competent person.
b. Commercial Activity. Selling or offering for sale any goods or services for which
a city business license is required under Chapter 10 of this code.
c. Dog. Any member of the canine family and shall include female as well as male
dogs.
d. Director. The Recreation Director or such other person appointed by the Director
to be his or her designee unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
e. Park. All public open spaces such as planted median islands, parks, recreation
areas and facilities owned and maintained by the City of Piedmont.
f. Parking Strip. That portion of land within the public right-of-way lying between
the curb and the sidewalk.
g. Picnic Area. An area within a park which contains one or more picnic tables.
h. Pruning. Removal of entire branches or portions of branches from a tree.
Pruning also includes but is not limited to thinning and topping. (Ord. 617 N.S.
6/00)
Parks
3 - 3
i. Public property. Property owned in fee by the City and property subjet to
easements, rights of way and other non-fee interests in real property belonging to,
in favor of, or benefiting the City. Public property includes but is not limited to
parking strips, medians and public parks. (Ord. 617 N.S. 6/00)
j. Street Tree. Any tree growing within a parking strip.
k. Topping. Elimination of the upper portion of a tree's trunk or main leader.
l. Tree. Any woody perennial plant, usually with one main trunk, attaining a height
of at least twelve feet at maturity.
m. Trees on private property. Any tree existing within the legally described
boundaries of a parcel of land which is not owned by the City of Piedmont,
whether owned by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.
n. Tree Removal. The destruction of any tree by cutting, girdling, interfering with
the water supply, applying chemicals, inserting foreign materials into the body of
the tree, or regrading around the base of the trunk.
o. View Pruning. The selective removal of entire branches or portions of branches
from a tree so as to improve visibility through the tree.
p. View. A distant vista or panoramic range of sight of Piedmont, neighboring
areas, or the San Francisco Bay that existed at the time a claimant acquired his/her
property, if after 1980, or the view existing in 1980 if acquired before that date.
Views include, but are not limited to, skylines, bridges, distant cities, geologic
features, hillside terrains and wooded canyons or ridges.
SEC. 3.3 GENERAL PARK REGULATIONS
3.3.1 Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. The possession, consumption or sale of
alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited in all city recreation facilities with the exception of city
sponsored events and other specific exemptions approved by the Director.
3.3.2 Amplified Sound. Except as otherwise specified, no one shall operate any
exterior sound amplification equipment in any park without a valid permit issued by the Director.
For the purposes of this section "sound amplification equipment" does not include radios or other
equipment tuned so that the sound does not carry more than ten (10) feet.
3.3.3 Commercial Activities. No person shall practice, carry on, or conduct any
business or profession or other commercial enterprise nor sell or offer for sale any service,
merchandise, article or anything whatever in any park without the prior written permission of the
Director, with the exception of commercial filming of all kinds which shall be regulated as set
forth in Chapter 15 of the city code.
Parks
3 - 4
3.3.4 Fires. No person shall kindle or maintain in any park any outdoor fire except in
picnic areas specifically equipped for such purpose. Persons using picnic facilities who have
kindled a fire shall not leave the area where the fire is kindled or maintained until the fire has
been extinguished and is cold to the touch.
3.3.5 Guns and Dangerous Devices Prohibited. No person, except those persons listed
in Penal Code Section 12031(b) and 12031(c), shall have in his possession in any park any
dangerous weapon, device, firearm, or destructive device as that term is defined in Section 12001
of the Penal Code.
3.3.6 Hours of Operation. Except as specified otherwise in this chapter, parks shall be
closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. daily, and no person shall be permitted to
enter or remain within any Piedmont city park, playground or other recreational facility except as
approved by the Director.
3.3.7 Injuring of Pets or Wildlife Prohibited. No person shall hunt, capture, or harm
or attempt to hunt, capture or harm any land or water animal in any park. No person shall
remove the young or the unhatched eggs of any wild animal found in any park.
3.3.8 Littering Prohibited. Littering is prohibited in all municipal parks as defined in
Sec. 9.11 of the code.
3.3.9 Plants Protected. No person shall pick, damage, remove or destroy any tree,
plant or plant material except as approved by the Director.
3.3.10 Priority Use Established. The use of recreation facilities shall be primarily for
the enjoyment of Piedmont residents. The following priority system will be used in allocating
facility resources.
a. Recreation Department programs
b. Piedmont Unified School District programs
c. Non-profit Piedmont organizations
d. Piedmont residents
e. All others
3.3.11 Reservations Required. Groups or individuals wishing to use city park or
recreation facilities shall submit a request to the Recreation Department and pay such fees as
may be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. This application shall be
a written statement on the form provided by the Director.
Parks
3 - 5
3.3.12 Temporary Closure of Parks. A park or any portion thereof may be closed to
the public on a temporary basis when it is determined by the Director, the Chief of Police or the
City Administrator that such closing is necessary to protect public safety or public property. A
temporary closure shall be defined as thirty (30) days or less. No person shall enter or remain in
any park or portion thereof which has been ordered closed. Any such actions by the Director,
Chief of Police or City Administrator shall be temporary in nature unless ratified by the City
Council at its meeting immediately following the taking of such actions. (Ord. No. 329 N.S., §1)
3.3.13 Wheeled Vehicles Prohibited. With the exception of bicycles, which are
restricted to paved pathways in the parks, and motorized wheelchairs, wheeled vehicles shall be
prohibited. Wheeled vehicles used for park maintenance by municipal employees shall be
specifically exempted from this provision of the code.
SEC. 3.4 DOGS IN PARKS
3.4.1 Running at Large Prohibited in Parks. Dogs running at large, as defined in
section 3.2 of the municipal code, shall be prohibited in all parks, playfields, and recreational
facilities except as set forth in section 3.4.2.
3.4.2 Off Leash Area Established. The following areas are designated as “off leash
areas” for dogs, and dogs, with an Off Leash permit, under the control of a competent person
shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 4.13 of the City Code when in these areas.
a. Blair Park in its entirety.
b. Piedmont Park creek area (designated by signs) in the rear of the Community Hall
to the Piedmont Unified School District property line.
c. The areas of Dracena Park designated as Off Leash in figure 3.4.2(c)1.
d. Linda Park (within fenced off leash area).
3.4.3. Off Leash Area Signs Required. The Department of Public Works shall be
responsible for installation and maintenance of signs in all off leash areas which clearly
designate the area to be used by dogs off leash and the rules for off leash areas as established in
Section 3.4.4 of this Code.
3.4.4 Off Leash Area Rules Established. The following rules shall apply to all off leash
areas in the City, except as otherwise noted:
a. Off leash areas shall be open to off leash dogs as follows:
(1) Linda Park - 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. weekdays and from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m. on weekends.
(2) Dracena Park – 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily
(3) Piedmont Park – 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily
(4) Blair Park – 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily
1 Please see page 3-32 for figure 3.4.2(c).
Parks
3 - 6
b. No smoking is allowed in established off leash areas.
c. Dogs must have current vaccinations, a license issued by the city of residence and
have a valid Off-Leash Permit from the City of Piedmont for a fee established
from time to time by the City Council by resolution.
d. Dogs under 4 months of age and female dogs in season are prohibited.
e. Dogs must be on leash when arriving and leaving the off leash area and owners
must carry a leash for each dog while in the off leash area and must have their
animals under voice control.
f. No more than three (3) dogs may accompany the owner in the off leash area, and
owners must remain with and have their dogs in sight at all times.
g. Dogs which become aggressive, unruly or play roughly must be leashed and
removed from the off leash area immediately.
h. Dogs which have been declared dangerous and/or vicious pursuant to Section
4.14(2) of this Code or a similar code in another jurisdiction shall be prohibited
from off leash areas.
i. Owners are legally responsible for all injuries and/or property damage caused by
their dogs.
j. Owners must remove dog defecation pursuant to Section 4.34 of this Code.
k. Pursuant to Sec. 3.3.3 of this Code, commercial use of off leash areas by
professional dog trainers or walkers is prohibited.
3.4.5 Off Leash Permit Required. Each dog using an Off Leash area in the City of
Piedmont must have a current Off Leash Permit attached to its collar. The Police Department
shall administer the issuance of Off Leash Permits. The City Council shall set the fee for Off
Leash Permits from time to time by resolution.
3.4.6 Violations an Infraction. Violations of Section 3.4.1, 3.4.4, and 3.4.5 of this Code
are an infraction. Violators are subject to removal from the off leash areas, suspension or
revocation of off leash license, and/or issuance of an Administrative Citation pursuant to Section
1.9 of the Piedmont City Code, in addition to other applicable legal remedies. The fine for such
violations shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 619
N.S., 12/2000; Ord. 741 N.S., 9/2018)
SEC. 3.5 TENNIS COURTS
Parks
3 - 7
3.5.1 Rules Established by Commission. All tennis courts located in city parks shall
be operated by the Recreation Department in accordance with rules established by the Recreation
Commission (which shall be ratified by the city council).
3.5.2 Permit System Established In order to allocate tennis court use in an equitable
manner, a permit system as approved by the Recreation Commission shall be in effect at all city
tennis facilities. Permits shall be purchased on an annual basis for a fee as may be established
from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
3.5.3 Youth Priority at Hampton Field Courts. The tennis courts at Hampton Field
shall be youth priority facilities and permitted youth shall have automatic, immediate and
absolute priority over adult players unless the adult has a valid written reservation issued by the
Recreation Department.
ARTICLE II PARK USE RESTRICTIONS
SEC. 3.6 CROCKER PARK USE RESTRICTIONS
In recognition of the passive nature of Crocker Park and the fact that no sports fields exist
at this city facility scheduled use, as defined in Section 3.7.2(b), shall be prohibited, unless
approved by resolution of the City Council.
SEC. 3.7 DRACENA PARK USE RESTRICTIONS
3.7.1 Administration The Recreation Director shall administer the use of Dracena
Park subject to the provisions of this article. The Recreation Director shall establish such
procedures as are necessary to administer and supervise use of the Dracena Park in its entirety,
including but not limited to the Quarry, the Children’s Play Area and “Panhandle” turf area
bordered by Artuna and El Cerrito Avenues. (Ord. 693 N.S. 05/10)
3.7.2 Definitions
a. Informal Use. The term "informal use" shall mean use of the park for purposes
without benefit of a reservation or formal application. Any sports team activity,
including informal practice sessions, shall be considered scheduled use, not
informal use.
b. Scheduled Use. The term "scheduled use" shall mean use of the park on a formal
basis with an approved application and reservation. Such authorized use shall be
limited to supervised activities or events sponsored by Piedmont based, non-profit
sports organizations, for sports practices for youth age 9 and under, or other uses
approved by the Recreation Department. City sponsored events may be held at
the discretion of the City. (Ord. 693 N.S. 05/10)
3.7.3 Restrictions
Parks
3 - 8
a. Days of the Week. The park will be open daily for informal use. No scheduled
use shall take place on Saturdays or Sundays. City or Recreation Department
sponsored events or activities may be held on any day of the week.
b. Hours of Use. Informal use may occur from 8:00 a.m. to dark. No scheduled use
shall occur before 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.
c Lighting. Lighting shall be provided for security. No nighttime illumination shall
be provided for any other purpose, including but not limited to sports or other
recreational activities.
d. Sound Amplification. Use of sound amplification of any kind is prohibited at all
times except by specific permission and approval of the City Council. (Ord. 566
N.S. 6/95, 611 N.S. 10/99)
e. Private Equipment/Caterers. Inflatable (or otherwise) “Jumpers”, bounce houses,
astrojumps, use of generators, and on-premises caterers are prohibited. The use of
portable furniture shall be limited to senior citizens and persons with disabilities.
Users of the park shall not be required to prove a disability (Ord. 693 N.S. 05/10)
SEC. 3.8 LINDA BEACH PLAYFIELD USE RESTRICTIONS
3.8.1 Administration. The Recreation Director shall have the authority to regulate the
use of the Linda Beach Playfield, subject to the provisions of this Section. The Recreation
Director or the Director's designee shall make such rules and regulations and establish such
procedures as are necessary to administer and supervise the use of the Linda Beach Playfield in
order to provide a field for the use of the Piedmont community, Piedmont youth sports teams and
Recreation Department programs and events in accordance with the terms and conditions set
forth below
3.8.2 Definitions.
a. “Group” means more than twelve (12) persons concurrently participating
in the same activity(ies) or game(s).
b. “Scheduled Use” means any use authorized and scheduled by written
permit issued by the City of Piedmont Recreation Department including
but not limited to the youth activity of the Piedmont Soccer Club and the
Piedmont Baseball Foundation. This term excludes special events
sponsored by the Recreation Department from time to time.
Parks
3 - 9
3.8.3 Use Restrictions.
a. Hours of Use
(i) On weekdays, Linda Beach Playfield shall be open from 7:00 a.m.
until dusk, except as permitted by City Council resolution 18-04
which allows use of field lighting for scheduled soccer until 9:00
p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesday, and Thursdays for no
more than 16 weeks in the fall.
(ii) On weekends, Linda Beach Playfield shall be open from 9:00 a.m.
until dusk.
(iii) Linda Beach Playfield shall be closed to use by the public during
Beach School hours regular or summer session] or any period
when Recreation Department scheduled programs are being
operated at Linda Beach Playfield.
b. Field Lighting. As originally adopted in City Council Resolution 141-88,
the following use restrictions are established for Linda-Beach Playfield.
(i) Field lighting cannot operate past 8:00 p.m., except as provided in
Section 3.8.3(a)(i)
(ii) Field lighting cannot exceed an average of 10 footcandles of
intensity.
(iii) Field lighting can be operated no more than sixteen (16) weeks per
year for soccer only.
(iv) Field lighting cannot be operated on Fridays, Saturdays or
Sundays.
(v) Field lighting standards cannot exceed 50' in height.
c. Group Use. There shall be no group use without a written permit.
(i) No permit shall be issued for a use other than by youth.
(ii) Permits shall only be issued for use during the hours the field is
open as designated in Sec. 3.8.3 (a). On weekends, the Director
shall not schedule use after 6:00p.m. unless, in his or her opinion,
there are no alternate fields available within the City for this use to
occur.
(iii) Use under a permit has priority over any other use.
Parks
3 - 10
(iv) The Director shall ensure that at least four hours per weekend
remain unscheduled and available for informal community use.
3.8.4 Locked Facility. Linda Beach Playfield may be fenced and operated, on a short
term or permanent basis, as an open/closed park that is locked during hours when the park is
closed.
3.8.5 Notice of Change in Restrictions. Any changes in field lighting restrictions will
require written notice to the immediate neighborhood at least 10 days prior to consideration of
any proposed changes by the City Council.
3.8.6 Infraction for Willful Violation Any willful violation of the provisions of this
Section 3.8.1 et seq. or the rules and/or regulations established by the Recreation Director under
the authority granted pursuant to this section shall be an infraction pursuant to Section 3.26
herein with the fine for such infractions established by Resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 729 N.S., 04/2017; Ord. 722 N.S., 05/2016; Ord. 710 N.S., 07/2013; Ord. 673 N.S.,
11/2007; Ord. 646 N.S., 4/2004)
SEC. 3.9 COACHES PLAYFIELD USE RESTRICTIONS
3.9.1 Administration The Recreation Director shall have the authority to regulate the
use of the Moraga Sports Field, subject to the provisions of this Section. The Recreation
Director or the director's designee shall make such rules and regulations and establish such
procedures as are necessary to administer and supervise organized use of the Moraga Sports
Field in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth below. (Ord. No. 470 N.S. 12/16/85;
538 N.S. 10/92)
3.9.2 Definitions
a Permitted Use - The term "permitted use" means use for sports and other
recreational activities. "Permitted use" shall exclude organized adult sports.
(Ord. No. 538 N.S.)
b. Organized Use - The term "organized use" means any use authorized and
scheduled by the City of Piedmont Recreation Department including but not
limited to the activity of the Piedmont Soccer Club and the Piedmont Baseball
Foundation. This term excludes special events sponsored by that Department
from time to time. (Ord. No. 470 N.S. 12/16/85, 538 N.S.)
c. Special Event - The term “special events” means an occasional event scheduled
by the City Recreation Department from time to time, such as Kite Day, Penny
Carnival, a holiday play day, and other such one-time short-term events. (Ord.
No. 470 N.S. 12/16/85, 538 N.S.)
3.9.3 Use Restrictions
Parks
3 - 11
a. Organized Sports and Games. Organized use of Coaches Field shall
be governed by the following regulations:
i. Hours of play and practice. Monday through Friday, games and
practices shall begin no earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor end later than 8:00 p.m.
On Saturday, games and practices shall begin no earlier than 9:00 a.m. On
Sunday, games and practices shall begin no earlier than 12:00 noon.
Games and practices shall end at 7:00 p.m. or dusk whichever comes first
on Saturday and at 6:00 p.m. or dusk whichever comes first on Sundays.
On all days, any baseball or softball inning started before closing time
shall be permitted to finish. . (Ord. No. 538 N.S., 553 N.S.)
ii. Player preparation. Players may warm up on Saturday no earlier than
8:30 a.m. and no earlier than 11:30 a.m. on Sunday.
iii. Field preparation. Field preparation on Saturday shall begin no
earlier than 8:00 a.m.; on Sunday, field preparation shall begin no earlier
than 11:00 a.m.
b. Lighting - Lighting shall be provided as necessary for security. No nighttime
illumination shall be provided for any other purpose, including but not limited to
sports and other recreational activities. (Ord. No. 470 N.S., 538 N.S.)
c. Sound Amplification - Use of sound amplification instruments is prohibited at
all times except by permission of the City Council.
d. Bicycles - Bicycles are not permitted anywhere inside the fence of the sports
field. (Ord. 636 N.S. 2/03)
3.9.4 Exceptions
a. Scout Christmas Tree Lot - The provisions of this article shall not apply to the
operation of the Scout Christmas tree lot.
b. Pumpkin Patch Exemption - Notwithstanding any other provision of Section
3.9, the Wildwood School Dad's Club Pumpkin Patch fund raising event shall be
allowed use of the Moraga Sports Field for up to three Sundays each October
upon written permission of the City Administrator, as an exception to the normal
restriction on special events for use of Moraga Sports Field on Sundays.
Parks
3 - 12
c. Hours of Use/Days of the Week - Use for Piedmont Recreation Department 7th-
8th Grade Flag Football on weekday mornings from 6:30 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. shall
be permitted in September and October. Use for Piedmont Soccer Club 1996 and
1997 practice sessions only on ten Sundays from 12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m. shall be
permitted in September, October and November. Use for 1998 Piedmont
Baseball/Softball Foundation and Piedmont-Oakland Little League on fourteen
(14) Sundays in the month of March, April, May and June excluding Easter
Sunday and Memorial Day to be determined at the discretion of the Director of
Recreation. (Ord. No. 581 N.S. 11/96; Ord. 595 N.S. )
d. Revocation - Section 3.9.4(c) shall be permanently revoked upon the opening of
the renovated Piedmont School District Witter Field or December 31, 1997,
whichever comes first. (Ord. No. 577 N.S. 7/96)
3.9.5 Locked Facility The facility shall be operated as an open/closed park. The
facility will be completely fenced and will be locked during those hours when the park is closed.
(Ord. 569 N.S. 10/95)
SEC. 3.9A SKATE PARK RULES AND USE RESTRICTIONS
a. In any skateboard park operated by the City, any person riding a skateboard, inline
skates, or similar devices shall wear a fastened helmet, elbow pads and knee
pads.
b. The City shall cause a sign or signs to be posed at all such parks or facilities
providing reasonable notice of Subsection (a) of this Section, as well as of other
rules and use restrictions that may apply, and stating that any person failing to
comply with subsection (a) of this Section will be guilty of an infraction and
subject to citation.
c. The City Council may from time to time adopt such other rules, regulations and/or
use restrictions as the City Council may deem appropriate by City Council
Resolution; provided that pursuant to Section 3.21 hereof, the Recreation Director
may also make rules and regulations and establish procedures in connection with
any skateboard park operated by the City, including but not limited to
establishing, changing or modifying hours of operation.
d. Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this Section and
who is injured while using the park or facility shall be deemed negligent.
e. Any willful violation of the provisions of this Section 3.9A shall be an infraction
pursuant to Section 3.24 hereof, and the fine for such infractions shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 623 N.S.
6/18/01)
SEC. 3.10 PIEDMONT SPORTS FIELD (HAMPTON FIELD) USE RESTRICTIONS
Parks
3 - 13
3.10.1 Definition. The term “organized use” for purposes of this section 3.10 shall mean
any use authorized and scheduled by the City of Piedmont Recreation Department including but
not limited to the activity of the Piedmont Soccer Club and the Piedmont Baseball and Softball
Foundation. This term excludes special events sponsored by the Recreation Department from
time to time.
3.10.2 Hours of Use - Piedmont Sports Field.
a. General. No person shall use Piedmont sports Field before dawn or after
dark.
b. Basketball Court. No person shall use the basketball court before 8 a.m.
or after 8 p.m. weekdays. On Saturday and Sunday, no person shall use
the basketball court before 9 a.m. or after 7 p.m.
c. Tennis Courts. No person shall use the tennis courts before 8 a.m. and
after 8 p.m., except that any set starting before 8 p.m. may finish.
d. Tennis Backstop. No person shall use the tennis backstop before 8 a.m.
and after 8 p.m. weekdays. On Saturday and Sunday, no person shall use
the tennis backstop before 9 a.m. or after 7 p.m.
e. Organized Sports and Games. Organized use of Piedmont Sports Field
shall be governed by the following regulations.
i. Hours of play and practice. Monday through Friday, games and
practices shall begin no earlier than 8 a.m. nor end later than 8 p.m.
On Saturday, games and practices shall begin no earlier than 9 a.m.
On Sunday, games and practices shall begin no earlier than noon.
Games and practices shall end at 7 p.m. on Saturday and at 6 p.m.
on Sunday. On all days, any baseball or softball inning started
before closing time shall be permitted to finish.
ii. Player preparation. Players may warm up on Saturday no earlier
than 8:30 a.m. and no earlier than 11:30 a.m. on Sunday.
iii. Field preparation. Field preparation on Saturday shall begin no
earlier than 8 a.m.; on Sunday, field preparation shall begin no
earlier than 11 a.m.
3.10.3 Basketball Court Monitor. An adult appointed by the City shall from time to time
supervise use of the basketball court to enforce permitted hours of use and to eliminate
unnecessary noise and inappropriate behavior.
Parks
3 - 14
3.10.4 Use - Playschool-City Building. Use of the Playschool-City building shall be
governed by the following regulations.
a. Childcare Use. Piedmont Playschool, the City Department of Recreation,
and youth groups authorized by the City, but no other person or
organization, may use the building which is proposed to be built for joint
Playschool/City purposes. The building shall not be used for childcare
before 9 a.m. or after 6 p.m. The fenced area adjacent to the building shall
be used exclusively for Playschool purposes during Playschool hours. At
all other times, the fenced area shall be available for use by the general
public.
b. Evening Use. Piedmont Playschool may use the building after 6 p.m. no
more than four times a calendar year, in coordination with the City. The
City may use the building after 6 p.m. as necessary for emergency
preparedness purposes and as otherwise approved by the City Council by
resolution. Prior notice for uses approved by Council resolution shall be
given under section 3.10.7 below.
c. Limitation - Number and Age of Children. Use of the new building shall
be limited to a maximum of twenty-two children, 12 years of age or
younger at any one time.
d. Use by General Public Prohibited. Leasing, renting and other use of the
Playschool/City building by the general public is prohibited, except that
restrooms in the building may be used by the general public.
e. Concurrent Uses. Rights to exclusive use of the Playschool/city building
and the adjacent fenced area shall not extend to the rest of the park, which
shall be available to members of the public in accordance with these rules
and regulations.
f. Outdoor Lighting. Lighting on and around the building shall be at a low
level, for security purposes only, and shall exclude overhead lighting.
3.10.5 Sound Amplification. Artificial sound amplification is prohibited at all times and
places at Piedmont Sports Field, with the exceptions listed in this paragraph. Sound
amplification includes but it not limited to megaphones, bullhorns (electrified or not),
electronic equipment, radios, CD and tape players, “boom boxes”, and the like. The
following are exceptions to this prohibition.
a. Whistles. Sound amplification shall exclude whistles used reasonably by
coaches during practices and by referees during games.
b. Disaster Preparedness. City disaster preparedness operations, including
drills, are not subject to the restriction on amplified noise.
Parks
3 - 15
c. City Council Approval. Sound amplification may be used with prior City
Council approval, after a public hearing. Notice shall be given under
section 3.10.7 below.
3.10.6 Maintenance. There shall be no maintenance activities at the park before
8 a.m.
3.10.7 Notice. Notice required in this section 3.10 shall be given in writing at least 10
calendar days in advance to all those requesting notice in writing and to all residents whose
properties are at any point within 300 feet of any point on the boundary of Piedmont Sports field.
3.10.8 Posting Requirement. The City will post a summary of the applicable use
restrictions in prominent places at Piedmont Sports Field. From time to time the City will also
publish these restrictions.
SEC. 3.11 PIEDMONT PARK USE RESTRICTIONS
3.11.1 Definitions
a. BMX Bikes – short, wide wheeled bicycles with raised handlebars which
are substantially similar to motocross bikes but without an engine.
b. Community Hall – the washed aggregate and brick plaza in front of the
Community Hall building; all adjacent raised brick work and walls; and all
wood decking and seating which are part of the Tea House structure.
c. Exedra Plaza – the paved areas in front of and to the rear of the monument
including all washed aggregate, brick, stone, concrete and asphalt; all
adjacent walls, stairs, planters, and seating areas but not including the
public sidewalk on Magnolia or Highland Avenue.
d. In-line Skates - skates with rows of wheels attached all in one single line
to the bottom of the skate boot on each foot.
e. Skateboard - a small light vehicle, normally consisting of a board and
four wheels, on which the operator stands with one or both feet, and which
is propelled by the operator.
f. Skates - any shoe or other device worn on the foot which has wheels
attached or incorporated and which is intended to propel an individual.
3.11.2 Use Restrictions. The use or operation of BMX bikes, skates, in-line skates
and skateboards is hereby prohibited at the Community Hall and Exedra Plaza in
Piedmont Park.
Parks
3 - 16
3.11.3 Violations an Infraction Violations of Section 3.11.2 of this Code are an
infraction and subject to a fine of $25.
ARTICLE III TREES IN GENERAL
SEC. 3.12 TREES OBSTRUCTING SEWERS
3.12.1 Declared a Public Nuisance. Any tree planted, growing or maintained in the City
which interferes with, obstructs, or damages in any manner any public sewer, drain or pipe and is
determined by the Director of Public Works or his designee to have a substantial effect on the
public health, safety and welfare, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
3.12.2 Notice to Property Owner The Director of Public Works shall notify in writing
the owner of the premises upon which such tree(s) is planted or grown of the determination of a
nuisance, of the right of the owner to respond to the finding of a nuisance caused by trees on his
property, and of the alternative as set forth hereafter to removing any tree(s) involved. The
owner shall have the right to respond in writing or in person to the Director of Public Works
within thirty (30) days from the date such notice is delivered to the property in question.
3.12.3 Removal by Owner. If the owner responds within the required period, desires to
retain the tree(s), and is willing to execute a maintenance agreement, then subsection 3.10.5.
hereafter shall apply. If the owner does not respond within such thirty (30) day period, or does
respond, but in the reasonable opinion of the Director of Public Works is unable to refute the
facts and circumstances upon which the finding of a nuisance is based, the Director of Public
Works shall then require the owner to remove the offending tree(s) within ten (10) days after
service upon the owner of written notice to do so, signed by the Director of Public Works. Any
refusal or neglect to remove such tree(s) so situated shall be deemed a misdemeanor. The term
"remove" as used in this Section 3.10.4 shall mean removal of the entire tree(s) above the ground
and all parts of the tree(s) down to one foot below the ground level.
3.12.4 Removal by City. Upon such refusal or neglect of such person to remove such
tree(s) within the time aforesaid, the Director of Public Works or his designee(s) may enter upon
the premises where such tree(s) is grown, planted or being maintained, and may remove it, and
the owner of the premises from which such tree(s) is removed shall be liable to the City for the
cost of such tree removal. City may contract for such tree removal with a private party or
company, if in the opinion of the Director of Public Works or his designee this is appropriate,
and the cost of such tree removal shall be treated the same as if City staff had performed the
removal.
Parks
3 - 17
3.12.5 Maintenance Agreement. If the owner of the premises upon which such tree is
planted or grown executes an agreement in a form to be determined by the City, which
agreement may be recorded at the option of the City and at the expense of owner, then the owner
may be allowed at the discretion of the City to retain such tree(s). Any such agreement shall
bind the owner to perform or for the City to perform or contract to be performed any
maintenance and repair to a sewer, drain or pipe which is required in the opinion of the Director
of Public Works or his designee due to damage by such tree(s), and further shall bind the owner
to be fully responsible for and to hold the City harmless against any damage whatsoever to
private or public property due to such tree(s).
3.12.6 Lien. The City is authorized to place a lien against the property of the owner to
cover all costs of such maintenance and repair, as well as all damages and expenses whatsoever
related to such sewer at any time after a forty-five (45) day period has elapsed from the date an
invoice setting forth such costs, expenses and damages has been mailed to the owner by City, to
the extent such costs, damages and expenses have not been paid within such forty-five (45) day
period. Such lien shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 10.12.1-4 of the City Code,
except that such lien may be placed and/or recorded at any time after such forty-five (45) day
period has elapsed without any other time limitations. (Ord. No. 483 N.S., 8/3/87)
ARTICLE IV TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
SEC. 3.13 INTENT
The street trees of Piedmont provide multiple benefits to the residents and to the
public at large. The trees are a verdant urban canopy, providing beauty, shade and privacy. The
uniformity and maturity of the street trees in Piedmont distinguish the city from vacant suburban
subdivisions and add significant aesthetic and economic value to the city’s residential housing
stock. As a matter of public policy, the overwhelming benefit of the city’s urban forest to the
city’s residents and to the general public outweighs the occasional regulatory limitations on
individual properties, taking into consideration that there is an established process in Section
3.213(b) for individuals to obtain city review of view claims relating to city street trees. It is
therefore in the public interest to regulate street trees and to provide penalties for noncompliance.
SEC. 3.14 CITY APPROVAL REQUIRED.
The vegetation on public property is owned by the City of Piedmont. No person other
than a City employee or other contractual agent of the City may plant, prune, treat, or remove
vegetation on public property. A property owner may request that the City plant, prune, treat or
remove a tree in a parking strip or other City right-of-way as provided in this Article IV.
Parks
3 - 18
SEC. 3.15 DESIGNATION OF APPROPRIATE TREES.
The Park Commission shall have the authority to designate the species of tree to be
planted on public property, including but not limited to parking strips. No planting of alternative
species shall be allowed on a street for which one or more species have been designated by the
Park Commission. A list comprised of the designated species for each street shall be maintained
by the Public Works Department.
SEC. 3.16 PLANTING TREES IN PARKING STRIPS.
A tree may be planted in a parking strip or other City right-of-way in compliance with the
following requirements.
3.16.1 Planting Responsibility. No tree may be planted on public property except by the
City or the City’s agent.
3.16.2 City Permission Required. Residents wishing to have a street tree planted by the
City shall file an application with the Public Works Department, which shall inspect the site,
determine the appropriateness of a street tree on the site, and plant a tree designated under
section 3.14 at no cost to the resident, providing funds are available in the department budget for
that fiscal year.
(a) Funds Unavailable. This section shall not apply if the Director of Public
Works determines that funds are unavailable for this purpose.
(b) No Designated Street Tree. If the applicant resides on a street for which
no street tree has been designated under section 3.15, the applicant may request any variety
contained in the approved list maintained by the Department of Public Works.
3.16.3 Unauthorized Planting in Parking Strips. In any case where a street tree has been
planted without the proper permit in a parking strip, the owner of the property abutting the
parking strip shall remove the tree or shrub in a parking strip or within any street right-of-way no
later than 30 days after written notice is mailed to the address by the City. If the tree or shrub
has not been removed at the conclusions of the thirty (30) day period, the City may remove the
tree or shrub, and the cost of removal shall be filled to and shall become the obligation of the
resident.
SEC. 3.17 PRUNING TREES IN PARKING STRIPS.
No person shall prune a tree in a parking strip or in another city right-of-way. Only City
personnel or agents of the City may trim or prune street trees and other trees on public property.
Parks
3 - 19
SEC. 3.18 REMOVAL OF TREES IN PARKING STRIPS.
3.18.1 City Approval Required. No person shall remove a tree in a parking strip or other
city right-of-way without the prior approval of the Park Commission after a hearing on the
request as provided in this Section 3.18. This prohibition includes but is not limited to the
proposed removal of a tree for sidewalk repairs or for the clearing of sanitary sewer and storm
drain easements. A tree on public property may be removed without Park Commission approval
only after a tree is declared an imminent hazard to public safety by the City Administrator or
Public Works Director.
3.18.2 Application for Removal of Trees. A request to remove a tree must be filed a
minimum of twenty (20) working days prior to the Park Commission meeting, on a form
furnished by City. The Public Works Department shall notify adjacent neighbors of the
proposed tree removal in accordance with Section 17.28.2 of the Municipal Code. In addition to
the notice provided by the city under this section, the resident shall be required to circulate a
petition to adjacent neighbors in the form determined by the Public Works Department. Such
petition must be returned to the Public Works Department at least five (5) days prior to the date
of the Park Commission hearing.
3.18.3 Action by Park Commission. At its hearing on the application for tree removal,
the Park Commission shall consider the information and testimony of the applicant, the report
and any recommendation of City staff, and the information and testimony of neighbors and
others, and shall make its ruling on the application based on its determination of what is in the
best interest of the neighborhood and the City as a whole, and specifically after reviewing any
dangerous or hazardous conditions which may be caused by the tree proposed for removal. The
Commission may attach reasonable conditions to the
3.18.4 Appeal of Park Commission Decision. Any person aggrieved by the final
decision of the Park Commission may appeal to the City Council I writing within ten (10)
working days following the Park Commission action, specifying the reasons for the appeal. The
Council shall hear the appeal at the next regular City Council meeting that occurs after ten (10)
working days from the date of filing an appeal with the City Clerk. This hearing shall be de
novo and the City Council shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the request after
reviewing all of the evidence and testimony, and the determination of the City Council shall be
final.
SEC. 3.19 UNAUTHORIZED TREATMENT
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any fertilizer, insecticide, fungicide, or other
chemical on city street trees including application to soil, spraying and injecting of chemical
substances without the express written authorization of the Public Works Director.
Parks
3 - 20
SEC. 3.20 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
3.20.1 Violation Civil Penalty. It is unlawful to perform unauthorized treatment, to
prune or to remove a tree on public property in violation of the terms of this Article IV> It is
also unlawful to damage vegetation on public property. A violation of this Article shall be
subject to the imposition of a fine under either subsection (a) or (b).
a. Civil Fine. The unauthorized treatment, removal of a tree or pruning one or
more parts of a tree, or damage to a tree, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 per
violation. The pruning of any single tree branch in excess of one (1) inch in
diameter at the site of the cut shall be considered a separate violation, even if it
occurs concurrently with the removal of other branches on the same tree.
b. Treble Damages. Unauthorized treatment, pruning, damage to or removal of a
tree on public property shall be a wrongful injury to city trees under Civil Code
3346 and Code of Civil Procedure 733, and damages three times the amount that
would compensate for the actual detriment shall be paid to the City. In addition,
the person responsible for the violation shall pay to the City all expenses incurred
by the city in connection with the violation, including but not limited to attorneys’
fees, all personnel costs relating to the violation (including costs to investigate the
violation), and the costs of replacing a removed tree or restoring to health and
reasonable shape a pruned or treated tree. (Ord. 617 N.S. 6/00)
ARTICLE V TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
SEC. 3.21 REMOVAL OF HAZARDOUS TREES
3.21.1 Determination of Hazard: Notice Period. Any tree on private property
determined to be an imminent hazard to persons on public property or to property owned or
controlled by the City, including but not limited to public streets and sidewalks, may be removed
without further delay or public notice after written notice is provided at least twenty-four hours
prior to removal to the property owner on whose property the hazardous tree is located. A copy
of such notice and an affidavit of delivery shall be maintained by the Public Works Department.
3.21.2 Removal by Property Owner. Upon receiving notice from the City, the owner of
the property upon which the hazardous tree is located shall have the option of promptly
arranging for the removal of the hazardous tree at property owner's sole expense, so long as the
hazardous tree is removed within twenty-four hours after the receipt of notice from the City. If
such hazardous tree cannot be reasonably removed within twenty-four hours of receipt of notice
from the City, but can definitely be removed within forty-eight hours from receipt of such notice,
property owner may request prior written permission from City to remove the tree within such
forty-eight hour period, which permission may be given at the discretion of the City. If such
written permission is given by the City, the property owner shall carry out the removal of such
hazardous tree within such forty-eight hour period.
Parks
3 - 21
3.21.3 Responsibility of Property Owner. Whenever a property owner removes a
hazardous tree, the property owner shall be responsible for carrying out such removal, personally
or through agents, in a safe manner and at the sole expense of the property owner, and the
property owner shall be liable for any damages caused by such removal, except to the extent that
such damages are paid by insurance and/or by the agents of property owner.
3.21.4 Removal by City. If the property owner does not remove the hazardous tree
within twenty-four hours or in the event of prior written permission from the city, within fortyeight
hours, then City may proceed to remove the hazardous tree by City or by hired agents of
the City.
3.21.5 Expense of Property Owner. The costs of any removal of a hazardous tree under
Section 3.21.4 shall be reimbursed to the City by the property owner. City shall provide property
owner with written notice of the amount charged to or incurred by City under Section 3.21.4 for
removal , together with a copy of any invoice owed by City. Property owner shall reimburse the
City the entire amount charged or incurred by the city for removal of the tree within twenty-one
days of the date property owner receives such written notice from the City of the amount due.
3.21.6 Immediate Removal. Notwithstanding any other provision of Section 3.21, if the
City Administrator or the Public Works Director determines that a tree located on private
property creates such an imminent hazard to persons or property located on property owned or
controlled by the City, including but not limited to public streets and sidewalks, that it is in the
public interest that such hazardous tree shall be removed immediately, then the City may
immediately take action to remove such tree, in which case every reasonable effort will be made
to promptly notify the property owner of such action, including a written notice to be delivered
to the property owner or to be attached to the front door of the residence on such property, with a
copy of such notice and an affidavit of delivery to be maintained by the Public Work
Department. In the event of such immediate removal, the provisions of Section 3.21.5 shall still
apply. (Ord. No. 428 N.S., §2)
SEC. 3.22 VIEWSHED
3.22.1 Purpose. This section is enacted in recognition of the following facts and for the
following reasons:
a. Among the features that contribute to the attractiveness and livability of the City
of Piedmont are its trees, both native and introduced, and its views of the San
Francisco Bay area, obtained from the variety of elevations found throughout the
City.
Parks
3 - 22
b. Trees, whether growing singly, in clusters, or in woodland situations, produce a
wide variety of significant psychological and tangible benefits for both residents
and visitors to the City. Trees contribute to the natural environment of the City by
modifying temperatures and winds, replenishing oxygen to the atmosphere and
water to the soil, controlling soil erosion, and providing wildlife habitat. Trees
contribute to the visual environment of the City by providing scale, color,
silhouette and mass, and by creating visual screens and buffers to separate land
uses, and promote individual privacy. Trees contribute to the economic
environment of the City by stabilizing property values and reducing the need for
surface drainage systems. Trees contribute to the cultural environment of the City
by becoming living landmarks of the City's history and providing a critical
element of nature in the midst of urban congestion and settlement.
c. Views, whether of the San Francisco Bay with its vistas of the City of San
Francisco, the varied bridges of the Bay Area, numerous islands and ships, or of
the Piedmont Hills with its vistas of trees and the hills themselves, also produce a
variety of significant and tangible benefits for both residents and visitors to the
City. Views contribute to the economic environment of the City by substantially
enhancing property values. Views contribute to the visual environment of the
City by providing inspiring panoramic vistas, and creating distinctive supplements
to architectural design. Views contribute to the cultural environment of the City
by providing a unifying effect, allowing individuals to relate different areas of the
City to each other in space and time.
d. It is recognized that trees and views, and the benefits derived from each, may
come into conflict. Tree planting locations and species selections may produce
both intended beneficial effects on the property where they are planted, and
unintended deleterious effects on neighboring properties of equal or higher
elevations. It is therefore in the interest of the public welfare, health and safety to
establish standards for the resolution of view obstruction claims so as to provide a
reasonable balance between tree and view related values.
e. An objective of the Design Review Element of the 1984 Piedmont General Plan is
to "preserve and enhance the aesthetic character of Piedmont". The policy for
implementing this objective is to "encourage cooperation between property
owners and/or the City to prevent vegetation from obstructing views". (Piedmont
General Plan, 1984, p. 148)
3.22.2 Definitions For the purposes of this Section, the meaning and construction of
words and phrases hereinafter set forth shall apply:
a. Claimant: Any individual who files a bona fide claim as required by the terms
and provisions of this Section.
b. Obstruction: Any blocking or diminishment of a view required by the terms and
provisions of this Section.
Parks
3 - 23
c. Public Agency: Any City, County, district, other local authority or public body of
or within this State.
d. Public Utility: Any person or entity supplying power, light, communications,
water, sewage or similar or associated services to the public or any portion
thereof.
e. Restorative Action: Any specific requirement to resolve a view claim.
f. Tree Owner: Any individual owning real property in the City upon whose land is
(are) located the tree(s) that form the basis for the filing of a view claim.
g. View Arbitrator: Any landscape architect registered and licensed by the State of
California, or any arborists registered and certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture.
h. View Claim: The written basis for arbitration or court action under the terms and
conditions of this Section, submitted by the claimant, which clearly establishes
the following:
1. The precise nature and extent of the alleged view obstruction, including all
pertinent and corroborating physical evidence available. Such evidence may
include, but is not limited to, photographic prints, negatives or slides.
2. The exact location of all trees alleged to cause a view obstruction, the address
of the property upon which the trees are located, and the present tree owner's
name and address. This requirement may be satisfied by the inclusion of tree
location, property address and tree owner information on a valid property survey
or plot plan submitted with the view claim.
3. Any mitigating actions proposed by the parties involved to resolve the alleged
view claim.
4. The failure of personal communication between the claimant and the tree
owner to resolve the alleged view obstruction as set forth in Section 3.22.12. The
claimant must provide physical evidence that written attempts at conciliation have
been made and failed. Such evidence may include, but is not limited to, copies of
and receipts for certified or registered mail correspondence.
Parks
3 - 24
3.22.3 Exemptions The following classes of trees are categorically exempted from the
provisions of this Chapter:
a. Quercus agrifolia (California or Coast Live Oak)
Umbellularia californica (Bay California Laurel)
Acer negundo (Box Elder)
Aesculus californica (California Buckeye)
Arbutus menziesii (Madrone)
Lithocarpus densifloris (Tan Bark Oak)
b. All trees located on property owned or leased by a Public Agency or a Public
Utility. View claims relating to trees located on property owned or leased by the
City of Piedmont, while exempt from the provisions of this section, shall be
subject to the review of the Park Commission acting pursuant to procedures,
standards and conditions approved from time to time by City Council resolution.
Decisions of the Park Commission may be appealed to the City Council by the
view claimant or any interested party filing a written appeal stating specifically
the reasons therefore with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the decision of
the Park Commission, and the determination of the City Council on such appeal
shall be final and non-appealable.
3.22.4 View Protection A person owning property in Piedmont shall have the right to
establish a view claim and obtain restorative action according to the terms of this Section.
3.22.5 Standards for Resolution of Claims The following standards shall apply to
measure the quality of the view and the character of the view obstruction for the purposes of
determining what, if any, restorative action is necessary.
a. The view claimant shall have no right greater than that which existed in 1980 or at
the time of the claimant's subsequent acquisition of the property involved in the
view claim, whichever is later, and shall provide evidence documenting the extent
of said view.
b. The character of the view shall be determined by evaluating:
1. The vantage point(s) from which the view is obtained.
2. The existence of landmarks or other unique features in the view.
3. The extent to which the view is diminished by factors other than the trees
involved in the claim.
Parks
3 - 25
c. The character of the view obstruction shall be determined by evaluating:
1. The amount of the alleged view obstruction, measured to arrive at a
percentage of the total view. Measurement of the alleged view obstruction
shall be calculated by means of a surveyor's transit, or by photography, or
both.
2. The quality of the view which is allegedly being obstructed. The quality of
the view obstructed shall be determined by comparing the items within the
scope of the view with the types of factors listed in the definitions of View
set forth above.
d. The extent of benefits derived from the tree(s) in question shall be determined
with consideration given to the following factors:
1. Visual screening provided by the tree(s).
2. Wildlife habitat provided by the tree(s).
3. Soil stability provided by the tree(s), as measured by soil structure, degree
of slope and extent of tree(s) root system.
4. Energy conservation and/or climate control provided by the tree(s).
5. Visual quality for the tree, including but not limited to species
characteristics, size, growth, form, vigor, and location.
6. The economic value of the tree(s) as measured by the criteria developed
by the International Society of Arboriculture.
7. Other tree-related factors, including but not limited to: Indigenous tree
species, specific tree quality, rare tree species, and/or historic value
e. Where present due to natural regeneration, the trees listed below shall be specifically
identified and be given special consideration in the resolution of the view claim:
Acer macrophyllum (Bigleaf Maple)
Alnus rhombifolia (White Alder)
Fagus sylvatica (Copper Beech)
Heteromeles arbutifolia (Toyon)
Salix lasiandra (Yellow Willow)
Salix lasiolepis (Black Willow)
Sambucus caerulea (Blue Elderberry)
Sequoia sempervirens (Redwood)
Parks
3 - 26
3.22.6 Restorative Action. Restorative action shall be limited to: pruning, thinning,
minor topping, or tree removal with or without replacement plantings. Each type of restorative
action shall be evaluated based on the above findings and with consideration given to the
following factors:
1. The effectiveness of the restorative action in reducing the view obstruction.
2. Any adverse impact of the restorative action on the benefits derived from the
tree(s) in question
3. The structural and biological effects of the restorative action on the tree(s) in
question.
4. The cost of the restorative action, as determined by consultation with a certified
arborist.
3.22.7 Mitigation of Action. All restorative actions shall be undertaken with
consideration given to the following factors:
1. Restorative actions shall be limited to the pruning or thinning of branches, or
both, where possible.
2. When pruning or thinning of branches, or both, is not a feasible solution, minor
topping shall be preferable to tree removal if it is determined that the impact of
topping does not destroy the visual proportions of the tree, adversely affect the
tree's growth pattern or health, or otherwise constitute a detriment to the tree(s) in
question.
3. Tree removal shall only be considered when all other restorative actions are
judged to be ineffective and may, at the tree owner's option, be accompanied by
replacement plantings of appropriate plant materials to restore the maximum level
of benefits lost due to tree removal. Replacement plantings, if used, may be on
the tree owner's or the claimant's property in
4. In those cases where tree removal eliminates or significantly reduces the tree
owner's benefits of visual screening or privacy, replacement screen plantings
shall, at the tree owner's option, be established prior to tree removal;
notwithstanding the provisions of (3) hereinabove, the tree owner may elect tree
removal with replacement plantings as an alternative to trimming, thinning or
topping.
5. All trimming, topping, thinning and tree removal required under this Section must
be performed by a certified arborist.
3.22.8 Resolution Without Action. A view claim may be resolved by the determination
that no restorative actions are required.
Parks
3 - 27
3.22.9 Apportionment of Costs The cost of all restorative actions, replacement
plantings, and arbitration shall be apportioned between the view claimant and the
tree owner as follows:
a. The view claimant and tree owner shall each pay 50% of such costs in those cases
involving any tree planted by the tree owner subsequent to the effective date of
this Section (October 3, 1988).
b. The tree owner shall pay 100% of such costs in those cases where:
1. The tree owner has refused to participate in good faith in the initial
reconciliation (Section 3.22.12) or voluntary arbitration processes (Section
3.22.13) and where the view claimant has prevailed at trial or judicial
arbitration, or
2. In any subsequent dispute between the same parties, to restore any view
obstructed by the same tree or trees or any of the plantings substituted for
the original offending tree or trees described in Section 3.22.9(a).
c. In all other cases, the view claimant shall pay 100% of such costs.
3.22.10 Attorney's Fees. Each party shall pay his/her own costs and attorneys' fees
except in the case where the dispute goes to trial or judicial arbitration. In the event that an
action under this Section is resolved after trial or judicial arbitration in Municipal or Superior
Court, the prevailing party shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit.
3.22.11 Civil Penalty. A tree owner shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of
this Section if judgment in favor of a view claimant is obtained after trial or judicial arbitration in
either the Municipal or Superior Court. The civil penalty for each violation of the ordinance,
which shall be paid to the City, shall be $1,000.00.
3.22.12 Initial reconciliation. A claimant who believes in good faith that the growth,
maintenance, or location of trees situated on the property of another diminishes the beneficial
use, economic value and enjoyment of views naturally accruing to the claimant's property may
notify the tree owner in writing of such concerns. The submission of said notification to the tree
owner should be accompanied by personal discussions, if possible, to enable the claimant and the
tree owner to attempt to reach a mutually agreeable solution to the alleged view obstruction
under the terms and conditions of this Section.
Parks
3 - 28
3.22.13 Arbitration. In those cases where the initial reconciliation process fails, the
claimant and the tree owner may elect binding arbitration to resolve the alleged view obstruction.
The view arbitrator shall be fully qualified under the terms and conditions of this Section and
shall be agreed to by both the claimant and the tree owner, who shall indicate such agreement in
writing. The arbitration agreement may provide for employment of experts representing the
parties or may be limited to an investigation of the view claim conducted by the arbitrator. The
view arbitrator shall follow the terms and conditions of this Section to reach a fair resolution of
the view claim. The view arbitrator shall submit a complete written report to the claimant, the
tree owner and the City, which shall make copies of all view arbitrator reports available to any
person who so requests and pays for the costs of reproduction. Said report shall include the view
arbitrator's findings with respect to all standards listed in Section 3.22.5 of this Chapter, a
complete listing of all mandated restorative actions, and at least three (3) price bids for said
restorative actions received from certified arborists. All mandated restorative actions shall be
implemented within thirty (30) days of the filing of an arbitration report to the claimant and the
tree owner. The findings of the view arbitrator shall be final.
3.22.14 Litigation. In those cases where the initial reconciliation process fails to resolve
the view claim and binding arbitration is not elected by the parties, civil action may be pursued
by a private party for resolution of a view claim under the terms and conditions of this Section.
The claimant shall have the burden of proving the alleged view obstruction and the suitability of
the proposed restorative actions. The party bringing any civil action under this Section must
promptly notify the City of Piedmont Public Works Department in writing of such action.
3.22.15 Liabilities. The issuance of an arbitration report and decision pursuant to this
to this Chapter shall not be deemed to establish any public use or access not already in existence
with regard to the property for which the arbitration report and decision are issued. The issuance
of an arbitration report and decision pursuant to this Section shall not create any liability of the
City with regard to restorative actions to be performed.
3.22.16 Enforcement. A violation of this Section is not a misdemeanor or an infraction,
and the enforcement of this Section shall be by the private parties involved. The claimant shall
have the right to bring injunctive action to enforce any restorative action mandated pursuant to
this Section. In the event that this Chapter is enforced by separate legal action other than the
issuance of citations, the cost of removing, replacing or treating such tree(s), as well as attorney's
fees, other City staff costs, and all other costs and expenses of enforcement shall be deemed
damages reimbursable to the City by the violating party. (Ord. No. 510 N.S., 7/89)
Parks
3 - 29
ARTICLE VI. ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER
SEC. 3.23 ADMINISTRATION OF REGULATIONS.
The Recreation Director or his designee shall make such rules and regulations and
establish such procedures as are necessary to administer and supervise organized use of the city's
recreational facilities and parks in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such
regulations shall be posted on the City Hall bulletin board for at least thirty days after their
adoption and shall be posted at specific parks, as specified in Sec. 3.24. (Ord. No. 378-78 N.S.)
SEC. 3.24 SIGNS REQUIRED
Whenever any activity is restricted or prohibited in specified areas of any park, or
whenever the use of a specified area is restricted or prohibited, the Director may cause signs to
be posted notifying the public of such restrictions or prohibitions. Failure to obey the restrictions
stated in any properly posted sign shall be an infraction.
SEC. 3.25 AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER
The City Council may from time to time amend portions of this code by resolution or by
ordinance, and such revised regulations shall be posted on the City Hall bulletin board for at least
thirty (30) days after their adoption and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City within thirty (30) days after their adoption.
SEC. 3.26 VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER AN INFRACTION
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, it shall be a violation of the law, to wit an
infraction, for any person to willfully violate the provisions of this chapter, and the fine for such
infractions shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
ARTICLE VII - BAY-FRIENDLY LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 3.30 BAY-FRIENDLY LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS FOR CITY FACILITIES
City owned and/or operated Permitted Use facilities in Zone B are subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Definitions. In this section:
“Bay-Friendly Landscaping Guidelines” means the most recent version of guidelines
developed by StopWaste.Org for use in the professional design, construction and
maintenance of Landscapes.
“Bay-Friendly Landscaping Scorecard” means the most recent version of the Bay-
Friendly Landscaping points system developed by StopWaste.Org.
Parks
3 - 30
"City Project" means any new construction or Renovation of a Building or Landscape
owned or occupied by a City Department or Agency.
“Covered Project” means all new Landscaping projects or Renovations of Landscapes
that equal or exceed $100,000 in construction costs and are either owned or occupied by a
City Department or Agency or developed as a Public-Private Partnership.
"Bay-Friendly Landscaping Compliance Official" means the Director of Public Works or
the Director’s designee.
“Initiated” means officially identified and substantially funded to offset the costs
associated with the project.
“Landscape” means the parcel area less the building pad and includes all planted areas
and hardscape surfaces (i.e. driveway, parking, paths and other paved areas).
“Public-Private Partnership” means any project built on city-owned land, primarily
funded by the City, or built under a Disposition and Development Agreement with the
City.
“Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification to an existing Landscape,
including, but not limited to, tenant improvements.
“Traditional Public Works Project” means heavy construction projects including but not
limited to such items as pump stations, flood control improvements, roads, and bridges,
as well as traffic lights, sidewalks, bike paths, bus stops, and associated infrastructure on
City owned and maintained property.
(b) Regulations and Standards for Compliance
(i) At all times, City staff shall maintain the most recent version of the Bay-Friendly
Landscape Guidelines and the Bay-Friendly Landscaping Scorecard.
(ii) Bay-Friendly Landscape Scorecard Points. All Covered Projects with landscapes
Initiated on or after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet the most recent
minimum Bay-Friendly Landscape Scorecard points as recommended by StopWaste.Org
or its designee.
(iii) Practicable Effort and Documentation. For the purposes of reducing operating
and maintenance costs in all City facilities and Public-Private Partnership facilities,
Covered Projects that do not meet the threshold that triggers compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance and that have Landscape construction costs greater than
$10,000 are required to meet as many Bay-Friendly Landscaping Scorecard points as
practicable and are required to complete and submit to the City’s Bay-Friendly
Landscaping Compliance Official the Bay-Friendly Landscaping scorecard as a way of
Parks
3 - 31
documenting the Bay-Friendly Landscaping practices that have been incorporated into
the project.
(iv) Project Specifications in Bids. In developing project specifications for use in
building “Traditional Public Works Projects,” the Public Works Department shall
consider including in those specifications Bay-Friendly landscape and environmentally
sound practices whenever practicable.
(c) Unusual Circumstances. Compliance with the provisions of this Article may be waived
in unusual circumstances where the City Council has, by resolution, found and determined that
the public interest would not be served by complying with these provisions. (Ord. 728 N.S.,
04/2017; Ord. 680 N.S., 09/2008)
Rev. 2018-10-04 (Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
Figure 3.4.2(c)
3-32
Chapter 4
ANIMALS
ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS
§4.1 Definitions
ARTICLE II. DOG LICENSES
§4.2 License-Required
§4.3 License-Exemption
§4.4 License-Term
§4.5 License-Application
§4.6 Anti-rabies vaccination certificate
§4.7 Issuance of tags and certificates
§4.8 Record of licensees to be kept-License tag to be worn by dog at all times.
§4.9 Inspection of license tag by authorities
§4.10 Removal of registration tags prohibited
§4.11 Replacement of lost and destroyed tags
§4.12 Counterfeit and imitation tags
ARTICLE III. BITING ANIMALS AND ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
§4.13 Running at large prohibited
§4.14 Biting animals to be quarantined
§4.15 Animals which die while under isolation
§4.16 Duty to report knowledge of bite
§4.17 Interference with and mistreatment of police dogs
ARTICLE IV. IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS
§4.18 Duty of Chief of Police to impound animals
§4.19 Notice to Chief of Police of stray animals; disposition of stray animals
§4.20 Notice to owners of impounded dogs
§4.21 Disposition of impounded animals-Generally
§4.22 Disposition of impounded animals-Reclamation of licensed animal by owner
§4.23 Repealed by Ordinance No. 355 N.S.
§4.24 Disposition of impounded animals-Destruction of unfit or dangerous animals
ARTICLE V. FEES
§4.25 Amount for licenses
§4.26 Penalty for failure to procure license
§4.27 Exemption from license fee-Seeing Eye dogs
§4.28 Exemption from license fee-Police dogs
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-2
§4.29 Duplicate tags
§4.30 Charges for animal control services
§4.31 Repealed by Ordinance No. 355 N.S.
§4.32 Repealed by Ordinance No. 355 N.S.
ARTICLE VI. PENALTIES
§4.33 Penalties, citation and enforcement
§4.34 Removal of dog defecation
ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS
SEC. 4.1 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a
different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
(a) ANIMAL. Any mammal, including but not limited to, horse, cow, goat, sheep,
dog and cat.
(b) ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The animal control officer and any duly
appointed assistant animal control officer appointed by the Chief of Police who is primarily
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Animal control officers shall
have the power to enforce the provisions of the chapter in the manner set forth in California
Penal Code Section 836.5; provided, that any police officer of the City shall also have the power
to enforce the provisions of the chapter in the manner set forth in California Penal Code Section
936.5.
(c) AT LARGE. A dog on or upon any public street, alley or other public place, or in
or upon any unenclosed lot or premises within the City, and not under restraint by leash, rope or
chain nor over six feet in length securely and continuously held by a competent person.
(d) CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the City of Piedmont or his or her
designee.
(e) DOG. Any member of the canine family and shall include female as well as male
dogs.
(f) HEARING OFFICER. The Chief of Police of the City of Piedmont or his or her
designee who shall be selected in a manner that avoids the potential for pecuniary or other bias.
(g) HORSE. Includes mule, burro, pony, jack, hinny or jenny.
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-3
(h) OWNER. Any person owning, having an interest in or having control or custody
or possession of any animal.
(i) PERSON shall include any person, partnership, corporation, trust and association
of persons.
(j) SHELTER. A facility designated by the Chief of Police for the impoundment of
animals.
(k) WILD ANIMAL. Any animal not ordinarily and customarily domesticated but
under human control, including, but not limited to, skunk, raccoon, opossum, squirrel and fox.
(Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
ARTICLE II. DOG LICENSES1
SEC. 4.2 LICENSE-REQUIRED.
Every person within the area owning, possessing, controlling, harboring or keeping any
dog over four months of age shall procure a dog license tag for each dog, as long as ownership of
the dog continues, or within ten days after acquiring or bringing into the area any dog over the
age of four months, and thereafter on expiration of the rabies vaccination. (Ord. 291 N.S.,
05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977)
SEC. 4.3 LICENSE-EXEMPTIONS
This article does not apply to dogs found within the area of the city under any of the
following conditions:
(a) When the dog is owned by, or in the care of any person who is a nonresident or
who is traveling through the area, or who is temporarily sojourning therein for a period not
exceeding thirty days, if the dog is not permitted to run at large;
(b) When the dog is brought or sent into the area for the exclusive purpose of
receiving veterinary care in any dog hospital, if the dog is not permitted to run at large;
(c) When the dog has a valid license from Alameda County or any city within
Alameda County, it shall not be subject to the license requirement of this chapter. (Ord. 291
N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
1 For state law as to authority of cities to require dog licenses, see Gov. C§ 38792; see also Ag. C. §30801 et
seq.
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-4
SEC. 4.4 LICENSE-TERM
The maximum effective period of each dog license issued shall be from the date of
issue until a like date during the month in which the antirabies vaccination expires as shown in
the vaccination certificate. Licenses may be issued in one year increments up to, but not
exceeding the expiration of the antirabies vaccination certificate. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord.
353 N.S., 11/1977; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.5 LICENSE-APPLICATION
The owner shall state, at the time application is made, and upon standard printed forms of
application provided for such purpose, owner’s name and address and the name, breed, color, age
and sex of each dog and name and address of the veterinarian or clinic who issued the
vaccination certificate when application is made. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S.,
11/1977; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.6 ANTIRABIES VACCINATION CERTIFICATE2
As a condition for the issuance of a license all applicants for such license shall procure
and deliver to the Chief of Police a certificate issued by a duly licensed veterinarian certifying
that the dog to be licensed has been administered an antirabies vaccination which will be
effective at least one month after the issuance of such license. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this section, every person owning, possessing, controlling or keeping any dog
within the City shall be required to keep such dog vaccinated against rabies at all times after the
dog attains the age of four months. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977)
SEC. 4.7 ISSUANCE OF TAGS AND CERTIFICATES.
A metallic tag and license certificate with corresponding number shall be furnished by
the Chief of Police upon payment of the appropriate fee as required in Section 4.25 of this code.
(Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.8 RECORD OF LICENSEES TO BE KEPT-LICENSE TAG TO BE WORN BY DOG
AT ALL TIMES
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the name of such owner or person making
payment of such license fee and to whom a certificate and tag shall have been issued, and the
number and date of such certificate and such tag. Such metal tag issued shall be securely fixed
to a collar, harness or other device to be worn at all times by the dog for whom the registration is
issued. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970)
2 For state law as to rabies control, see H. & S.C.A. §§1900 to 2000.
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-5
SEC. 4.9 INSPECTION OF LICENSE TAG BY AUTHORITIES
No person shall fail or refuse to show to the Chief of Police, his representative, or any
police officer, the license certificate and the tag for any duly registered dog kept or remaining
within any home or upon any enclosed premises under such persons immediate control. (Ord.
291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977)
SEC. 4.10 REMOVAL OF REGISTRATION TAGS PROHIBITED
No unauthorized persons shall remove from any dog any collar, harness or other device
to which is attached a registration tag for the current period, or remove such tag therefrom. (Ord.
291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977)
SEC. 4.11 REPLACEMENT OF LOST AND DESTROYED TAGS
If the dog license tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall immediately procure a new
duplicate license tag from the Chief of Police. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970)
SEC. 4.12 COUNTERFEIT AND IMITATION TAGS
No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags prescribed by this article, or have in his
possession any imitation or counterfeit tags. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970)
ARTICLE III. BITING ANIMALS AND ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE3
SEC 4.13 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED
(a) No owner or keeper of any dog shall cause or permit such dog to be or run at large
upon any public place or any private property other than that of such owner except with the prior
consent of the person in charge of such private property, unless such dog is securely restrained
by a substantial leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the charge and control of a
person competent to keep such dog under effective charge and control. A dog may be secured by
a retractable leash; however, the leash may not exceed six feet in length when in the presence of
other people. A substantial leash must be capable of restraining the dog without breaking when
the animal is pulling with all of its strength.
(b) Section 4.13 (a) shall not apply to dogs in off leash areas, as defined in Section
3.4.2 of this code, subject to the off leash area rules established in Section 3.4.4. (Ord. 291 N.S.,
05/1970, Ord. 316 N.S., 07/1974; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
3 For state law as to dogs running at large, See Ag. C.A. §30951.
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-6
SEC. 4.14 BITING ANIMALS TO BE QUARANTINED
1. Purpose and Intent: There have been, are and will be in the future in the City of
Piedmont dogs and animals which are vicious and which, as such, constitute a public nuisance
which should be abated. The provisions of this Section are intended to provide a process
pursuant to which such dogs and animals found, following a hearing at which oral and
documentary evidence is considered, to be a public nuisance may be removed from the City or
otherwise abated. This Section is intended to supplement rather than supplant any other remedy
available either under State law or City ordinance.
2. Vicious Animal Defined: The term "vicious animal" as used in this Section shall
mean any animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties,
which demonstrates any or all of the following behavior patterns:
(a) An attack, without provocation, which requires a defensive action by any
person to prevent bodily injury or property damage in a place where such person is
conducting himself peaceably and lawfully.
(b) An attack, without provocation, on another animal which occurs off the
property of the owner of attacking animal.
(c) An attack, without provocation, that results in an injury to a person in a
place where such person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully.
(d) Any aggressive behavior, without provocation, that constitutes a physical
threat of bodily harm to a person where such person is conducting himself peaceably and
lawfully.
For the purposes of this subsection 4.14.2, a person is peaceably and lawfully upon the
private property of the owner of an animal when he/she is on such property in the performance of
any duty imposed upon him/her by the laws of this state or any City or County or the laws of
postal regulations of the United States or when he/she is on such property upon invitation,
expressed or implied.
3. Investigation: In the event of a report or incident involving an animal biting a
human, any animal is quarantined pursuant to Subsection 4.14.4 for biting a human being or
other animal, the case shall be investigated by the Piedmont Animal Control Officer with the
assistance of the City Police. If, based on said investigation, the Animal Control Officer
concludes there is probable cause to believe that the animal is vicious, then he/she shall so certify
in writing to the Piedmont Police Department.
4. Confinement of Animal: If, pursuant to Subsection 4.14.3, an animal is certified
to the Police Department as being probably vicious, the Animal Control Officer shall ensure that
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-7
the animal is confined either on the premises of the owner or, if considered necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare, at any approved animal shelter with the cost of confinement
therein deemed a part of the cost of abatement if such is eventually the order. Said confinement
shall continue pending disposition of the hearing provided for in Subsection 4.14.5.
5. Scheduled Hearing: The Police Department shall upon receipt of certificate under
Subsection 4.14.3 schedule a hearing before the Hearing Officer. The hearing date shall be no
longer than 10 days from receipt by the Police Department of the certification. The Police
Department shall mail by both regular and certified mail to the owner of the animal at the
address where the animal is kept and maintained at least 7 days prior to the date set for hearing a
notice in form substantially as follows:
'NOTICE OF HEARING REGARDING VICIOUS ANIMAL'
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.14 of
the City Code of the City of Piedmont, the Animal Control Officer has certified that
there are reasonable grounds to believe your animal may be vicious. The animal is
described as:
____________________________________________________________________.
FURTHER NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ________________ the
_____ day of __________________, 20_, at the hour of _______ o'clock ____.M., in
the Police Department, 403 Highland Avenue, Piedmont, Alameda County,
California, the report of the Animal Control Officer will be considered by the Hearing
Officer together with such oral and documentary evidence bearing upon the question
of whether the animal herein is vicious.
In the event the animal herein is found to be vicious he will be abated as a
public nuisance and the cost, if any, of said abatement assessed against you.
Dated:______________________________________
Chief of Police
In addition to sending such notice by mail, the Police Department shall either deliver a
copy of such notice by personal service to an adult at the address where the animal is kept and
maintained or shall post such notice prominently at such address, either by means of providing
notice to be accomplished at least 5 days prior to the date set for hearing.
In the event that the record owner of the property on which the animal is kept and
maintained is listed in the real property records of the City as residing elsewhere, a copy of such
notice shall also be mailed to such record owner of the property at the other address in the same
manner as if he were owner of the animal.
6. Hearing. At the hearing before the Hearing Officer, which may be continued
from time to time at the discretion of the Hearing Officer, both oral and documentary evidence
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-8
shall be taken and considered bearing upon the question of whether or not the animal in question
is vicious, consistent with the provision so Subsection 4.14.3 hereof. No hearing shall be
continued without proof to the Hearing Officer that the public is being adequately protected from
any further attacks by the animal in question.
7. Findings: Public Nuisance. If, based upon the hearing, the Hearing Officer finds
that the animal in question is vicious, he shall so specify in writing together with particular
findings of fact. Any animal found to be a vicious animal is hereby deemed a public nuisance
and shall be, pursuant to the order of the Hearing Officer, humanely destroyed by the Animal
Control Officer, removed from the City or otherwise abated.
8. Appeal to Superior Court.
(a) The decision of the Hearing Officer may be appealed by any interested
party to the Superior Court.
(b) The Hearing Officer will automatically stay the effect of his or her
decision upon request for up to thirty (30) days provided that the animal's owner must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Hearing Officer that the public is being adequately
protected from the possibility of any further attacks by the animal in question.
(c) After an action has been commenced, the Superior Court may stay the
Hearing Officer's decision provided that the animal's owner must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Court that the public is being adequately protected from the possibility
of any further attacks by the animal in question.
(d) Superior Court review shall be in accordance with Code of Civil
Procedure Section 1094.5 and the Court shall exercise its independent judgment based
upon the record of proceedings before the Hearing Officer.
9. Cost of Abatement. The cost of abatement shall be paid for by the owner of the
animal and shall become a lien against the property of the owner, if any, upon which the animal
is kept and maintained until said assessment is paid.
10. Payment of Assessment. It shall be lawful for any person to pay the amount of
such assessment on or before the 15th day of July following its imposition. If said assessment is
not paid on or before said date the total amount thereof shall be entered on the next fiscal year
tax roll as a lien against the property of the owner upon which property the animal was
maintained and shall be subject to the same penalties as are provided for other delinquent taxes
or assessments of the City.
11. Collection of Assessment. In the event that legal action is necessary to collect
said assessment the owner of the animal shall pay all the expenses thereof, including but not
limited to reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City, all as determined by the Court. (Ord.
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-9
291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977; Ord. 474 N.S., 02/1986; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.15 ANIMALS WHICH DIE WHILE UNDER ISOLATION
The head of an animal which dies while under isolation shall be submitted to the
laboratory of the county health department for examination for rabies. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970)
SEC. 4.16 DUTY TO REPORT KNOWLEDGE OF BITE
Whenever any person having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any animal
has knowledge that such animal has bitten any person or animal, or has been bitten by another
animal, the person having such charge, care, control custody or possession of such animal shall
report such fact within forty eight hours to the Chief of Police. The report shall state the name
and address of the person bitten, a description of the animal bitten, if any, the time and place
where such person or animal was bitten, and any other information so requested by the Chief of
Police. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.17 INTERFERENCE WITH AND MISTREATMENT OF POLICE DOGS
No person shall willfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate,
injure, disable or kill any dog used by the county sheriff or police department in the performance
of the functions or duties of such department, or interfere with or meddle with any such dog
while being used by such department or any member thereof in the performance of any of the
functions or duties of such department or of such officer of member. (Ord. No. 291 N.S. §1)
ARTICLE IV. IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS4
SEC. 4.18 DUTY OF CHIEF OF POLICE TO IMPOUND ANIMALS
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to take up, impound and safely keep any of the
animals enumerated in Sec. 4.2 hereof and found running at large, staked, tied or being herded or
pastured in any street, lane, alley, court, square, park or other place belonging to or under the
control of the City, or upon any private property, contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353 N.S., 11/1977; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.19 NOTICE TO CHIEF OF POLICE OF STRAY ANIMALS; DISPOSITION OF
STRAY ANIMALS
Every person taking up any stray animal or such animal which is running at large
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall within eight hours thereafter give notice to the
Chief of Police of the following:
4 For state law as to killing and seizure of dogs, see Ag. C.A., 31101 et seq.
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-10
(1) The fact that he has such animal in his possession;
(2) The complete description of such animal;
(3) The license number of such animal, if any, and by what county or municipal
corporation issued; if such animal has not license, such person shall so state;
(4) The place where such animal is confined.
Every such person and any person in whose custody such animal may, in the meantime,
be placed, may deliver such animal to the shelter without fee or charge, and the Chief of Police
shall thereupon hold and dispose of such animal in the same manner as though such animal had
been found at large and impounded by him. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.20 NOTICE TO OWNERS OF IMPOUNDED DOGS
The Chief of Police shall, immediately upon impoundment of dogs or other animals,
make every reasonable effort to notify the owners of such dogs or other animals impounded, and
inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such animals. If the
dog has a valid license, the owner shall be notified. Such notice shall be either personal or by
deposit in the mail properly addressed and postage prepaid. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 353
N.S., 11/1977; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.21 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS-GENERALLY
All animals impounded at the shelter shall be provided with proper and sufficient food
and water. Unless such unlicensed animals shall have been redeemed within five days after being
impounded, or licensed animals seven days after notification provided for in Section 4.20, they
may be sold to the person offering to pay a cash amount, but not less than ten dollars therefor;
provided, that the purchaser shall not be given possession of any dog or dogs until he shall have
paid to the Chief of Police the license fee or fees prescribed for such dog or dogs. If any dog or
other animal impounded shall not have been redeemed within such period and cannot be sold
within a reasonable time thereafter, it may be destroyed in a humane manner. In lieu of
destruction, the shelter may release without charge animals to any humane organization that
provides an animal adoption service. The shelter shall maintain a file describing each animal
impounded therein, for at least the period prescribed herein, beginning on the day any such
animal is taken or delivered into the possession of the shelter. The owner must within five days
show proof of a current, valid antirabies vaccination. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 741 N.S.,
09/2018)
SEC. 4.22 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS-RECLAMATION OF LICENSED
ANIMALS BY OWNER
The owner of any licensed impounded animal shall have the right to reclaim the same at
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-11
any time prior to the lawful disposition thereof upon payment to the Chief of Police of the costs
and charges hereinafter provided in this chapter for the impounding and keeping of such animals.
(Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.23 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 355 N.S.
SEC. 4.24 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS-DESTRUCTION OF UNFIT OR
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, and he is authorized, to destroy any animal
lawfully impounded which is by reason of age, disease or other cause unfit for adoption, or is
dangerous to keep impounded. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
ARTICLE V. FEES
SEC. 4.25 AMOUNT FOR LICENSES
The dog license fee shall be set from time to time by City Council resolution, and shall be
payable in full for the complete license period. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 341 N.S.,
10/1976; Ord. 448 N.S., 08/1983)
SEC. 4.26 PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PROCURE LICENSE
Any person who fails to procure within forty-five days of the date required for procuring
such license shall, in addition to any other penalty prescribed by this chapter, be subject to a late
charge in the same amount as the dog license would be to be added to and collected with the
license fee. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 338 N.S., 07/1976; Ord. No. 353 N.S., 11/1977)
SEC. 4.27 EXEMPTION FROM LICENSE FEE-SEEING EYE DOGS
Seeing Eye dogs owned and actually used by blind persons shall be exempt from a
license fee as specified in this article. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970)
SEC. 4.28 EXEMPTION FROM LICENSE FEE-POLICE DOGS
Any dog owned by the county or a city and used by the sheriff or police department in the
performance of the functions or duties of such department shall be exempt from a license fee as
specified in this article. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970)
SEC. 4.29 DUPLICATE TAGS
The fee for replacement of a current tag which has been lost or stolen shall be set from
time to time by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
Chapter 4 - Animals
4-12
SEC. 4.30 CHARGES FOR ANIMAL CONTROL SERVICES
The Chief of Police shall charge, receive and collect such service charges relating to
animal control services, including but not limited to collection and impoundment charges, as
shall be set from time to time by City Council resolution. (Ord. 291 N.S., 05/1970; Ord. 355
N.S., 11/1978; Ord. 372 N.S., 05/1978; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.31 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 355 N.S.
SEC. 4.32 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 355 N.S.
ARTICLES VI. PENALTIES
SEC. 4.33 PENALTIES, CITATIONS, AND ENFORCEMENT
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction.
Violators are subject to issuance of an Administrative Citation pursuant to Section 1.9 of the
Piedmont City Code, in addition to any other applicable remedies. The fine for such violations
shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 291 N.S.,
05/1970; Ord. No. 318 N.S., 05/1974; Ord. No. 339 N.S., 07/1976; Ord. 741 N.S., 09/2018)
SEC. 4.34 REMOVAL OF DOG DEFECATION
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any dog to fail to
immediately remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner, by placing in a closed or sealed
container and depositing in a trash receptacle, any feces deposited by such dog upon any public
or private property not owned or controlled by the owner or person having custody of such dog.
(b) Any person who has the charge or control of any dog in a location other than on
property owned or controlled by such person, or on the property of the owner of the dog, shall
have in his possession a suitable wrapper, bag, or container for the purpose of complying with
the requirements of this section. The failure of any person to carry such a wrapper, bag, or
container when in charge or control of any dog in a location other than on property owned or
controlled by such person, or on the property of the owner of the dog, shall constitute a violation
of this section.
(c) The violation of any provision of this Section 4.34 shall be an infraction. The
City Council shall set the fine for violations from time to time by resolution. (Ord. No. 515 N.S.,
12/89)
Rev. 2018-10-04 (Ord. 741 N.S; 09-2018)
Bicycles
4A - 1
CHAPTER 4A
BICYCLES1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
'4A.1 Definition of bicycle
'4A.2 Penalty for violation of chapter by juveniles under eighteen years of age
ARTICLE II. LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES
'4A.3 Required
'4A.4 Exception to nonresidents registered in another municipality
'4A.5 Examination of applicants
'4A.6 License-Fee
'4A.7 License-Application; requirements to be met before issuance
'4A.8 License-Expiration
'4A.9 License-Renewal
'4A.10 License-Penalty for failure to renew; exceptional cases
'4A.11 Issuance of plate and registration card Upon approval of application;
effective date
'4A.12 Designation of size, form, etc., of plate and card to be by chief of police;
plate to be affixed to bicycle; card to be carried by licensee
'4A.13 Report of loss, theft, transfer, etc. of plate or card to chief of police
'4A.14 Procedure Upon loss of registration card
ARTICLE III. MECHANICAL CONDITIONS AND EQUIPMENT
'4A.15 Generally
'4A.16 Brakes
'4A.17 Warning devices
For state law making persons riding bicycles subject to Vehicle
Code, see Veh. C.A., '21050
Bicycles
4A - 2
'4A.18 Sirens and whistles
'4A.19 Handlebar grips
'4A.20 Carriers
'4A.21 Stand
'4A.22 Lights
ARTICLE IV. OPERATION OF BICYCLES
'4A.23 Compliance with chapter as to equipment and safe mechanical condition required
prerequisite to operation
'4A.24 Applicability of article
'4A.25 Riding on sidewalk
'4A.26 Juveniles riding on sidewalk
'4A.27 Keep to right of roadway
'4A.28 Riding in a group
'4A.29 Clinging to moving vehicles
'4A.30 Passengers
'4A.31 Towing
'4A.32 Carrying articles
'4A.33 Racing
'4A.34 Trick riding
'4A.35 Traffic signals
'4A.36 Parking
'4A.37 Speed
'4A.38 Parks, playgrounds and schools
'4A.39 Turning-Generally
'4A.40 Same-Right turn
'4A.41 Same-Left turn
'4A.42 Same-U-turns
'4A.43 Same-turn right against red light
'4A.44 Stop required prior to riding Upon sidewalk or street area
'4A.45 Meeting and passing
'4A.46 Hand signals
'4A.47 Methods of giving signals-Left turn
'4A.48 Same-Right turn
'4A.49 Same-Stop or sudden decrease of speed
Bicycles
4A - 3
'4A.50 Procedure in event of accident
'4A.51 Restrict bicycles and other wheeled vehicles to pathways in park
Bicycles
4A - 4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 4A.1 DEFINITION OF BICYCLE
"Bicycle" when used in this chapter, means and indicates a light vehicle without a motor,
having two wheels, handlebars and a seat or seats, and propelled by the operator. (Ord. No. 213
N.S., '1)
SEC. 4A.2 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER BY JUVENILES UNDER
EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE
Where this chapter has been violated by juveniles under the age of eighteen years, in lieu
of such fine and imprisonment as provided in Section 1.7 of the Code and in lieu of filing charges
in the juvenile court, the chief of police may prohibit the operation Upon the streets, alleys and
public places in the City for a period not to exceed thirty days of a bicycle so used in such
violation, in which event, the bicycle so used in such violation shall be impounded by the chief of
police and retained by him during the period of the operation which is prohibited and the owner's
registration card shall be held for a like period. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '17)
ARTICLE II. LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES
SEC. 4A.3 REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle in the City which has not
been registered and licensed and equipped with one or more license plates as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '2)
SEC. 4A.4 EXCEPTION TO NONRESIDENTS REGISTERED IN ANOTHER
MUNICIPALITY
Any nonresident of the City may operate in the City any bicycle which is duly licensed
and registered in another municipality, and equipped with license plates, without obtaining a
Piedmont license; provided, that such other municipality wherein the bicycle is licensed extends
the same privilege to residents of the City of Piedmont. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '3)
Bicycles
4A - 5
SEC. 4A.5 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS
Upon making an application for his first license, registration card and license plates or
insignia, the applicant may be required to be examined by an examining officer designated by the
chief of police. The chief of police may further designate the manner of examination. Upon
completion of the examination, the chief of police may refuse to issue a license to the applicant if
the examination discloses to the chief of police that the applicant does not have a reasonable
knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Section 21050 of the Vehicle Code
of the State, or that the applicant is unable to exercise reasonable control in operating a bicycle.
(Ord. No. 213 N.S., '6)
SEC. 4A.6 LICENSE-FEE
Every person desiring a bicycle license shall pay to the chief of police a fee of one dollar
per year payable in advance at the time the application is made. The license may be issued up to
a total period of three years at the discretion of the chief of police, for a maximum fee of three
dollars for three years, and the fee may be prorated on a reasonable basis for the actual period
issued at the discretion of the chief of police. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '5; Ord. No. 360 N.S., '1)
SEC. 4A.7 LICENSE-APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS TO BE MET BEFORE
ISSUANCE
Every person desiring a bicycle license in the City shall make application to the chief of
police Upon blanks furnished by him. Such application must be filed in duplicate and shall
contain such information as may be required by the chief of police as to the applicant and the
description of the bicycle licensed. No license shall be issued unless the bicycle to be licensed
complies with the requirements of this chapter as to its safe mechanical condition, and has affixed
to the rear fender and, if there is no rear fender, to a permanent part of the frame, in a position
readily visible from three hundred feet from the rear of such bicycle a red lamp, a red reflector or
a piece of red reflectorized tape at least two inches in length. (Ord. No. 213, N.S., '4; Ord. No.
295 N.S., '1)
SEC. 4A.8 LICENSE-EXPIRATION
All bicycle licenses shall expire on the thirty first day of December of the last year of the
period for which they are issued. (Ord No. 213 N.S., '7; Ord. No. 360 N.S., '2)
Bicycles
4A - 6
SEC. 4A.9 LICENSE-RENEWAL
Application for renewal of a bicycle license expiring on the date mentioned in section
4A.8 shall be made by the owner, between January first and March first succeeding the
expiration date, and shall be made by presentation of the license plate and the registration card
last issued for the bicycle, and by the payment of the fee for the bicycle in the same manner as
provided in section 4A.6. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '8; Ord. No. 360 N.S., '3)
SEC. 4A.10 LICENSE-PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO RENEW; EXCEPTIONAL CASES
A penalty shall be imposed Upon the bicycle owner who fails to comply with section
4A.9 in the amount of one dollar; provided, however, no penalty shall be imposed Upon the
owner of a newly purchased bicycle who obtains a license within fourteen days of the purchase;
or to a new resident of the City who obtains a license within thirty days of becoming a resident
of the City; or, when the owner can provide adequate proof that he was unable to operate the
bicycle during the renewal period due to mechanical failure. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '9, Ord. No.
360 N.S., '4)
SEC. 4A.11 ISSUANCE OF PLATE AND REGISTRATION CARD UPON APPROVAL
OF APPLICATION; EFFECTIVE DATE
Upon approval of the application, and payment of the license fee, the chief of police shall
issue a bicycle license plate and registration card which shall be effective until December thirtyfirst
of the last year of the license. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '7; Ord. No. 360 N.S., '5)
SEC. 4A.12 DESIGNATION OF SIZE, FORM, ETC., OF PLATE AND CARD TO BE BY
CHIEF OF POLICE; PLATE TO BE AFFIXED TO BICYCLE; CARD TO BE
CARRIED BY LICENSEE
The size, form and character of the license plate or insignia and registration card shall be
designated by the chief of police. The license plate or insignia shall be affixed to the bicycle in
the manner designated by the chief of police. The registration card shall be carried by the licensed
person. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '10)
SEC. 4A.13 REPORT OF LOSS, THEFT, TRANSFER, ETC., OF PLATE OR CARD TO
CHIEF OF POLICE
Upon the loss of a license plate or insignia or the transfer of a bicycle from one person to
Bicycles
4A - 7
another, the licensee shall be required to report its loss, theft or transfer within ten days. Upon
receipt of such report, the chief of police shall cancel this license and issue a new license plate to
the licensee or new licensee Upon receipt of a fee of twenty five cents (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '11)
SEC. 4A.14 PROCEDURE UPON LOSS OF REGISTRATION CARD
Upon the loss of a registration card, the licensee shall make application for a duplicate
card which shall be issued to him free of cost. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '12)
ARTICLE III. MECHANICAL CONDITIONS AND EQUIPMENT
SEC. 4A.15 GENERALLY
Every person desiring a bicycle license must demonstrate to the chief of police that the
bicycle for which the applicant desires to secure license plates or insignia meets the requirements
as to safe mechanical conditions set out in this article. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '13)
SEC. 4A.16 BRAKES
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake adequate to skid the front or rear tire of the
bicycle Upon application of the brake. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '13)
SEC. 4A.17 WARNING DEVICES
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a horn or bell in good working order, capable of
emitting sound audible for a distance of not less than one hundred feet under normal conditions.
(Ord. No. 213 N.S., '13)
SEC. 4A.18 SIRENS AND WHISTLES
It shall be unlawful to equip a bicycle with a siren or whistle. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '13)
SEC. 4A.19 HANDLEBAR GRIPS
Every bicycle that is equipped with handlebar grips must have such grips securely glued
or cemented to the handlebars. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '13)
Bicycles
4A - 8
SEC. 4A.20 CARRIERS
Every bicycle equipped with a carrier must have such carrier securely attached to the
bicycle, and the carrier must be of a type approved by the chief of police. (Ord. No. 213 N.S.,
'13)
SEC. 4A.21 STAND
Every bicycle purchased after the effective date of this chapter, if equipped with a stand,
such stand must be of a type approved by the chief of police. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '13)
SEC. 4A.22 LIGHTS
Every bicycle operated at any time from a half-hour after sunset to a half-hour before
sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernable any
person or vehicle on the streets or sidewalks, shall be equipped with a lamp affixed to the front
of the bicycle, which lamp shall exhibit a white light visible for a distance of three hundred feet
from the front of the bicycle, and the bicycle shall be equipped with a red lamp affixed to the rear
fender, which lamp shall exhibit a red light visible for a distance of three hundred feet from the
rear of the bicycle; provided, however, that a red reflector of a type approved by the chief of
police may be used in lieu of the rear lamp. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '13)
ARTICLE IV. OPERATION OF BICYCLES
SEC. 4A.23 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER AS TO EQUIPMENT AND SAFE
MECHANICAL CONDITION REQUIRED PREREQUISITE TO
OPERATION
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the City unless such
bicycle is equipped as otherwise provided in this chapter and unless the bicycle is in safe
mechanical condition. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '14)
SEC. 4A.24 APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the City in violation of
any of the rules of the road as set forth in Sections 4A.25 to 4A.50. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
Bicycles
4A - 9
SEC. 4A.25 RIDING ON SIDEWALK
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle on any sidewalk in the City, except as herein
specifically permitted. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.26 JUVENILES RIDING ON SIDEWALK
Juveniles under the age of sixteen years, exercising due care and giving pedestrians the
right of way, may ride and operate their bicycles Upon the sidewalk, except such sidewalks as
are in front of schools, stores or buildings used for business purposes. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.27 KEEP TO RIGHT OF ROADWAY
Persons riding or operating bicycles on a highway or street shall keep such bicycles as
close to the right hand curb as possible, except when preparing to make a left hand turn. (Ord.
No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.28 RIDING IN A GROUP
Persons riding or operating bicycles in the City shall not ride more than two abreast,
except on paths or parts of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles; provided,
further, that persons riding bicycles on the sidewalk shall do so in single file. (Ord. No. 213 N.S.,
'15)
SEC. 4A.29 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES
No person riding or operating a bicycle in the City shall cling or attach himself or his
bicycle to any other moving vehicle or streetcar, or person in any other vehicle. (Ord. No. 213
N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.30 PASSENGERS
No person riding or operating a bicycle in the City shall carry another person on such
bicycle, unless such person or passenger is seated Upon an individual seat or carrier separate
from that intended to be used by the operator.
No person shall ride Upon a bicycle as a passenger, unless he is seated Upon an
individual seat or carrier separate from that intended to be used by the operator. (Ord. No. 213
Bicycles
4A - 10
N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.31 TOWING
No person riding or operating a bicycle in the City shall tow any other vehicle or person,
except that bicycle trailers used for the delivery of newspapers, magazines or merchandise may
be towed when being used in such delivery service. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.32 CARRYING ARTICLES
No person riding or operating a bicycle in the City shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prohibits the rider from having full control of the bicycle at all times. (Ord. No. 213
N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.33 RACING
No person riding or operating a bicycle Upon a public highway or street shall participate
in any race, speed or endurance contest unless such race or endurance contest has the written
permission of the chief of police, and under his supervision. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.34 TRICK RIDING
No person riding or operating a bicycle shall perform or attempt to perform any
acrobatic, fancy or stunt riding Upon any public highway or street in the City. (Ord. No. 213
N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.35 TRAFFIC SIGNALS
Every person operating a bicycle in the City shall stop for all arterial highways and traffic
signals. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.36 PARKING
No person shall park any bicycle against windows or parking meters or on the maintraveled
portion of the sidewalk, nor in such manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians,
traffic or property.
Bicycles
4A - 11
If there are no bicycle racks or other facilities intended to be used for parking of bicycles
in the vicinity, bicycles may be parked on the sidewalk in an upright position parallel to and
within twenty-four inches of the curb. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.37 SPEED
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle faster than is reasonable and proper, and every
bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and other persons
Upon the streets, sidewalks and public highways of the City. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.38 PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND SCHOOLS
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle Upon any playground, park or school grounds,
where children are playing, without permission of the person having supervision thereof. (Ord.
No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.39 TURNING-GENERALLY
Every person riding or operating a bicycle Upon the streets and highways of the City
shall turn only at intersections, except as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. No. 213 N.S.,
'15)
SEC. 4A.40 SAME-RIGHT TURN
Every person, riding or operating a bicycle intending to turn to the right at an intersection
or into an alley or driveway, shall approach the turning point in the line of traffic nearest the
right-hand curb of the street. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.41 SAME-LEFT TURN
Every person riding or operating a bicycle intending to turn left at an intersection or to
enter an alley or driveway shall approach the point of turning in the line of traffic nearest to the
center of the roadway. The operator of a bicycle in turning left at an intersection shall pass to
the right of the center of the intersection before turning unless otherwise directed by markers,
buttons or signs. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.42 SAME-U-TURNS
Bicycles
4A - 12
No bicycle shall be turned in any business district so as to proceed in the opposite
direction, except at intersections.
No bicycle operated in a residence district shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction when any other vehicle is approaching from either direction within two hundred feet,
except at an intersection. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.43 SAME-TURN RIGHT AGAINST RED LIGHT
The operator of a bicycle which is stopped as close as practicable to the entrance of an
intersection in obedience to a red light or "Stop" signal may make a right turn, but shall yield the
right of way to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at the
intersection unless a sign has been posted at such intersection prohibiting such turn. (Ord. No.
213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.44 STOP REQUIRED PRIOR TO RIDING UPON SIDEWALK OR STREET
AREA
The operator of a bicycle, on leaving an alley or driveway, when his view of either the
sidewalk or street area is obstructed shall stop such bicycle immediately prior to riding Upon
such sidewalk or street area. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.45 MEETING AND PASSING
Every person operating a bicycle shall pass to the left when passing vehicles going in the
same direction, and shall pass to the right when meeting vehicles going in the opposite direction.
(Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.46 HAND SIGNALS
No person shall turn a bicycle or stop a bicycle which he is riding or operating unless
such movement can be made with safety, and then only after giving an appropriate signal during
the last fifty feet traveled by the bicycle before turning or stopping. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.47 METHOD OF GIVING SIGNALS-LEFT TURN
Bicycles
4A - 13
Every person signalling a left turn shall do so by extending his left hand and arm
horizontally beyond the side of the bicycle. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.48 SAME-RIGHT TURN
Every person signalling a right turn shall do so by extending his left hand and arm upward
beyond the side of the bicycle. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.49 SAME-STOP OR SUDDEN DECREASE OF SPEED
Every person signalling a stop shall do so by extending his left hand and arm downward
beyond the side of the bicycle. (Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.50 PROCEDURE IN EVENT OF ACCIDENT
The operator of any bicycle involved in an accident shall take reasonable steps to
ascertain whether or not anyone was injured, and he shall give his name, address and the license
number of his bicycle to the person with whom he was in collision; and he shall obtain the same
information from the other person.
It shall be the duty of the bicycle operator to make a written report of any accident
resulting in death or injury to the police department within twenty-four hours of such accident.
(Ord. No. 213 N.S., '15)
SEC. 4A.51 RESTRICT BICYCLES AND OTHER WHEELED VEHICLES TO
PATHWAYS IN PARK
No bicycle or other wheeled vehicle shall be allowed in any part of a City park, except
Upon paved pathways or sidewalks within such park. This section does not apply to City
operated vehicles, babies in strollers or carriages, handicapped persons in wheelchairs, and such
other vehicles as are exempted from me to time by the city administrator. (Ord No. 394 N.S.,
'1)
Bicycles
4A - 14
1/23/02
Chapter 5
BUILDING CODE
ARTICLE I. GENERAL
§5.1 2016 California Residential Code – Adopted
§5.2 2016 Piedmont Residential Code – Amendments
§5.3 2016 California Building Code – Adopted
§5.4 2016 Piedmont Building Code – Amendments
§5.5 2016 California Mechanical Code – Adopted
§5.6 2016 Piedmont Mechanical Code – Amendments
§5.7 2016 California Plumbing Code – Adopted
§5.8 2016 Piedmont Plumbing Code – Amendments
§5.9 2016 California Electrical Code – Adopted
§5.10 2016 Piedmont Electrical Code – Amendments
§5.11 2016 California Energy Code – Adopted
§5.12 2016 California Green Building Standards Code – Adopted
§5.13 2016 Piedmont Green Building Standards Code – Amendments
§5.14 2016 California Referenced Standards Code – Adopted
§5.15 2016 California Administrative Code – Adopted
§5.16 2016 California Historical Building Code - Adopted
§5.17 2016 California Existing Building Code - Adopted
ARTICLE II. STREAMLINED PERMITTING FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL
ROOFTOP ENERGY SYSTEMS
§5.18 Definitions
§5.19 Applicability
§5.20 Solar Energy System Requirements
§5.21 Duties of Department of Public Works & Building Official
§5.22 Permit Review and Inspection Requirements
§§5.23-5.24 Not Used
ARTICLE III. DISCLOSURES
§5.25 Disclosure Required
§§5.26-5.29 Not Used
ARTICLE IV. GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS FOR CITY PROJECTS
§5.30 Green Building Standards for City Facilities
§§5.21-5.39 Not Used
Building Code
5-2
ARTICLE V. MISCELLANEOUS
§5.40 Definitions
§5.41 Building Sewer Lateral Required
§5.42 Prohibited Uses
§5.43 Building Sewer Lateral Connection Bond and Building Permit
§5.44 Building Sewer Lateral: Standards, Design, and Materials for Construction
§5.45 Building Sewer Lateral Standards for Measurements, Tests, and Analyses
§5.46 Abandonment of Existing Building Sewer Laterals
§5.47 Building Sewer Lateral Maintenance and Required Inspection
§5.48 Required Time of Compliance
§5.49 Sewer Service Charges
§5.50 Sewer Connection Charge Fund
§5.51 Septic Tanks and Cesspools Prohibited
§5.52 Cost Recovery – Building Sewer Lateral Overflows
§5.53 Administrative Penalties – Non Compliance
§5.54 Adoption of the EBMUD Regional PSL Ordinance
§§5.55-5.59 Not Used
ARTICLE VI. EXPEDITED PERMITTING FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING
SYSTEMS
§5.60 Definitions
§5.61 Expedited Permitting Process
§5.62 Permit Application Processing
§5.63 Technical Review
§5.64 Electric Vehicle Charging Station Installation Reguirements
ARTICLE I
GENERAL
SEC. 5.1 2016 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE – ADOPTED1
The 2016 California Residential Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5,
including Appendices K&V, prepared by the California Building Standards Commission,
and as amended in sections 5.2 of this code, is hereby adopted by reference as the
Piedmont Residential Code. The City Council may from time to time designate by
resolution which edition of the California Residential Code is currently applicable, since
the California Residential Code is periodically revised, and the edition currently
designated by Council resolution shall be the one referred to in the Piedmont Residential
Code. One copy of the Piedmont Residential Code and the California Residential Code
shall be kept on file at the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 54 N.S., 6/65; Ord. 275
N.S., 12/67; Ord. 312 N.S., 8/73; Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, 607 N.S.
1 For state law as to adoption by reference, see Gov. C. § 50022.2 to 50022.10.
Building Code
5-3
6/99; Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S.
05/17)
SEC. 5.2 2016 PIEDMONT RESIDENTIAL CODE – AMENDMENTS
The following provisions replace and, some cases, amplify certain sections of the 2016
California Residential Code as adopted in Section 5.1 of this Chapter.
5.2.1 Section R105.1 – Permits Required: Section R105.1 is amended to
include the following provisions: “A building permit will also be required for the
following:
(a) An on-grade improvement capable of use for parking vehicles and located
in the front yard setback, the side yard setback of a corner lot or the rear
yard setback of a through lot.
(b) On-grade stairs with 4 (four) or more risers that are part of the primary
entrance/exit to and from the structure.
(c) Construction, repair or replacement of a public sidewalk curb or gutter.
(d) A building permit will be required for building alternations and property
improvements which have received Design Review approval and would,
by their nature, not ordinarily require a building permit as defined in
Section 5.2.1. The purpose of the building permit is to verify
conformance to the approved design and any Conditions of Approval.”
(Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730
N.S. 05/17)
5.2.2 Section R105.2 – Work Exempt from Permit: Delete section in its entirety
and replace with the following: “Permits shall not be required for the following.
Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this
code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
(a) Building
1. One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the projected floor
area does not exceed 120 square feet, it is not located within the
front setback, and is less than 7 feet in height measured from the
lowest adjacent grade to the highest roof projection. Not more than
one (1) accessory structure is allowed on any single parcel.
2. Fences 6 feet high or less which are not located in the front yard
setback, the side yard setback of a corner lot, or the rear yard
Building Code
5-4
setback of a through lot, and is not within 2 feet, measured
horizontally, of a retaining structure that compensates for a change
in grade.
3. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches
high.
4. Retaining walls which are not over 30 inches in height, measured
from the top of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting
a surcharge.
5. Platforms, walks and driveways not more than 12 inches above
grade and not over any basement or story below.
6. Painting, papering, interior floor covering and similar finish work.
7. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
(b) Electrical
1. Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
2. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets
therefore.
3. Repair or replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the
required capacity in the same location.
4. Installation or maintenance of communications wiring, devices,
appliances, apparatus or equipment.
(c) Gas
1. Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances, portable
patio heaters and portable barbeques.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
3. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
(d) Mechanical
1. Portable heating appliances.
Building Code
5-5
2. Portable ventilation appliances.
3. Portable cooling units.
4. Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative coolers.
7. Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds or less
of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower or
less.
8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
(e) Plumbing
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided,
however, that if a trap, drain pipe, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes
defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same
with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be procured and inspection made as provided in this
code.
2. The clearing of stoppages including the removal and reinstallation
of water closets, or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or
fixtures, provided such repairs do not involve or require the
replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
Exceptions to Exemption: Unless otherwise exempted, if separate plumbing,
electrical and mechanical construction is required as part of the construction of the
exempted items, a separate building permit for the plumbing, electrical and mechanical
construction will be required for the above-exempted items.” (Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
5.2.3 Section R105.3.1 – Action on Application: Replace the second and third
sentence with the following: “Such applications may be reviewed by other departments
of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction.
Except as provided below, if the building official finds that the work described in an
application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith
conform to the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and
that the fees specified in Section 5.2.5 have been paid, the building official shall issue a
Building Code
5-6
permit therefore to the applicant. The building official shall not issue any new permit for
a particular site until all expired building permits have been finally approved and all work
originally done without permits has been covered by a building permit, inspected and
finally approved. If the Director of Public Works determines that an emergency exists,
the Director of Public Works may authorize issuance of a building permit without first
requiring permit compliance on prior improvements." (Ord. 564 N.S., 4/95; Ord. 571
N.S. 11/95, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
5.2.4 Section R105.5 – Expiration: Add the following sentence after the first
sentence of Section 105.5: “For purposes of this section, the term “work” shall include
successful inspections by the building official as defined in Section R109 – Inspections.”
(Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.5 Section R106.3.3 – Construction Documents – Phased Approval: Delete
this section in its entirety.
5.2.6 Section R108.2 – Schedule of Permit Fees: Add the following sentence to
the end of this section to read as follows: “The fee for each permit shall be charged
according to the City of Piedmont Building Permit Fee Schedule set by City Council
resolution from time to time.” (Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.2.7 Section R108.3 – Building Permit Valuations: Add the following sentence
at the end of R108.3: “In determining the value of the construction, the building official
shall consider the contract price for the work to be performed or, if there is no contract,
such other evidence as the building official may consider relevant.” (Ord. 548 N.S.,
10/93; Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.8 Section R108.4 – Related Fees: Add a new Section R108.4.1 to read as
follows: "An SMIP (Strong Motion Instrumentation Program) fee set by State of
California from time to time will be charged. The minimum SMIP fee will be $0.50."
(Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93; Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.9 Section R108.7 – Government Agency Exemption: Add a new Section
R108.7 to read as follows: "No building permit fee shall be required for any project or
improvement to be built by or at the direction of the City of Piedmont, the County of
Alameda, the State of California and the United States of America." (Ord. 548 N.S.,
10/93; Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.10 Section R109.1 – Types of Inspections: A new paragraph shall be added
at the end of Section R109.1 to read as follows: “A survey of the lot may be required by
the building official to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved
plans. In the case of a new residence or a detached structure, the building official shall
require a survey by a licensed land surveyor prior to approving the foundation. The
foundation survey shall include the related setbacks, the elevation of the existing grades,
and the elevations of the foundation. At the completion of the framing and roof
sheathing, the survey shall include the elevations of all floors and the maximum roof
Building Code
5-7
height, to verify that the structure is built according to the approved drawings.” (Ord.
564 N.S., 4/95; Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.11 Section R112 - Board of Appeals: Delete this section in its entirety.
5.2.12 Add Section R302.15 – Deck Fire Protection: “The exposed underside of
decks which are located less than 10 feet from any structure regulated by this code shall
be protected by the installation of materials approved for one hour fire resistant
construction on the horizontal exterior underside.
Exceptions:
(1) Where exterior walls enclose the underside of the deck completely to
grade.
(2) Where the underdeck area is equipped with an automatic fire suppression
system which complies with Section R313.
(3) Where the deck, whether cantilevered or supported on posts, is less than
one foot above grade or more than 15 feet above grade.
(4) Where the deck, whether cantilevered or supported on posts, is constructed
as follows:
Horizontal framing members 4 x 8 (nominal) and larger
Posts 6 x 6 (nominal) and larger
Decking:
(A) 3x (nominal) decking
(B) Ignition-resistant materials that comply with the
performance requirements of both SFM Standard 12-7A-4
and SFM Standard 12-7A-5.
(C) Exterior fire retardant treated wood.
(D) Non-combustible material.
(E) Any material that complies with the performance
requirements of SFM Standard 12-7A-4A when attached
exterior wall covering is also either non-combustible or
ignition-resistant material.
Exception: Wall materials may be of any material that
otherwise complies with this chapter when the decking
surface material complies with the performance
Building Code
5-8
requirements of ASTM E 84 with a Class B flame spread
rating.
(5) Decks constructed over noncombustible paving which extends at least 3
feet beyond the edge of the deck and permanently prevents the growth of
plant material.
The alteration or repair of an existing deck, or balcony shall meet the above requirements,
except that if the number of linear feet of horizontal framing members to be repaired and
replaced is less than 50% of the total linear feet of all framing members, materials like
those used on the original construction may be used." (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93; Ord. 554
N.S. 5/94, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17, Ord. 730 N.S.
05/17)
5.2.13 Section R303.1 – Habitable Rooms: Delete exceptions 1 and 2.
5.2.14 Section R304.4 – Height Effect on Room Area: Amend section to read as
follows: “Portions of a room with a sloping ceiling measuring less than 5 feet, or a furred
ceiling measuring less than 7 feet, 6 inches from the finished floor to the finished ceiling
shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum required habitable area for that
room.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.15 Section R305.1 - Minimum Height: Delete section in its entirety and
replace with: “Habitable space, hallways and portions of basements containing these
spaces, shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches. Bathrooms, toilet
rooms, and laundry rooms shall be permitted to have a ceiling height of not less than 7
feet.”
Exceptions:
1. For rooms with sloped ceilings, the required floor area of the room shall
have a ceiling height of not less than 5 feet. Not less than 50 percent of the
required floor area shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6
inches.
2. The ceiling height above bathroom and toilet room fixtures shall be such
that the fixture is capable of being used for its intended purpose. A
shower or tub equipped with a showerhead shall have a ceiling height of
not less than 6 feet 8 inches above an area not less than 30 inches by 30
inches at the showerhead.
3. Beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions in basements containing
habitable space shall be permitted to project to within 6 feet 8 inches of
the finished floor.
Building Code
5-9
4. Existing non-habitable space contained within the existing building
envelope that is converted to habitable space shall be permitted to have a
ceiling height of not less than 7 feet. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S.
02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.2.16 Section R305.1.2 – Under Floor Area: Add the following new section:
“Portions of basements with ceiling heights of less than 6 feet 8 inches shall be
considered under floor areas and shall be separated from the portions of the basement
with ceiling heights of 6 feet 8 inches or greater by construction conforming to Chapter 6,
2016 California Residential Code. Such under floor areas shall be unfinished.
Exception: Existing under floor areas may be finished with the approval of the
building official.”
5.2.17 Section R310.6 – Alterations or Repairs of Existing Basements: Delete
this section in its entirety.
5.2.18 Section R313.1 – Townhouse Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Add to
exception: “However, if at any time a building is demolished or destroyed for any reason
to the extent of more than seventy percent (70%) of the physical building, then an
automatic fire sprinkler system shall be required. The amount of physical building
destruction or demolition shall be determined by the building official.” (Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11)
5.2.19 Section R313.2 – One and Two Family Dwellings Automatic Fire
Systems: Add to exception: “However, if at any time a building is demolished or
destroyed for any reason to the extent of more than seventy percent (70%) of the physical
building, then an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be required. The amount of
physical building destruction or demolition shall be determined by the building official.”
(Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.20 Section R401.3 – Drainage: Add the following to the end of the section:
"Provisions shall be made for the control and drainage of surface and subsurface water
around buildings. Whenever plans for an improvement to real property indicate the
possibility of change in either surface or subsurface drainage, or both, a plan for drainage
control shall be submitted which shall provide for no increase or other adverse change in
drainage on any property adjacent to that on which the improvement is to be located. The
methods by which storm water is to be managed shall be according to the latest approved
provisions of the Alameda County Clean Water Program. If adhering to these provisions
is not reasonable due to site specific conditions, then the storm water discharge shall be
managed with one or more of the following exceptions:
(1) Underground, rigid pipe via gravity flow down to the face of curb of a
street bordering the property. Any piping occurring under the city
sidewalk or other city improvements shall be cast iron pipe.
Building Code
5-10
(2) Direct all concentrated storm water to a catch basin and sump pump to
deliver water to the face of curb of a street bordering the property.
(3) Gravity flow through neighboring property to the face of curb on a lower
street subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works, and a
written agreement and recorded easement mutually agreed to by the
affected neighbors.
(4) Any other method determined by the building official to be reasonable and
appropriate under the circumstances. The building official shall require
plans by a civil engineer, if necessary based on the characteristics of the
site." (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.21 Section R401.4.3 – Foundation and Soils Investigations – Where
Required:
1. "For any building on a site having a slope of twenty percent (20%) or
greater, a soils report shall be prepared by a geotechnical engineer licensed
by the State of California.
2. At discretion of the building official based on the characteristics of the site
and the nature of the construction proposed.” (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord.
607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.2.22 Section R403.1.6 - Foundation Anchorage: Add the following sentence at
the end of the second paragraph: “All anchor bolts, seismic ties, and any other
mechanical or structural connectors to be embedded in new concrete shall be installed
and be in place at the time of the foundation form inspection.” (Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord.
696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.2.23 Section R404.1.1 – Design Required: Revise this section as follows:
“Concrete or masonry foundation walls shall be designed in accordance with accepted
engineering practice where either of the following conditions exists:
1. Walls are subject to hydrostatic pressure from groundwater.
2. Walls supporting more than 30 inches of unbalanced backfill that do not
have permanent lateral support at the top or bottom.” (Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.2.24 Section R405.1 - Concrete or Masonry Foundations: Delete this section in
its entirety and replace with: “Drains shall be provided around all concrete or masonry
foundations that retain earth and enclose habitable or usable spaces located below grade.
Perforated pipe or other approved systems or materials shall be installed at or below the
area to be protected and shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved
drainage system. Perforated pipe shall be surrounded with an approved filter membrane
Building Code
5-11
or the filter membrane shall cover washed gravel or crushed rock covering the drain pipe.
Perforated pipe shall be placed on a minimum of 2 inches of washed gravel or crushed
rock at least one sieve size larger than the perforations and covered with not less than 6
inches of the same material.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
5.2.25 Section R703.6 - Wood Shakes and Shingles: Add the following at the
end of the first paragraph of R703.6 to read as follows:
(1) "All wood shingles and shakes shall be fire-retardant-treated to a Class B
rating, or Class C if the wall assembly, treatment of underlayment, or the
proposed finish is a fire-rated equivalent approved by the building official.
(2) Exterior wall finishes of existing structures where openings are infilled,
but not additions to existing structures, may be replaced to match the
existing wall finish, if wood shakes and shingles installed on sidewalls are
Class-B fire-treated. (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 713
N.S. 02/14)
(3) Framing to receive wood siding or wood shingles and shakes siding shall
be covered with tight-fitting minimum 1/2" wood underlayment or
1/2"exterior grade gypsum sheathing." (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607
N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.2.26 Section R902.1 – Roof Covering Materials: Delete section in its entirety
and replace with: “Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904
and R905. A minimum Class A roofing shall be installed. Class A roofing required by
this Section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ATM E 108.
Exceptions:
1. Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry
and exposed concrete roof deck.
2. Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets,
metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on
noncombustible decks. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
3. Class A roof assemblies include minimum 16oz/ft² copper sheets installed
over combustible decks.
4. Class A roof assemblies include slate installed over underlayment over
combustible decks.” (Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.2.27 Section R902.1.1 Roof coverings within very-high fire hazard severity
zones. Delete this section in its entirety. (Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
Building Code
5-12
5.2.28 Section R902.1.2 Roof coverings within state responsibility areas. Delete
this section in its entirety. (Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.2.29 Section R902.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas. Delete this section in
its entirety. (Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.2.30 Section R902.4 - Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panels and modules.
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with “Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel
systems installed on or above the roof covering shall be tested, listed and identified with a
fire classification in accordance with UL 1703. Class A photovoltaic panels and modules
shall be installed.”
5.2.31 Section R1003.9.2 – Spark Arresters: Add after the first sentence of
Section R1003.9.2, the following: “This shall be required when a building permit is
issued for an improvement on the lot on which the house is located which is of a value in
excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The spark arrester must be installed before
final inspection approval." (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
5.2.32 Appendix K. Add a new Section AK103.2 – Mechanically Generated
Noise Sources to read as follows: “Machines and other devices located on the exterior of
structures which generate sounds perceptible outside the perimeters of the lot on which
they are located shall be installed with such sound transmission control measures to
adequately minimize or eliminate the transmission of the sound to a level not to exceed
50 decibels, A-weighted, beyond property perimeters. This section is directed to and
includes, but is not limited to pool and spa filter systems, air conditioning units, and
exterior mounted blowers for exhaust systems.” (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S.
6/99; Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
SEC. 5.3 2016 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE – ADOPTED
The 2016 California Building Code of Regulations, Parts 1 and 2 of Title 24, including
the California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2 and Appendices D, F, G, H, I, & J,
prepared by the California Building Standards Commission, and as amended in sections
5.4 of this code, is hereby adopted by reference as the Piedmont Building Code. The City
Council may from time to time designate by resolution which edition of the California
Building Code is currently applicable, since the California Building Code is periodically
revised, and the edition currently designated by Council resolution shall be the one
referred to in the Piedmont Building Code. One copy of the Piedmont Building Code and
the California Building Codes shall be kept on file at the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 254 N.S., 6/65; Ord. 275 N.S., 12/67; Ord. 312 N.S., 8/73; Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93,
Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, 607 N.S. 6/99; Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713
N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.4 2016 PIEDMONT BUILDING CODE – AMENDMENTS
Building Code
5-13
The following provisions replace and, some cases, amplify certain sections of the 2016
California Building Code as adopted in Section 5.3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.4.1 Section 105.1 – Permits Required: Section 105.1 is amended to include
the following provisions: “A building permit will also be required for the following:
(a) An on-grade improvement capable of use for parking vehicles and located
in the front yard setback, the side yard setback of a corner lot or the rear
yard setback of a through lot.
(b) On-grade stairs with 4 (four) or more risers that are part of the primary
entrance/exit to and from the structure.
(c) Construction, repair or replacement of a public sidewalk, curb or gutter.
(d) A building permit will be required for building alterations and property
improvements which have received Design Review approval and would,
by their nature, not ordinarily require a building permit as defined in
Section 5.4.1. The purpose of the building permit is to verify
conformance to the approved design and any Conditions of Approval.”
(Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713
N.S. 02/14)
5.4.2 Section 105.2 – Work Exempt from Permits: Section 105.2 is amended
with the following:
“Building:
1. One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses and similar uses, provided the projected floor area does not
exceed 120 square feet, it is not located within the front yard setback, and
is less than 7 feet in height measured from the lowest adjacent grade to
the highest roof projection. Not more than one (1) accessory structure is
allowed on any single parcel.
2. Fences 6 feet high or less which are not located in the front yard setback,
the side yard setback of a corner lot, or the rear yard setback of a through
lot, and is not within 2 feet, measured horizontally, of a retaining structure
that compensates for a change in grade.
3. Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not
over 5 feet 9 inches in height.
4. Retaining walls which are not over 30 inches in height, measured from the
top of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or
impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.
Building Code
5-14
5. Platforms, walks and driveways not more than 12 inches above grade and
not over any basement or story below and not part of an accessible route.
6. Painting, papering, interior floor covering and similar finish work.
7. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.”
(Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.4.3 Section 105.3.1 – Action on Application: Replace the second and third
sentence with the following: “Such applications may be reviewed by other departments
of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction.
Except as provided below, if the building official finds that the work described in an
application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith
conform to the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and
that the fees specified in Section 5.4.5 have been paid, the building official shall issue a
permit therefor to the applicant. The building official shall not issue any new permit for a
particular site until all expired building permits have been renewed and finally approved,
and all work originally done without permits has been issued a building permit, inspected
and finally approved. If the Director of Public Works determines that an emergency
exists, the Director of Public Works may authorize issuance of a building permit without
first requiring permit compliance on prior improvements." (Ord. 564 N.S., 4/95; Ord.
571 N.S. 11/95, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
5.4.4 Section 105.5 – Expiration: Add the following sentence after the first
sentence of Section 105.5: “For purposes of this section, the term “work” shall include
successful inspections by the building official as defined in Section 110 – Inspections.”
(Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
5.4.4.(1) Section 107.3.3 –Examination of Documents - Phased Approval: Delete
this section in its entirety. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
5.4.5 Section 109.2 – Schedule of Permit Fees: Add the following sentence to
the end of this section to read as follows: “The fee for each permit shall be charged
according to the City of Piedmont Building Permit Fee Schedule set by City Council
resolution from time to time.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S.
05/17)
5.4.5.(1) Section 109.3 – Building Permit Valuations: Add the following
sentence at the end of 109.3: “In determining the value of the construction, the building
official shall consider the contract price for the work to be performed or, if there is no
contract, such other evidence as the building official may consider relevant." (Ord. 548
N.S., 10/93; Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.4.6 Section 109.5.1 – Other Fees: Add a new Section 109.5.1 to read as
follows: "An SMIP (Strong Motion Instrumentation Program) fee set by State of
Building Code
5-15
California from time to time will be charged. The minimum SMIP fee will be $0.50."
(Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93; Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.4.7 Section 109.7 – Government Agency Exemption: Add a new Section
109.7 to read as follows: "No building permit fee shall be required for any project or
improvement to be built by or at the direction of the City of Piedmont, the County of
Alameda, the State of California and the United States of America." (Ord. 548 N.S.,
10/93; Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.4.8 Section 110.1 – Inspections, General: A new paragraph shall be added at
the end of Section 110.1 to read as follows: "A survey of the lot may be required by the
building official to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved
plans. In the case of a new residence or a detached structure, the building official shall
require a survey by a licensed land surveyor prior to approving the foundation inspection.
The foundation survey shall include the related setbacks, the elevation of the existing
grades, and the elevations of the foundation. At the completion of the framing and roof
sheathing, the survey shall include the elevations of all floors and the maximum roof
height, to verify that the structure is built according to the approved drawings.” (Ord.
564 N.S., 4/95; Ord. 571 N.S., 11/95, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 730
N.S. 05/17)
5.4.9 Section 711.4 – Protection of Underside of Floors: Add the following new
section: “The exposed underside of floors for habitable space, uninhabitable space which
supports or is attached to habitable space, or decks which are located less than 10 feet
from any structure regulated by this code, shall be protected by the installation of
materials approved for one-hour fire-resistant construction on the horizontal exterior side.
Gypsum sheathing may be covered by combustible finish materials.
Exceptions:
(1) Where exterior walls enclose the under floor area completely to grade.
(2) Where the underfloor area is equipped with an automatic fire suppression
system which conforms with the Piedmont Fire Code.
(3) A balcony or deck, whether cantilevered or supported on posts, is less than
one foot above grade or more than 15 feet above grade.
(4) A balcony or deck, whether cantilevered or supported on posts, which is
constructed as follows:
Horizontal framing members 4x8 (nominal) and larger
Posts 6x6 (nominal) and larger
Decking:
(A) 3x (nominal) decking
Building Code
5-16
(B) Ignition-resistant materials that comply with the
performance requirements of both SFM Standard 12-7A-4
and SFM Standard 12-7A-5.
(C) Exterior fire retardant wood.
(D) Non-combustible material.
(E) Any material that complies with the performance
requirements of SFM Standard 12-7A-4A when attached
exterior wall covering is also either non-combustible or
ignition-resistant material.
Exception: Wall materials may be of any material that
otherwise complies with this chapter when the decking
surface material complies with the performance
requirements of ASTM E 84 with a Class B flame spread
rating.
(5) Decks constructed over noncombustible paving which extends at least 3
feet beyond the edge of the deck and permanently prevents the growth of
plant material.
The alteration or repair of an existing deck, or balcony shall meet the above requirements,
except that if the number of linear feet of horizontal framing members to be repaired and
replaced is less than 50% of the total linear feet of all framing members, materials like
those used on the original construction may be used." (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93; Ord. 554
N.S. 5/94, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.4.10 Section 903.2 – Automatic Sprinkle Systems Where required: Add the
following to the section: “Any previously non-conforming structure that is demolished or
destroyed for any reason to the extent that more than seventy percent (70%) of the
physical building is demolished or destroyed shall be provided with approved automatic
sprinkler system as described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19. The amount of
physical building destruction or demolition shall be determined by the building official.”
(Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.4.11 Add a new Section 1207.6 – Mechanically Generated Noise Sources to
read as follows: "Machines and other devices located on the exterior of structures which
generate sounds perceptible outside the perimeters of the lot on which the machine or
other device is located shall be installed with such sound transmission control measures
to adequately minimize or eliminate the transmission of the sound to a level not to exceed
50 decibels, A-weighted, beyond property perimeters. This section is directed to and
includes, but is not limited to, pool and spa filter systems, air conditioning units, and
exterior mounted blowers for exhaust systems.” (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S.
Building Code
5-17
6/99; Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S.
05/17)
5.4.12 Section 1406.5 – Wood Shingle Siding and Other Wood Siding: Exterior
wall coverings shall be permitted to be constructed of wood shingle siding and other
wood siding complying with the following limitations:
(1) All wood shingle siding shall be fire-retardant treated to a Class B rating,
or Class C rating if the wall assembly, treatment of underlayment, or the
proposed finish is a fire-rated equivalent approved by the Building
Official.
(2) Exterior wall finishes of existing structures where openings are infilled,
but not additions to existing structures may be replaced to match the
existing wall finish, if wood shingle siding installed is Class-B fire treated.
(3 ) Framing to receive wood shingle siding or other wood siding shall be
covered with tight-fitting minimum 1/2" wood underlayment or 1/2"
exterior grade gypsum sheathing. (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S.
6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.4.13 Section 1505.1 – Roof Assemblies Fire Classification – General: Delete
section in its entirety and replace with the following: “Class A roof assemblies and roof
coverings shall be installed. Class A roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be tested in
accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL 790. In addition, fire retardant-treated wood roof
coverings shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D 2898.
Exception: Skylights and sloped glazing that comply with Chapter 24 or Section
2610.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.4.14 Section 1511.1 – Reroofing – General: Delete section in its entirety and
replace with the following: “Materials and methods of application used for recovering or
replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Section 1505.1.
Exception: Reroofing shall not be required to meet the minimum design slope
requirements of one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2 percent
slope) in Section 1507 for roofs that provide positive roof drainage.
Reroofing of an existing structure, regardless of existing roofing materials, shall conform
to the requirements of a Class-A roof for the materials used in the installation. Class-A
roofing materials may be installed over previous roof material layers if final assembly
meets requirements of California Building Code Chapter 15.
Patches and repairs exceeding 100 square feet shall meet the requirements for reroofing.
Patches and repairs of 100 square feet or less may match existing materials, including
sheathing and roofing materials, provided that all wood shingles and shakes are fire
Building Code
5-18
treated to a Class-B rating." (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.4.15 Section 1803.2 – Geotechnical Investigations Required: After the first
sentence add the following: “Geotechnical investigations shall be required:
1. For any building on a site having a slope of twenty percent (20%) or
greater.
2. At discretion of the building official based on the characteristics of the site
and the nature of the construction proposed.” (Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14)
5.4.16 Section 1805.4.3 – Drainage Discharge: Delete section in its entirety and
replace with the following: “Provisions shall be made for the control and drainage of
surface and subsurface water around buildings. Whenever plans for an improvement to
real property indicate the possibility of change in either surface or subsurface drainage, or
both, a plan for drainage control shall be submitted which shall provide for no increase or
other adverse change in drainage on any property adjacent to that on which the
improvement is to be located. The methods by which storm water is to be managed shall
be according to the latest approved provisions of the Alameda County Clean Water
Program. If adhering to these provisions is not reasonable due to site specific conditions,
then the storm water discharge shall be managed with one or more of the following
exceptions:
(1) Underground, rigid pipe via gravity flow down to the face of curb of a
street bordering the property. Any piping occurring under the city
sidewalk or other city improvements shall be cast iron pipe.
(2) Direct all concentrated storm water to a catch basin and sump pump to
deliver water to the face of curb of a street bordering the property.
(3) Gravity flow through neighboring property to the face of curb on a lower
street subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works, and a
written agreement and recorded easement mutually agreed to by the
affected neighbors.
(4) Any other method determined by the building official to be reasonable and
appropriate under the circumstances. The building official shall require
plans by a civil engineer, if necessary, based on the characteristics of the
site." (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
5.4.17 Section 1807.2 – Retaining Walls: Add the following sentence at the end
of 1807.2: "A retaining wall, any portion of which exceeds 30 inches in height measured
from the top of the footing to the top of the retaining wall, shall be designed by a
registered civil or structural engineer or architect." (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S.
6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11)
Building Code
5-19
5.4.18 Section 2113.9.2 – Spark Arrestors: Add after the first sentence of Section
2113.9.2, the following: “A spark arrester shall be required when a building permit is
issued for an improvement on the lot on which the house is located which is of a value in
excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The spark arrester must be installed before
final inspection approval.” (Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.4.19 Section 2308.3.1 – Foundation Plates or Sills: Add the following sentence at the
end of the paragraph: “All anchor bolts, seismic ties, and any other mechanical or
structural connectors to be embedded in new concrete shall be installed and be in place at
the time of the foundation form inspection.” (Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11,
Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.5 2016 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE – ADOPTED
The 2016 California Mechanical Code, Part 4 of Title 24 and its appendices, prepared by
the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference, subject to any
changes, additions or deletions set forth in this chapter. The Council, by resolution, may
from time to time designate which edition of the California Mechanical Code is currently
applicable, since said California Mechanical Code is periodically revised and the edition
so designated by Council resolution shall be the one referred to throughout this Code.
One copy of the California Mechanical Code shall be kept on file at the Department of
Public Works. (Ord. 276 N.S., 3/68; Ord. 548 N.S., 10/93, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99; Ord. 634
N.S. 12/02, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.6 2016 PIEDMONT MECHANICAL CODE – AMENDMENTS
The following listed sections of the 2016 California Mechanical Code, adopted by
Section 5.5, are amended to read as follows:
5.6.1 Section 104.5– Fees: In the first sentence, supplant “in the fee schedule,
Table 104.5”, with the following: “the Building Permit Fee Schedule set by City Council
resolution from time to time.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S.
05/17)
5.6.2 Section 104.5.4– Permit Fees: Add the following subsections:
(a) “The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this
Code shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in
computing the mechanical permit and mechanical plan review fees shall
be the total value of all construction for which the permit is issued.
(b) SMIP (Strong Motion Instrumentation Program) Fee set by the State of
California from time to time will be charged. The minimum SMIP fee
will be $0.50.
Building Code
5-20
(c) The City of Piedmont, the County of Alameda, the State of California and
the United States of America shall be exempted from the paying of any fee
for any building permit.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord.
730 N.S. 05/17)
5.6.3 Section 107.0 - Board of Appeals: Delete this section in its entirety. (Ord.
696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.6.4 Section 104.3.2 – Plan Review Fees: Delete the third paragraph in its
entirety and replace with the following: “The plan review fees specified in this subsection
are included in the permit fees specified in section 104.5.” Delete the fourth paragraph in
its entirety.” (Ord. 232 N.S., 12/62; Ord. 255 N.S., 6/65; Ord. 275 N.S., 12/67; Ord. 312
N.S., 8/73; Ord. 359 N.S., 2/78; Ord. 411 N.S., 10/80, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.6.5 Section 105.2.6 - Reinspections: Delete the fourth paragraph. (Ord. 696
N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.7 2016 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE – ADOPTED
The 2016 California Plumbing Code, Part 5 of Title 24, and its appendices, prepared by
the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference, subject to any
changes, additions or deletions set forth in this chapter. The Council, by resolution, may
from time to time designate which edition of the California Plumbing Code is currently
applicable, since said California Plumbing Code is periodically revised and the edition so
designated by Council resolution shall be the one referred to throughout this Code. One
copy of the California Plumbing Code shall be kept on file at the Department of Public
Works. (Ord. 276 N.S. 3/68; Ord. 312 N.S., 8/73; Ord. 359 N.S., 2/78, Ord. 607 N.S.
6/99; Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S.
05/17)
SEC. 5.8 2016 PIEDMONT PLUMBING CODE – AMENDMENTS
The following listed sections of the 2016 California Plumbing Code, adopted by Section
5.7, are amended to read as follows:
5.8.1 Section 104.3.2 – Plan Review Fees: Revise the third paragraph to read:
“The plan review fees specified in this subscription are included in the permit fees
specified in Section 104.5.” Delete the fourth paragraph in its entirety. (Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.8.2 Section 104.5 – Fees: In the first sentence, supplant “in the fee schedule,
Table 104.5” with the following: “by the Building Permit Fee Schedule set by City
Council resolution from time to time” and the following subsections:
Building Code
5-21
(a) The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this
code shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in
computing the plumbing permit and the plumbing plan review fees shall
be the total value of construction work for which the permit is issued.
(b) SMIP (Strong Motion Instrumentation Program) Fee set by State of
California from time to time will be charged. The minimum SMIP fee will
be $0.50.
(c) The City of Piedmont, the County of Alameda, the State of California and
the United States of America shall be exempted from the paying of any fee
for any building permit. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord.
730 N.S. 05/17)
5.8.3 Section 107.0 – Board of Appeals: Delete this section in its entirety. (Ord.
696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.8.4 Add new Subsection 601.9 to read as follows: “When new water service
piping is installed, and a ground driven electrode is nonexistent, one must be driven and
the proper electrical connections made as described in the current electrical code.” (Ord.
276 N.S., 3/68; Ord. 312 N.S., 8/73; Ord. 359 N.S., 2/78; Ord. 411 N.S., 10/80, Ord. 607
N.S. 6/99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.8.5 Section 1101.2 – Where Required: Revise this section to read as follows:
“Roofs, paved areas, yards, courts, courtyards, vent shafts, light wells, or similar areas
having rain water shall be drained into a separate storm sewer system or to some other
place of disposal satisfactory to the Authority Having Jurisdiction.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11,
Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.8.6 Section 1101.6.1 – Discharge: Revise Section 1101.6.1 to read as follows:
“Subsoil drains shall be piped to a storm drain, to an approved water course, or to the
front street curb or gutter. Where a continuously flowing spring or ground water is
encountered, subsoil drains shall be piped to a storm drain or an approved water course.”
(Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.8.7 Delete Section 1101.6.3 in its entirety. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713
N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.8.8 Delete Section 1101.6.5 in its entirety. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713
N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
5.8.9 Section 1501.3 – Permit: Delete the following exception in its entirety:
“A construction permit shall not be required for a clothes washer system meeting the
requirements of section 1502.1.1.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730
N.S. 05/17)
Building Code
5-22
5.8.10 Section 1502.1.1 – Clothes Washer System: Revise the first paragraph to
read: “A clothes washer system shall comply with the following:” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11,
Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.9 2016 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE – ADOPTED
The 2016 California Electrical Code, Part 3 of Title 24, and its annexes, prepared by the
California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference, subject to any
changes, additions or deletions set forth in this chapter. The Council, by resolution, may
from time to time designate which edition of the California Electrical Code is currently
applicable, since said California Electrical Code is periodically revised and the edition so
designated by Council resolution shall be the one referred to throughout the Code.
Revisions to the California Electrical Code will be adopted upon receipt of same. One
copy of the California Electrical Code shall be kept on file at the Department of Public
Works. (Ord. 359 N.S., 2/78, Ord. 607 N.S. 6/99; Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.10 2016 PIEDMONT ELECTRICAL CODE – AMENDMENTS
The following listed sections are added to the 2016 California Electrical Code adopted by
Section 5.9 to read as follows:
5.10.1 Section 89.108.4.2 – Fees: Add the following sentence and subsections to
the end of the paragraph to read as follows: “A fee for each electrical permit shall be paid
to the building official in accordance with the Building Permit Fee Schedule set by City
Council resolution from time to time.
(a) The determination of value or valuation under any of this Code shall be
made by the building official. The value to be used in computing the
electrical permit and electrical plan review fee shall be the total value of
all construction work for which the permit is issued.
(b) SMIP (Strong Motion Instrumentation Program) Fee set by State of
California from time to time will be charged. The minimum SMIP fee will
be $0.50.
(c) The City of Piedmont, the County of Alameda, the State of California and
the United States of America shall be exempted from the paying of any fee
for any building permit.” (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord.
730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.11 2016 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE ADOPTED
The 2016 California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6 including all of its appendices is
hereby adopted by reference. The City Council may from time to time designate by
resolution which edition of the California Energy Code is currently applicable, since the
Building Code
5-23
California Energy Code is periodically revised, and the edition currently designated by
Council resolution shall be the one referred to in the Piedmont Building Code. One copy
of the currently adopted California Energy Code shall be kept on file at the Department
of Public Works. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.12 2016 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE –
ADOPTED
The 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11 is hereby adopted
by reference, subject to any changes, additions or deletions set forth in this chapter. The
City Council may from time to time designate by resolution which edition of the
California Green Building Standards Code is currently applicable, since the California
Green Building Standards Code is periodically revised, and the edition currently
designated by Council resolution shall be the one referred to in the Piedmont Building
Code. One copy of the California Green Building Standards Code shall be kept on file at
the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730
N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.13 2016 PIEDMONT GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE –
AMENDMENTS
5.13.1 Section 301.1.1 – Additions and Alterations. [HDC]: After the first
sentence add the following: “The mandatory provisions of Chapter 4 shall also be applied
to any project with a building permit valuation greater than or equal to $50,000 as such
valuation is determined by the City’s building official. (Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.14 2016 CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE – ADOPTED
The 2016 California Referenced Standards Code, Part 12 of Title 24, including all of its
appendices is hereby adopted by reference. The City Council may from time to time
designate by resolution which edition of the California Referenced Standards Code is
currently applicable, since the California Referenced Standard Code is periodically
revised, and the edition currently designated by Council resolution shall be the one
referred to in the Piedmont Building Code. One copy of the California Referenced
Standards Code shall be kept on file at the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 696 N.S.
01/11, Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.15 2016 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE – ADOPTED
The 2016 California Administrative Code, Part 1 of Title 24, and its appendices,
prepared by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference,
subject to any changes, additions or deletions set forth in this chapter. The Council, by
resolution, may from time to time designate which edition of the California
Administrative Code is currently applicable, since said California Administrative Code is
periodically revised and the edition so designated by Council resolution shall be the one
referred to throughout this Code. One copy of the California Administrative Code shall
Building Code
5-24
be kept on file at the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 332 N.S., 9/75; Ord. 334 N.S.,
12/75; Ord. 359 N.S., 2/78, Ord. 607 N.S. 6./99, Ord. 696 N.S. 01/11, Ord. 713 N.S.
02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SEC. 5.16 2016 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE – ADOPTED
The 2016 California Historical Building Code, Part 8 of Title 24, including all of its
appendices is hereby adopted by reference. The City Council may from time to time
designate by resolution which edition of the California Historical Building Code is
currently applicable, since the California Historical Building Code is periodically revised,
and the edition currently designated by Council resolution shall be the one referred to in
the Piedmont Building Code. One copy of the California Historical Building Code shall
be kept on file at the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S.
05/17)
SEC. 5.17 2016 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE – ADOPTED
The 2016 California Existing Building Code Part 10, Title 24, and its appendices,
prepared by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference,
subject to any changes, additions or deletions set forth in this chapter. The Council, by
resolution, may from time to time designate which edition of the California Existing
Building Code is currently applicable, since said California Existing Building Code is
periodically revised and the edition so designated by Council resolution shall be the one
referred to in the City of Piedmont Building Code. One copy of the California Existing
Building Code shall be kept on file at the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 713 N.S.
02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
Building Code
5-25
Article II
STREAMLINED PERMITTING FOR
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP ENERGY SYSTEMS
SEC. 5.18 DEFINITIONS
The definitions in this section apply throughout this article unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
(a) “Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association
created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.
(b) “Common interest development” means any of the following:
(1) A community apartment project.
(2) A condominium project.
(3) A planned development.
(4) A stock cooperative.
(c) “Electronic submittal” means submission of the application via electronic mail.
(d) “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do
not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its
efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of
comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.
(e) “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease
its efficiency or specified performance” means:
(1) For Water Heater Systems or Solar Swimming Pool Heating Systems: an
amount exceeding 10 percent of the cost of the system, but in no case
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or decreasing the efficiency of
the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10 percent, as originally
specified and proposed.
(2) For Photovoltaic Systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a
decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10 percent as
originally specified and proposed.
(f) “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means a solar energy system that
meets each of the following requirements:
Building Code
5-26
(1) A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating
current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.
(2) A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural,
electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and
all state and City health and safety standards.
(3) A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family
dwelling.
(4) A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal
building height of the zone the property is located in, as defined in Chapter
17 the City Code.
(g) “Solar Energy System” means either:
(1) Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is
to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.
(2) Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to
provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. (Ord.
718 N.S. 11/15)
SEC. 5.19 APPLICABILITY
(a) This Article applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy
systems in the City.
(b) Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted
prior to the effective date of this Article are not subject to the requirements of this
Article unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially
change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a
way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or likekind
replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 718 N.S. 11/15)
SEC. 5.20 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
(a) All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and
requirements imposed by the state and the City.
(b) Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating
water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an
Building Code
5-27
accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical
Code.
(c) Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and
performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as
Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities
Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 718 N.S. 11/15)
SEC. 5.21 DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND BUILDING
OFFICIAL
(a) All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system
application shall be made available on the publicly accessible City web site.
(b) Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents shall be
made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit
applicants.
(c) An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications,
and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.
(d) The Department of Public Works shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all
requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall
comply to be eligible for expedited review.
(e) The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and
checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited
permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most
current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the
Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.
(f) All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy
systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55, 66015, 66016,
and Health and Safety Code Section 17951 as may be amended. (Ord. 718 N.S.
11/15)
SEC 5.22 PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
(a) The Department of Public Works shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary
review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy
systems within 30 days of the adoption of this Article. The Department of Public
Works shall issue a building permit within three business days of receipt of a
complete application which also meets the requirements of the approved checklist
and standard plan.
Building Code
5-28
(b) Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Official’s review of
whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety
requirements.
(c) The City shall not condition the approval of an application on the approval of an
association.
(d) If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation
required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant
for resubmission.
(e) Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Official for
small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.
(f) The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated
inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a
request and provide a two hour inspection window.
(g) If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent
inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this Article.
(Ord. 718 N.S. 11/15)
Building Code
5-29
ARTICLE III
DISCLOSURES
SEC. 5.25 DISCLOSURE REQUIRED.
(a) In order to fairly notify future City property owners of important requirements
concerning property in the City, every person who sells an interest in real property
located in the City shall provide the following to a buyer at least 10 days before
the close of escrow:
(1) A Property Records Search provided by the City Public Works
Department for a nominal fee established by the City Council. This report
shows the building permit history for the property, including which
improvements have been approved; and
(2) A disclosure statement prepared by the Director of Public Works,
outlining certain requirements concerning real property. (Ord. 695 N.S.
11/2010, Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
Building Code
5-30
ARTICLE IV
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS FOR CITY PROJECTS
SEC. 5.30 GREEN BUILDING REGULATIONS FOR CITY FACILITIES.
City owned and/or operated Permitted Use facilities in Zone B are subject to the
following regulations:
(a) Definitions. In this section:
"Building" has the same meaning as defined in division 17.90.010 of this code.
"City Project" means any new construction or Renovation of a Building owned or
occupied by a City Department or Agency.
“Covered Project” means all new Building or Renovation projects that equal or
exceed $3 million in construction costs; and are either owned or occupied by a
City Department or Agency or developed as a Public-Private Partnership.
"Green Building Compliance Official" means the Director of Public Works or the
Director’s designee.
“GreenPoint Rated” means the most recent version of the residential green
building rating program developed by Build It Green.
“Initiated” means officially identified and substantially funded to offset the costs
associated with the project.
"LEED™ Rating System" means the most recent version of the Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEEDTM) Green Building Rating System
approved by the United States Green Building Council.
“LEED™ Accredited Professional” means an individual who has passed the
LEED™ accreditation exam administered by the US Green Building Council.
“Public-Private Partnership” means any project built on city-owned land,
primarily funded by the City, or built under a Disposition and Development
Agreement with the City.
“Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification to an existing Building
or Structure, including, but not limited to, tenant improvements.
"Structure" has the same meaning as defined in division 17.90.010 of this code.
“Traditional Public Works Project” means heavy construction projects including
but not limited to such items as pump stations, flood control improvements, roads,
Building Code
5-31
and bridges, as well as traffic lights, sidewalks, bike paths, bus stops, and
associated infrastructure on City owned and maintained property.
(b) Regulations and Standards for Compliance.
(i) At all times, City staff shall maintain the most recent version of the
GreenPoint checklists and Residential Green Building Guidelines for New Home
Construction, Remodeling, and Multifamily Building; and the LEEDTM Rating
System.
(ii) LEEDTM Rating and GreenPoint Score. All Covered Projects Initiated on
or after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet either: a minimum
LEEDTM Certified rating and be so certified by the US Green Building Council or
a minimum GreenPoint Rated score of 50 and be so verified by Build It Green.
All Covered Projects shall also have a LEEDTM-Accredited Professional or a
Certified Green Building Professional as a principal member of the design team
from the beginning of the project.
(iii) Practicable Effort and Documentation. For the purposes of reducing
operating and maintenance costs in all City facilities and Public-Private
Partnership facilities, Covered Projects that do not meet the threshold that triggers
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and that have Building
construction costs greater than $200,000 are required to meet as many LEED
credits, or GreenPoint Rated measures, as practicable and are required to
complete and submit to the City’s Green Building Compliance Official the LEED
or GreenPoint checklist as a way of documenting the green building practices that
have been incorporated into the project.
(iv) Project Specifications in Bids. In developing project specifications for use
in building “Traditional Public Works Projects,” the Public Works Department
shall consider including in those specifications green building and
environmentally sound practices whenever practicable.
(c) Unusual Circumstances. Compliance with the provisions of this Article may be
waived in unusual circumstances where the City Council has, by resolution, found
and determined that the public interest would not be served by complying with
these provisions. (Ord. 680 N.S., 10/2008; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
Building Code
5-32
ARTICLE V
MISCELLANEOUS
SEC. 5.40 DEFINITIONS
Unless otherwise defined by this Code, terms in this chapter shall be as defined in
the latest editions of American Public Works Association Standard Specifications for
Public Works Construction, the California Plumbing Code, and the Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
(a) APWA: shall refer to the American Public Works Association
(b) ASTM: shall refer to the American Society for Testing and Materials.
(c) BUILDING SEWER LATERAL: The section of sewer pipe that carries sewage
and liquid waste from a point two (2) feet from the building or structure served,
up to and including the connection to the public sewer. The building sewer lateral
is comprised of the upper and lower sewer lateral and is the sole responsibility of
the property owner.
(d) CCTV: shall refer to a closed-circuit television method of inspecting any
underground sewer piping system.
(e) CITY: When used herein shall refer to the City of Piedmont
(f) CLEANOUT: A segment of pipe connected to a building sewer lateral which rises
vertically to the ground surface and provides access to the building sewer lateral
for purposes of routine inspection, flushing, and servicing in order that the
building sewer lateral remain free-flowing.
(g) CODE: Shall refer to Chapter 5, Article V of the Piedmont City Code.
(h) COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE: A certificate issued by EBMUD indicating that
a building sewer lateral complies with the requirements as set forth in the
EBMUD Regional PSL Ordinance No. 311, Title VIII.
(i) DIRECTOR: Shall mean the Director of Public Works for the City of Piedmont
and his authorized representative.
(j) EBMUD or DISTRICT: The East Bay Municipal Utility District, Special District
No. 1
Building Code
5-33
(k) EBMUD REGIONAL PSL ORDINANCE: Shall refer to East Bay Municipal
Utility District Ordinance 311, Title VIII, Regulation of Private Sewer Laterals,
its implementation and any future amendments or modifications thereto.
(l) FOG: Shall refer to Fats, Oils, and Grease in the sanitary sewer system.
(m) INFILTRATION and INFLOW (I/I): Stormwater that enters a sanitary sewer
system intended only for wastewater flows.
(n) LOWER SEWER LATERAL: That part of the building sewer lateral extending
from the property line and/or two-way cleanout to the publicly-owned sewer
main.
(o) NOTICE TO PROCEED: A written notice from the City specifying that the
temporary City action preventing the repair or replacement of any part of the
building sewer lateral is lifted and further, that the property owner shall proceed
with the repair or replacement of that part of the building sewer lateral such that
is it completed and the appropriate Compliance Certificate be obtained within the
specified time limit set by the Director.
(p) NOTICE OF VIOLATION: A written notice from the City specifying that a
building sewer lateral is not in compliance with this Code.
(q) PLUMBING CODE: Shall refer to the latest adopted edition of the California
Plumbing Code.
(r) PUBLIC SEWER: The publicly-owned collection system that carries sewage and
liquid waste from building sewer laterals to the wastewater treatment facilities.
(s) REPAIR: For purposes of this Code,” repair” means a spot mending of an existing
building sewer lateral to address a specific section of pipe that is not in
compliance with this Code.
(t) REPLACEMENT: For purposes of this Code, “replacement” means that entirely
new underground pipes, fittings, joint connections, clean-outs, caps, and other
required components of the new building sewer lateral are installed and
constructed in conformance with this Code. Complete lining of an existing
building sewer lateral in conformance with this Code shall also be considered a
replacement.
(u) SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: The entire wastewater collection system
including public sewers and all building sewer laterals.
(v) SEWER MAIN: the publicly owned sanitary sewer piping system.
Building Code
5-34
(w) STORMWATER: natural occurring water created by the weather, underground
springs, and surface or subsurface drainage of said water.
(x) UPPER SEWER LATERAL: That part of the building sewer lateral extending
from the property line and/or cleanout, running on private property to the building
or structure served. When an upper sewer lateral connects to a rear or side yard
sewer main located on private property in an easement, the entire lateral,
including the connection to the sewer main, shall be considered the building
sewer lateral.
(y) VERIFICATION TEST: A specific on-site testing of the building sewer lateral
established by EBMUD to assure compliance with the EBMUD Regional PSL
Ordinance and this Code.
(z) WASTEWATER: All sewage, industrial and other waste and waters, whether
treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.41 BUILDING SEWER LATERAL REQUIRED
(a) Building Sewer Lateral Required: Every building in which plumbing fixtures are
installed and every premise having waste drainage piping shall have a connection
to the public sewer in conformance with this Code.
(b) No Direct Discharges to Public Sewers: No person shall discharge any substance
directly to a manhole or other opening in a public sewer other than through an
approved building sewer lateral except with the written approval of the Director.
(c) Cleanout Required. In addition to the required building sewer lateral as defined in
Section 17A.2 (a) above, the property owner shall be responsible for the
installation of a two (2) way cleanout in the building sewer lateral between the
upper and lower lateral in a location approved by the Director. Such cleanout shall
be a double-wye conforming to the City of Piedmont Standard Details. (Ord. 697
N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.42 PROHIBITED USES
(a) Limitation on Use.
1. Use of the sanitary sewer system is limited to the discharge of sewage
and/or industrial wastes in such a quantity and of such a quality as shall
not endanger the condition, operation or capacity of the sanitary sewer
system and the wastewater treatment facilities.
2. No person shall discharge, deposit, or throw into a building sewer lateral
or the sanitary sewer system, any substance which may cause an
Building Code
5-35
obstruction or damage to the sewer system, or which may cause a nuisance
or hazard, or which will in any manner obstruct the efficient operation or
maintenance of the sewer system treatment facilities.
(b) Stormwater and Groundwater Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface
drainage into any building sewer lateral or public sewer.
(c) Prohibited Discharges. No discharge shall be made to a building sewer lateral or
public sewer that does not meet all requirements set by the City or the District.
No one required by the City or the District to have a waste discharge permit shall
discharge to a building sewer lateral or public sewer without a valid permit from
the City or the District.
(d) Additional Prohibited Uses. No person shall discharge any of the following
waters or waste into a building sewer lateral or the sanitary sewer system:
1. Any unpolluted industrial process water.
2. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature detrimental to the sewer system.
3. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid, or gas.
4. Any water or waste which contains fats, oils, or grease in excess of those
standards established by EBMUD and the City.
5. Any garbage, except garbage from dwellings and establishments where
food is prepared and consumed on the premises, and which has been
ground to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the
flow conditions prevailing in the public sewers. No particle shall in any
event be greater than 3/8-inch in any dimension.
6. Any sand, cement, lime, plaster, cinders, ashes, metal, glass or other heavy
solids; any straw, shavings, animal hair, feathers, paunch manure or other
fibrous matter; any tar, asphalt, resins, plastics or other viscous substance;
or any other matter of such a nature as to obstruct the flow in sewers or
cause other interference with the proper operation of the sewer system.
7. Any waters or wastes containing excessive amounts of acid, alkali, or
dissolved sulfide, or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to sanitary sewer system structures, equipment
or personnel.
Building Code
5-36
8. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the operation and
maintenance of the sanitary sewer system.
9. Any waters or wastes containing more than 500 milligrams per liter of
suspended solids.
10. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
11. Any radioactive wastes.
12. Any waste having more than 1 milligram per liter of sulfides.
13. Any waste having a pH of less than 5.5 or more than 10.5.
14. Any material that obstructs or prevents the effective maintenance or
normal operation of the building sewer lateral or sewer main.
(e) Special Agreements. The City, the District, and any individual or industrial
concern discharging any water or waster of unusual strength, character,
composition or volume into the sanitary sewer system may enter into a contract
permitting such discharge. If the discharge shall cause additional or extraordinary
expense to the City, the individual or industrial concern shall be required to
reimburse the City as determined by the Director.
(f) Sampling Structures. The Director shall have the right to require any property
owner to construct and maintain, at their own expense, a sampling structure in an
accessible location for the purpose of sampling and determining the flow of
sewage or industrial wastes through their building sewer lateral. The design of
the structure shall be completed by a licensed engineer approved by the Director.
(Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC.5.43 BUILDING SEWER LATERAL CONNECTION BOND AND
BUILDING PERMIT
(a) Bond Required. If required by the Director, every person engaged in the business
of installing building sewer laterals in the City, which installation will connect to
any sewer main owned by the City, shall deposit with the City Clerk the sum of
one thousand dollars ($1,000) as a guarantee that all such installations will be
accomplished in the manner specified by the Director and in accordance with this
Code. Said bond shall be held for one year following completion and acceptance
of the installation. As an alternative to the deposit of cash as called for herein,
this requirement may be satisfied (a) with a surety company bond in a form and
with a bonding company acceptable to the City Clerk in the amount of the cash
deposit of (b) with an interest bearing deposit in the amount of the cash deposit,
Building Code
5-37
which deposit would be assigned to the City in a form and with a depository
acceptable to the city clerk, all for the purposes of carrying out the requirements
set forth herein, and upon satisfactory compliance with such requirements, the
bond or interest bearing deposit shall be released by the City.
(b) Permit Required. A written permit shall be obtained from the Director before
construction, repair, or abandonment of a building sewer lateral. However, no
permit shall be required for the clearance of sewer stoppages in a privately-owned
building sewer lateral.
(c) Permit Application. The applicant or applicant's representative shall apply in
person for the permit. No permit shall be issued until the following has been
submitted by the applicant and approved by the Director.
1. Site plan showing the proposed location of the building sewer lateral
including location of the connection to the public sewer and of all clean
outs on the building sewer lateral.
2. List of materials that shall be used to construct the building sewer lateral.
3. Verification that the contractor to permit construction/repairs of the
building sewer lateral has an active City business license.
4. Payment of sewer permit fees as follows:
a. For a new sewer connection and inspection thereof, the applicant
shall pay the current New Sewer Connection Fee as set from time
to time by a resolution of the City Council.
b. For replacement or repair of a building sewer lateral and inspection
thereof, the permit fee shall be in accordance with the City
Building Permit Fees as set from time to time by a resolution of the
City Council.
(d) Form and Conditions of the Permit. The permit, when signed by the Director,
shall constitute permission to do the work. The permit shall be void if the work is
not commenced and completed within the period specified on the permit unless an
extension of time is granted in writing by the Director. Permits shall not be
transferable.
(e) Notice of Commencement of Work. The permitee shall give notice of the time of
commencement of the work to the Director and Underground Service Alert, as
required by law, at least forty-eight (48) hours before the work is started. Similar
notice shall be given to the Police Department, Fire Department and utility
companies if required on the permit.
Building Code
5-38
(f) Revocation of Permit. The Director may revoke a building sewer lateral permit
for non-compliance with any applicable laws or regulations.
(g) Final Inspection. Unless otherwise deemed an exception by this Code, any
building permit issued by the City for any property that is subject to the
provisions of this Code and the EBMUD Regional PSL Ordinance shall not
receive a Final Inspection unless a Compliance Certificate is issued by EBMUD
and filed with the City. (Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.44 BUILDING SEWER LATERAL: STANDARDS, DESIGN, AND
MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION
(a) Standards:
1. All construction standards and methods shall comply with the City of
Piedmont Standard Plans, the current adopted edition of the California
Plumbing Code, the latest edition of the APWA Standard Specifications
for Public Works Construction, applicable standard of the American
Society for Testing and Materials, and the current edition of the EBMUD
Regional PSL Ordinance. The Director shall be responsible for resolving
possible conflicts between any of these standards.
(b) Design:
1. All aspects of the building sewer lateral design, including but not limited
to the size, slope, and alignment, the method of excavation, placing of the
pipe, testing of the building sewer lateral and the backfilling the trench
shall be in conformance with this code, the current adopted edition of the
California Plumbing Code, the latest edition of the APWA Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction, and the current edition of
the EBMUD Regional PSL Ordinance. All connection joints shall be
watertight and free of defects and shall conform to the standards as set
forth in ASTM D 3212. All gaskets shall conform to the standard set forth
in ASTM F477.
2. Any new connection of a new building sewer lateral to the sewer main, or
any connection of a new building sewer lateral to an existing fitting at the
sewer main, shall be inspected by the Director prior to the actual
connection construction occurring for verification of the proper design,
materials, and methods, which shall be in compliance with this Code.
Unauthorized and non-comforming connections to the sewer main can
only be repaired by the City. The cost of repairing any unauthorized or
non-conforming connections to the sewer main shall be the responsibility
of the property owner to which such connection serves.
Building Code
5-39
3. Whenever possible, the building sewer lateral shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. Within buildings where
any interior building sewage drain is below the building sewer lateral such
that proper flow via gravity as specified by this Code cannot be achieved,
this sanitary sewage can be discharged by means of an approved
mechanical sewage pump facility and discharged into the building sewer
system. The design of said pumping system shall be in accordance with
this Code, other applicable regulations, and receive the approval of the
Director during the building permit plan check process.
(c) Materials:
1. All materials used in the construction, repair, or replacement of any
building sewer lateral shall be in conformance with the City of Piedmont
Standard Plans, the current adopted edition of the California Plumbing
Code, the latest edition of the APWA Standard Specifications for Public
Works Construction, applicable standard of the American Society for
Testing and Materials. (Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.45 BUILDING SEWER LATERAL STANDARDS for MEASUREMENTS,
TESTS, AND ANALYSES
(a) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters, wastewaters
and their conveyance to which reference is made in this Code, shall be determined
in accordance with the latest editions of the EBMUD Regional PSL Ordinance ,
APWA Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, the California
Plumbing Code, and the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association and the
American Water Works Association. (Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S,
04/2017)
SEC. 5.46 ABANDONMENT OF EXISTING BUILDING SEWERS
(a) An existing building sewer lateral or its connection, which is to be abandoned
shall be removed or sealed with a permanent, watertight plug at the connection to
the public sewer in a manner satisfactory to the Director. All other openings of the
abandoned building sewer lateral including plumbing connections, clean outs, rat
holes, etc. shall also be similarly sealed.
SEC. 5.47 BUILDING SEWER LATERAL: MAINTENANCE and REQUIRED
INSPECTION
(a) Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to perform all
required maintenance, repairs and inspections to keep the building sewer lateral in
the condition as specified by paragraph (b)1 below.
Building Code
5-40
(b) Required Maintenance.
1. The building sewer lateral must be maintained to meet the following
minimum requirements:
a. The building sewer lateral shall be kept free from roots, grease
deposits, and other solids which may impede the flow or obstruct
the transmission of waste.
b. All joints shall be tight and all pipes shall be sound to prevent
exfiltration by waste or infiltration by groundwater or stormwater.
c. The building sewer lateral pipe shall be free of any structural
defects, cracks, breaks, or missing portions and the grade shall be
uniform without sags or offsets.
d. No area drains, foundation drains, roof leaders, sump pumps or
other direct connections that allow stormwater or groundwater into
the building sewer lateral will be allowed.
e. The building sewer lateral shall have a two-way clean out located
approximately at the property line or, in the case where the
building sewer is all within private property, in a location approved
by the Director. All clean outs shall be securely capped with an
approved cap at all times, except during maintenance activities.
f. The building sewer lateral shall be free from breaks, openings, and
rat holes.
g. The building sewer lateral shall be free of any material that
obstructs or prevents the effective maintenance or normal
operation of the building sewer lateral or the City sewer main.
h. Property owners and food service operators are required to control
the discharge of fats, oils, and grease (FOG) into the sanitary sewer
system from their properties or food service establishments, and
not cause or contribute to FOG related sanitary sewer overflows,
blockages, or increased maintenance in the sanitary sewer
systemsaccording to the current standards established by EBMUD
and the City.
2. The Director shall determine the criteria and acceptable methods of
evaluating building sewers to ensure compliance with the above
requirements.
(c) Required Inspections, Replacement and Compliance Certificate
Building Code
5-41
1. OWNER RESPONSIBILITES: It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to perform all required inspections of their building sewer
lateral, obtain all required building permits, perform all required
construction, schedule and pass the EBMUD Verification Test, obtain and
file with the City, a Compliance Certificate from EBMU, and obtain a
Final Inspection from the City for their building sewer lateral when one or
more of the following triggering events occurs:
a. TITLE TRANSFER: Prior to the sale or transfer of an entire real
property estate or the fee interest in that real property estate and
does not include the sale or transfer of partial interest, including a
leasehold. In addition, the following shall not be considered a
“title transfer” for purposes of Chapter 17A:
(i) transfer by a fiduciary in the course of the administration of
a decedent’s estates, guardianship, conservatorship, or trust.
(ii) transfer from one co-owner to one or more other coowners,
or from one or more co-owners into or from a
revocable trust, if the trust is for the benefit of the grantor
or grantors.
(iii) transfer made by a trustor to fund a living trust.
(iv) transfer made to a spouse, to a registered domestic partner
as defined in Section 297 of the State of California Family
Code, or to a person or persons in the lineal line of cosanguinity
of one or more of the transferors.
(v) transfers between spouses or registered domestic partners
resulting from a decree of dissolution of marriage or
domestic partnership, or a decree of legal separation or
from a property settlement agreement incidental to a
decree.
b. CONSTRUCTION and REMODELNG: Whenever a property
owner or authorized agent applies for a building permit for any
type of construction on the subject property that exceeds $100,000
in construction cost.
c. CHANGE IN WATER SERVICE SIZE: Whenever a property
owner or authorized agent applies to EBMUD to increase or
decrease the size of the property’s water meter.
Building Code
5-42
d. NOTICE OF VIOLATION: Whenever a property owner or
authorized agent has received a written Notice of Violation from
the City with respect to the condition of the building sewer lateral
based on testing conducted by the City or its authorized
representative.
e. CITY INSPECTION: Whenever the property owner or authorized
agent has received a written communication from the City with
respect to the condition of the building sewer lateral based on
observations from the City or its authorized representative.
2. INDIVIDUALLY OWNED UNITS IN A MULTI UNIT BUILDING: For
all individually-owned units within a multi-unit building, such as a
condominium, which is served by a single or shared building sewer
lateral(s) the homeowners’ association or the responsible party for this
type of multi-unit building, shall be responsible for compliance to the
following requirements within ten (10) years of the adoption of this Code.
a. authorize the required inspection(s) to determine if the building
sewer lateral(s) serving said property are, as determined by the
Director, in compliance with this Code and the EBMUD Regional
PSL Ordinance.
b. if repair or replacement is required by the Director, obtain the
required building permit, perform such work, and obtain the
required inspections as specified by this Code.
c. obtain a Compliance Certificate from EBMUD as specified in the
EBMUD Regional PSL Ordinance and a Final Inspection from the
City as specified in this Code.
3. EXCEPTIONS
a. A property owner of a structure may request an exemption from
EBMUD if the building sewer lateral is less than 10 years old from
the date of any triggering event described above, and said property
owner provides a valid building permit showing that the building
sewer lateral was replaced in total, received a Final Inspection, and
said building sewer lateral is deemed by the Director to not
otherwise be in violation of this Code.
b. If at the time of repair or replacement of any building sewer lateral,
there is an action in place by the City that would prevent the repair
or replacement of the lower sewer lateral in compliance with this
Code, the City may temporarily waive the requirements of this
Code for the lower sewer lateral. In such case, a Compliance
Building Code
5-43
Certificate will only be required for the upper sewer lateral. Upon
conclusion of the City action, the City will rescind the waiver and
shall issue a Notice to Proceed to the affected property owner, now
directing them to complete the repair or replacement of the lower
sewer lateral within a specific time limit such that the lower sewer
lateral will be in compliance with this Code and the EBMUD
Regional PSL Ordinance. Failure to obtain a valid Compliance
Certificate for the lower sewer lateral in a timely manner and to
otherwise not comply with the terms in the Notice to Proceed
shall constitute a violation of this Code and will be subject to
enforcement by the City according to this Code. (Ord. 697 N.S.,
02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.48 REQUIRED TIME OF COMPLIANCE
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to comply with all time limits
set forth by the Director for any work related to this Code that is pertinent to their
property. The time limit for compliance will be established by the Director and
specified in the first written communication and/or Notice of Violation to the
property owner. Non-compliance in excess of said time limits may be deemed a
violation of this Code and could subject the property owner to Cost Recovery and
Administrative Penalties as specified in this Code.
(b) Emergency Work: Nothing in this Code shall prevent any reasonable person from
doing such work and making such excavations as may be necessary for the
preservation of life or property when such necessity arises; provided, however,
that the person doing such work or excavations shall obtain a building permit as
specified in this Code on the next working day.
(c) Right of Entry: The Director may enter, inspect, and test any buildings, structures,
or premises to secure compliance or prevent a violation of any portion of this
Code. No premises shall be entered until a reasonable notice is given to the
property owner or authorized agent except to protect life or public safety.
(d) Emergency Work by City
1. Whenever, in the opinion of the Director, the public health, safety, or
welfare shall require that repairs or protective measures to a building
sewer lateral be made or instituted immediately, he is hereby authorized to
proceed with all necessary work to abate the condition and may enter upon
private property for such purpose. He may erect and maintain all
necessary barricades, warning lights, and other protective devices upon
public or private property. He shall notify the owner of the premises as the
circumstances shall permit.
Building Code
5-44
2. The owner of the property upon which the condition exists and the person
creating such condition shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for
all costs incurred by it in abating the emergency condition and erecting
and maintaining said protective devices.
(e) Order to Abate: The Director shall investigate all dangerous and unsanitary
conditions existing in or about building sewers laterals and shall periodically
require that building sewer laterals be tested. If such a condition is a menace to
life, health, safety, or property, or is in violation of law, he shall, in writing, order
the owner of the premises to discontinue use of the sewer, or to discontinue all
construction work with respect to the sewer, and to abate the condition in such
manner as shall comply with the law. Any stoppage in the building sewer lateral
or break in the watertight integrity of the building sewer lateral shall be
conclusively presumed to be a menace to life, health, safety or property for
purposes of requiring abatement of such a condition.
(f) Time Requirement for Emergency Building Sewer Lateral Repair: Upon
notification by the City of a faulty building sewer lateral which has been deemed
an emergency situation by the Director, the property owner shall repair or replace
said faulty building sewer lateral within forty-eight (48) hours from the date of
notification, verbal or written. If the property owner fails to comply with said
order, the City shall have the right to make or have made the necessary repairs
and recover said costs as authorized by this Code. (Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord.
728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.49 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
(a) Every person owning real property which is connected to the City sanitary sewer
facilities shall pay a charge for sewer service based upon the use of such property
in accordance with Chapter 20E of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011;
Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.50 SEWER CONNECTION CHARGE FUND
(a) The Sewer Connection Charge fund is hereby established. Money collected by
the City for sewer connection charges as herein set forth shall be placed in the
Sewer Connection Charge Fund and shall be used only to expand the capacity of
the sewer system by construction or modification and activities required thereby.
(Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.51 SEPTIC TANKS and CESSPOOLS PROHIBITED
(a) Septic tanks and cesspools are specifically prohibited in the City notwithstanding
any statement in the latest adopted edition of the Plumbing Code to the contrary.
(Ord. 479 N.S., 11/1986, Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
Building Code
5-45
SEC. 5.52 COST RECOVERY – BUILDING SEWER LATERAL OVERFLOWS
(a) The City shall have the authority to recover from the property owner, the City’s
expenses incurred in responding to, abating, or repairing any sewer overflow from
a defective building sewer not otherwise addressed by the property owner in a
timely manner as specified in this Code. The City may collect the incurred costs
by use of all legal means, including the recordation of a lien against said property.
(Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.53 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES – NON COMPLIANCE
(a) The City shall have the authority to assess administrative penalties on the property
for the property owner’s failure to meet any requirement of this code, or for
continued violation of any requirement of this code, according to the following
schedule. The City may collect the incurred costs by use of all legal means,
including the recordation of a lien against said property. The City shall have the
authority to waive, suspend, or otherwise modify any administrative penalty
established by this code.
(1) $500 for the first violation which remains out of compliance in excess of
the time limit established in the first Notice of Violation.
(2) $1,000 for the second violation occurring within three(3) years of the first
violation.
(3) $2,500 for each additional violation exceeding two (2) violations within
three (3) years of the first violation. (Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728
N.S, 04/2017)
SEC. 5.54 ADOPTION OF THE EBMUD REGIONAL PSL ORDINANCE
(a) The East Bay Municipal Utility District Ordinance 311, Title VIII, Regulation of
Private Sewer Laterals is hereby adopted by reference. The City Council may
from time to time designate by resolution, any amendments or modifications to
the ordinance thereto, as the ordinance may be periodically revised by the District.
One copy of the EBMUD Regional PSL Ordinance shall be kept on file at the
Department of Public Works. (Ord. 697 N.S., 02/2011; Ord. 728 N.S, 04/2017)
Building Code
5-46
ARTICLE VI.
EXPEDITED PERMITTING FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING
SYSTEMS
SEC. 5.60 DEFINITIONS
The definitions in this section apply throughout this article unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
Association means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the
purpose of managing a common interest development.
Electric vehicle charging station or charging station means an electric vehicle supply
equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the
California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this Article, and delivers
electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
Electronic submittal means the submittal of the application utilizing electronic mail, the
internet, or facsimile.
Specific adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact,
based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or
conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 734
N.S., 09/2017)
SEC. 5.61 EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCESS
Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall
implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging
stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging
stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited,
streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained
in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting
Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness
Guidebook” as published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The City’s
adopted checklist shall be published on the City’s website. (Ord. 734 N.S., 09/2017)
SEC. 5.62 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING
(a) Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that
the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific,
adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification
by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and
loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building
infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits;
areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.
Building Code
5-47
(b) A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the City’s
adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon
confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and supporting
documents meet the requirements of the City’s adopted checklist, and are
consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the Building
Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the
application and issue all necessary permits. Electric vehicle charging stations
cannot be installed or utilized until approval is granted by the Building Official. If
the Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or
she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be
eligible for expedited permit issuance.
(c) Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall
allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this Ordinance
and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications,
the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms,
applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant.
(Ord. 734 N.S., 09/2017)
SEC. 5.63 TECHNICAL REVIEW
(a) The permitting requirements in this article do not supersede the Building
Official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. The Building
Official may deny an application to install an electric vehicle charging station
only if the Building Official makes written findings based upon substantial
evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific,
adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall
include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing
the adverse impact. The decision of the Building Official to deny an application
to install an electric vehicle charging station may be appealed to the Planning
Commission in accordance with Division 17.78 of Chapter 17 of this code.
(b) The City shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station
permit on the approval of such a system by an association. (Ord. 734 N.S.,
09/2017)
SEC. 5.64 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION INSTALLATION
REQUIREMENTS
(a) Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the
California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National
Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as
Building Code
5-48
Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a
Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety and reliability.
(b) Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding,
disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the
requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California
Electrical Code.
(c) Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load
calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the
requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging
equipment shall be considered a continuous load.
(d) Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging
stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential
Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s
installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect
building elements. (Ord. 734 N.S., 09/2017)
Rev. 2017-10-05 (Ord. 734 N.S.)
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-1
Chapter 5A
DISASTERS AND EMERGENCIES1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§5A.1 Purposes of chapter
§5A.2 "Emergency" defined
§5A.3 Disaster council-created; composition; officers
§5A.4 Same - Powers and duties generally; meetings
§5A.5 Director and assistant director of emergency services - Designated
§5A.6 Same - Powers and duties
§5A.7 Emergency organization
§5A.8 Emergency plan
§5A.9 Expenditures
§5A.10 Prohibited acts
ARTICLE II. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
§5A.11 Definitions
§5A.12 General Provisions
§5A.13 Administration
§5A.14 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 5A.1 PURPOSES OF CHAPTER
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out
of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of any
emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency
functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected
private persons. (Ord. No. 301 N.S., §1)
SEC. 5A.2 "EMERGENCY" DEFINED
As used in this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of
conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City
caused by such conditions as fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other conditions,
including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions
resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of
the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of
other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. No. 301 N.S., §2)
For state Emergency Services Act, see Gov. C. §8550 et seq. As to local disaster councils, see Gov. C §§8610 to
8614. As to local emergency, see Gov. C. §§8630 to 8634.
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-2
SEC. 5A.3 DISASTER COUNCIL-CREATED; COMPOSITION; OFFICERS
The City Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:
(a) The City Administrator, who shall be chairman.
(b) The Fire Chief, who shall be vice-chairman.
(c) The Police Chief.
(d) Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other
organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by
the director with the advice and consent of the City Council. (Ord. 725 N.S.
12/16; Ord. 301 N.S.)
SEC. 5A.4 SAME POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY; MEETINGS
It shall be the duty of the City Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop
and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and
agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to
implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman
or, in his absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman.
(Ord. No. 301 N.S., §4)
SEC. 5A.5 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES -
DESIGNATED
(a) There is hereby created the Office of Director of Emergency Services. The City
Administrator shall be the Director of Emergency Services.
(b) There is hereby created the Office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services,
who shall be the Fire Chief. (Ord. 725 N.S. 12/16; Ord. 301 N.S.)
SEC. 5A.6 SAME - POWERS AND DUTIES
(a) The director, or during his absence, inability to act or at his direction, the assistant
director is hereby empowered to:
(1) Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence
of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue such
proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local
emergency is proclaimed by the director, the City Council shall take
action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the
proclamation shall not no further force or effect.
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-3
(2) Request the governor of the state to proclaim a "state of emergency"
when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are
inadequate to cope with the emergency.
(3) Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for
the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.
(4) Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the
emergency organization of this City, and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them.
(5) Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on
matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.
(6) In the event of a proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided,
the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the governor or the director
of the state office of emergency services or the existence of a "state of war
emergency", the director is hereby empowered:
a. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such
emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations
must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City
Council.
b. To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property
and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required
immediately, to commandeer the same for public use.
c. To require emergency services of any City officer or employee
and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in
the county in which this City is located or the existence of a "state
of war emergency" to command the aid of as many citizens of this
community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties.
Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and
immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster
service workers.
d. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City
department or agency.
e. To execute all of his ordinary power as chief administrative
officer, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this
chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto
adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him by
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-4
any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council and by
any other lawful authority.
(b) The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that
office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise
perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City
Council.
(c) The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the
assistance of emergency services chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency
programs of this City, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the
director. (Ord. No. 301 N.S., §6)
SEC. 5A.7 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATIONS
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to
aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement
or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of paragraph
(a)(6)c. of Section 5A.6, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in
this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City. (Ord.
No. 301 N.S., §7)
SEC. 5A.8 EMERGENCY PLAN
The City Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City
emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of
this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state or
emergency or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers, and duties,
services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. No. 301 N.S., §8)
SEC. 5A.9 EXPENDITURES
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid
activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the
inhabitants and property of the City. (Ord. No. 301 N.S., §9)
SEC. 5A.10 PROHIBITED ACTS
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or
by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:
(a) Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in
the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the
performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of his chapter.
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-5
(b) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this
chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to
imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense
or protection thereof.
(c) Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by
the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. No. 301 N.S., §10)
ARTICLE II. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
SEC. 5A.11 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so
as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most
reasonable application.
a. Area of Special Flood Hazard means the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
b. Base flood means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equalled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the
term used throughout this ordinance.
c. Building - see Structure
d. Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment
or materials.
e. Flood or Flooding means:
1. a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by
flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid & flowing mud
on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a
current of water & deposited along the path of the current.
2. the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body
of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents
of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
this definition.
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-6
f. Floodplain or Flood-prone Area means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source - see Flooding.
g. Floodplain Administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations, the Director of Public Works.
h. Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
i. Floodplain Management Regulations means this ordinance and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of
police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which
provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
j. Governing body is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is
empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health,
safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
k. Historic structure means any structure that is
1. listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
2. certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
3. individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of Interior; or
4. individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.
l. Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-7
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
m. Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
n. New Construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
o. One-Hundred-Year Flood or "100-year flood" - see Base flood.
p. Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle which is
1. built on a single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
3. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
4. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
q. Start of Construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new
development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the
permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
r. Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-8
s. Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
t. Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either
1. any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
(Ord. 665 N.S. 07/06)
SEC. 5A.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS
5A.12.1 Land to Which this Ordinance Applies. This ordinance shall apply to all areas
identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of City of Piedmont
5A.12.2 Basis for Establishing Flood-Prone Areas. The Floodplain Administrator shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other
Federal or state agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the
jurisdiction of City of Piedmont. This data will be on file at 120 Vista Avenue,
Piedmont, CA 94611.
5A.12.3 Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this
ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City
Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
5A.12.4 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or
deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-9
restrictions shall prevail.
5A.12.5 Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all
provisions shall be
A. considered as minimum requirements;
B. liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
5A.12.6 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by
this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of City Council any officer or
employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
5A.12.7 Severability. This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to
be severable. Should any section of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 665 N.S. 07/06)
SEC. 5A.13 ADMINISTRATION
5A.13.1 Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained
for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including
the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such
construction or other development is within flood-prone areas.
5A.13.2 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Director of Public Works is
hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this ordinance by
granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.
5A.13.3 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and
responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited
to the following.
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-10
A. Permit Review. Review all development permit applications to determine
that
1. permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied,
2. all other required state and federal permits have been obtained, and
3. the site is reasonably safe from flooding.
B. Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. The Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
data available from other Federal or state agency or other source.
SEC. 5A.14 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
5A.14.1 Standards of Construction. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all
new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes,
shall:
A. Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
B. Be constructed:
1. with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
2. using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
3. with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
Disasters & Emergencies
5A-11
5A.14.2 Standards for Subdivisions or Other Proposed New Development. If a
subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured
home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be
reviewed to assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
within the floodprone area;
B. All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
C. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
5A.14.3 Standards for Utilities.
A. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate:
1. infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and
2. discharge from the systems into flood waters.
B. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 665 N.S. 07/06)
Rev. 2016-12-21
Abatement of Nuisances
6-1
Chapter 6
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
§6.1 Purpose
§6.2 Applicability
§6.3 Definitions
§6.4 Unlawful Activities
§6.5 Notice of Public Nuisance and Order to Abate
§6.6 Appeal and Hearing Request
§6.7 Hearing Officers
§6.8 Hardship Waiver
§6.9 Hearing Procedure
§6.10 Decision on Appeal
§6.11 Abatement by City
§6.12 Recoverable Costs
§6.13 Failure to Pay Recoverable Costs
§6.14 Lien Procedure
§6.15 Public Hearing and Protests of Proposed Liens
§6.16 Recording of Lien
§6.17 Satisfaction of Lien
§6.18 Summary Abatement
§6.19 Treble Abatement Cost for Repeat Public Nuisance
§6.20 Method of Service
SEC. 6.1 PURPOSE
It is declared to be in the public interest to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City by providing procedures for the enforcement of the Piedmont City Code and
for the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.2 APPLICABILITY
Whenever a public nuisance is declared, it may be abated in accordance with the procedures
provided in this chapter. The procedures set forth in this chapter are not exclusive but are in
addition to any other remedies, including, but not limited to, criminal penalties, civil injunction,
administrative citations pursuant to Chapter 1 of the Piedmont City Code, denial of permits or
the forfeiture or revocation of permits, and any other legal means available. The seeking of other
remedies shall not preclude the simultaneous commencement of proceedings pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
Abatement of Nuisances
6-2
SEC. 6.3 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
“City Compliance Officer” means the contractor, officer or employee designated by the City
Administrator for enforcing the Piedmont City Code.
“Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written,
marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any real or personal property, or other inscribed
material which remains on the exterior of any building, fence or other structure for at least
seventy-two (72) hours and is visible from a public street, alley or any adjoining property.
“Hearing Officer” means the City Administrator or a person designated by the City
Administrator to serve as the presiding officer for hearings on matters related to the
administrative abatement of nuisances, subject to the requirements of Section 6.7.
“Notice and order to abate” means the written notice and order to abate given by the City
Compliance Officer in accordance with this chapter.
“Owner” means the record owner of real property according to Alameda County’s latest
equalized property tax assessment roll or on the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, or
the person who owns or is in control of any personal property.
“Person” means and includes a natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority
stockholders, corporate officers, trustees and general partners of a legal entity.
“Property” means any real or personal property located within the City and any improvement,
structure, or portion thereof, located on real property.
“Responsible person” means the owner or any person or persons in charge of the property on
which a violation of the Piedmont City Code exists, or the person or persons responsible for an
event or incident that constitutes a violation of the Piedmont City Code, and shall include, but is
not limited to, any of the following: (1) a person who, by action or inaction (whether acting alone
or with one or more other persons), causes, maintains, permits, or allows a code violation; (2) a
person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor, by action or inaction, causes,
maintains, permits, or allows a code violation; (3) an owner of real property on which a code
violation occurs; (4) a lessee or sub-lessee with the current right of possession of real property on
which a code violation occurs; (5) the person or persons in charge of the property where the
violation occurs; and (6) the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, general
partners and any other person with the legal authority to act for a legal entity that is a responsible
person under subsections (1) through (5) above. If the responsible person is a minor or
incompetent, the parents or guardians of such minor persons shall be deemed responsible
persons.
Abatement of Nuisances
6-3
“Unreasonable state of partial construction” means any unfinished building or structure: (i)
which has been under construction more than one (1) year or where no substantial work has
occurred for more than six (6) months; and (ii) because of the incomplete construction or exterior
finish, the building or structure substantially detracts from the safety of the immediate
neighborhood or otherwise adversely affects neighboring properties.
“Weeds” means weeds, as defined by Government Code Section 39561.5 or successor statutes,
growing in or on streets, sidewalks, and private property in the City. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017;
Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.4 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES
It is unlawful for any responsible person by action or inaction (whether acting alone or with one
or more other persons) to cause, maintain, permit, or allow a nuisance. The following conditions
or actions constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to this chapter:
A. Anything declared by state law, judicial action or resolution of the City Council to
be a nuisance and not otherwise described as a nuisance in this chapter;
B. Rubbish, refuse, unsightly accumulations of dirt, sand, gravel, and the like on
parkways, sidewalks, streets or private property in the City. Garbage cans must
be reasonably screened from view, except when temporarily placed near a public
street to be emptied;
C. Any structure, other improvement, activity, use, or act on private or public
property which is in violation of the provisions of the Piedmont City Code;
D. Any violation of a permit issued by the City or conditions of development
approval;
E. Tangible personal property not intended for outdoor use (including but not limited
to broken or discarded furniture, household equipment, and furnishings, or
shopping carts) which is stored on property so as to be visible from a public street
or public space;
F. Overgrown vegetation that is likely to harbor rats, vermin or other rodents;
obstruct the view of drivers on public streets or private driveways; impede,
obstruct or deny pedestrian or other lawful travel on sidewalks, walkways, or
other public rights-of-way; or provide concealment or shelter to trespassers;
G. Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous vegetation visible from a public street or
public space;
Abatement of Nuisances
6-4
H. Packing boxes, cardboard boxes, lumber, trash, barrels, drums, salvage materials,
vehicle parts or other debris kept on the property for more than sixty days, and
visible from a public street or public space;
I. Conditions dangerous to persons on the property, including but not limited to
abandoned, broken, neglected or hazardous equipment, machinery, appliances,
refrigerators, freezers, and hazardous pools, ponds, and excavations;
J. Vehicles in residential zoning districts which are wrecked, inoperable or in a state
of partial repair, when visible from a public space;
K. Vehicles in commercial zoning districts which are wrecked, inoperable or in a
state of partial repair, when visible from a public space, unless located at an
operational service station which is conducting repairs on the vehicle or at a
commercial vehicle storage facility;
L. Buildings which appear to be abandoned, partially destroyed, left in an
unreasonable state of partial construction or have been declared substandard or
dangerous by the Director of Public Works;
M. Buildings with windows and doors containing broken or missing glass panes,
except where covered by plywood or other material pursuant to a City permit.
Plywood or other material used to cover such window and door space for more
than two (2) weeks shall be painted in a color or colors compatible with the
remainder of the building;
N. Building exteriors, walls, fences, driveways, sidewalks or walkways which
present a public safety hazard, such as cracked, uneven or broken sidewalks;
O. Construction equipment of any type or description, including scaffolding, parked
or stored on property when it is visible from a public street or other public space,
except during excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an
active building permit which are in progress on the property or an adjoining
property;
P. Construction or grading (ongoing or completed) without proper approvals and
permits, and construction not conforming to or in excess of approvals and permits
obtained;
Q. Obstruction of watercourses, including but not limited to uneven, cracked or
broken curb, gutter, ditches, and stormwater conveyance systems;
R. The unpermitted release, discharge, placement, spill or deposit of any hazardous
substance or waste on private or public property
Abatement of Nuisances
6-5
S. The unpermitted release, discharge, placement, spill or deposit of materials,
hazardous or otherwise, in or on City streets, the public right-of-way, storm drains
or creeks;
T. Conditions creating or contributing to a substantial likelihood of an unpermitted
release, discharge, placement, spill or deposit of materials, hazardous or
otherwise, in or on City streets, the public right-of-way, storm drains or creeks, as
determined by the Director of Public Works;
U. Conditions that support the development, attraction or maintenance of vectors;
V. Storage of mobile homes, trailers, boats, camp cars, and recreational vehicles at a
residence unless adequately screened from view from a street or other property,
not including boats, mobile homes, and trailers stored on paved or graveled
driveway;
W. Boats, trailers, or mobile homes which are not currently registered with the
Department of Motor Vehicles located on a paved or graveled driveway for a
period in excess of sixty (60) days;
X. Placement of personal property or sports equipment, such as basketball standards,
soccer goals, and skate ramps, in the public right of way on arterials or major
collector streets, or in a manner that blocks the public right of way;
Y. Weeds;
Z. Property with inadequate landscaping, turf or plant material which causes
excessive dust for an unreasonable period of time;
AA. Graffiti;
BB. Maintenance of property so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance
standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the
enjoyment and use of such adjacent properties;
CC. Exterior lighting causing detrimental light pollution, glare onto a neighboring
property, or unsafe conditions on public roadways. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord.
518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.5 NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND ORDER TO ABATE
A. Whenever a City Compliance Officer determines that a nuisance exists, the officer shall
have the authority to give a written notice and order to abate to the owner and/or
responsible person with content substantially similar to the following form:
Abatement of Nuisances
6-6
[Name and address of responsible person]
NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you have been identified as the responsible person for
a condition constituting a nuisance in violation of the Piedmont City Code. The violation
must be abated. The public nuisance is on property commonly known as [insert address
or other legal property description] and more particularly described by the Alameda
County Assessor as [APN #].
The City Administrator or his/her designee has observed the following conditions, which
constitute a violation of the Piedmont City Code: [description of nuisance]
The observed conditions violate the following provisions of the Piedmont City Code:
[cite code section(s)]
YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED TO ABATE SAID PUBLIC NUISANCE within
[insert reasonable period not less than fifteen days] calendar days from the issuance of
this order. The issuance date is specified below. You may abate the nuisance by [insert
desired action which, if taken, will adequately remedy the situation].
FAILURE TO REMEDY THE VIOLATION WITHIN THE SPECIFIED TIME WILL
RESULT IN FURTHER ACTION BY THE CITY which may include all or some of the
following:
1. Administrative Citations. Failure to remedy the nuisance within the
specified time may result in the issuance of fines. Each day for which the
nuisance remains after the specified date shall constitute a new violation
and may result in additional fines without further notice. Nonpayment of
the fines may result in additional penalties and costs being assessed and in
a lien being assessed on your property, to be collected by the County
Auditor along with municipal taxes and other assessments. This notice
and order to abate shall have the same force and effect as a Notice of
Violation pursuant to Section 1.10 of the Piedmont City Code.
2. Abatement by the City via public employees, private contractor, or other
means. The cost of said abatement, if not paid to the City, may be levied
and assessed against the property as a special assessment lien.
3. A civil action brought by the City to enjoin the nuisance.
[Optional: The City will seek to recover its attorneys’ fees as a result of any
administrative or court proceeding resulting from this nuisance.]
Abatement of Nuisances
6-7
YOU MAY APPEAL THIS ORDER OF ABATEMENT, but any such appeal must be
brought within ten calendar days of the issuance date of this notice and order to abate.
The appeal must be in writing; specify the reasons for the appeal; contain your name,
address, and telephone number; be accompanied by an appeal fee of
_____________________ dollars ($____________); and be submitted to the City Clerk
at the following address:
City Clerk
City of Piedmont
120 Vista Avenue
Piedmont, CA 94611
One who is legally indigent may apply for a waiver of the appeal fee. Upon timely
receipt of the appeal and accompanying fee, or waiver, the City Clerk will cause the
matter to be set for hearing and notify you of the date and location of the hearing.
THE FAILURE TO FILE A TIMELY AND COMPLETE APPEAL OF A NOTICE
AND ORDER TO ABATE SHALL BE DEEMED TO BE A FAILURE TO EXHAUST
ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.
If you have any questions regarding this matter, you may direct them to the City
Compliance Officer issuing this notice at the address or telephone number listed below.
ISSUANCE DATE: _____________
[Insert: name, title, address, and telephone number of the City Compliance Officer
issuing this notice.]”
B. The City Compliance Officer shall maintain records detailing the instance or instances of
the violation(s), including such information as photographic evidence, a chronological
account of inspections made, identification of conditions noted, and witness statements, if
any, all of which support the issuance of the notice and order to abate. The records shall
be made available upon request to the responsible person. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord.
518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.6 APPEAL AND HEARING REQUEST
A. Any recipient of a notice and order to abate may appeal. The appeal must be in writing,
be delivered to the City Clerk within ten calendar days of the issuance date of the notice
and order to abate, specify the grounds upon which the appeal is taken, and contain the
name, address, and telephone number of the appellant.
B. The appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal application fee. If the Hearing Officer
Abatement of Nuisances
6-8
finds there is no violation or the appellant was not the responsible party, the appeal fee
shall be refunded to the appellant without the payment of any interest that could have
accrued.
C. The appeal application fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
D. Failure to submit the completed fee waiver forms or pay the appeal fee shall cause the
appeal request to be automatically denied. Enforcement of the order to abate may then
proceed as if no appeal request had been submitted.
E. Upon the filing of a timely and complete appeal, including payment of the appeal fee or
submission and approval of completed fee waiver forms, the matter will be set for
hearing. The City Clerk will notify the parties in writing of the date, time, and location of
the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Further abatement action by
the City shall be stayed until the appeal decision is issued.
F. Records of the City Compliance Officer concerning the notice and order to abate
prepared pursuant to Section 6.5(B), if intended to be submitted to the Hearing Officer
for consideration at the hearing, shall be copied and served on the person requesting the
hearing at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing.
G. The failure to file a timely and complete appeal of a notice and order to abate shall be
deemed to be a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
H. At any time the City Compliance Officer may choose to withdraw a previously issued
notice and order to abate. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.7 HEARING OFFICERS
For each appeal of a notice and order to abate, the City Administrator shall designate the Hearing
Officer for the appeal. The Hearing Officer shall not be the City Compliance Officer who issued
the notice and order to abate that is the subject of the appeal. The employment, performance
evaluation, compensation, and benefits of the Hearing Officer shall not be directly or indirectly
conditioned upon the Hearing Officer upholding or denying any appeal to a notice and order to
abate. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.8 HARDSHIP WAIVER
A. Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest a notice and order to abate and
who is financially unable to pay the appeal application fee as required in Section 6.6(B)
may request a hardship waiver. A request for a hardship waiver shall be submitted to the
City Clerk along with advanced prepayment of the appeal application fee, within ten
calendar days of the issuance date of the notice and order to abate.
Abatement of Nuisances
6-9
B. The City Clerk may approve a hardship waiver only if the applicant has submitted a
sworn affidavit demonstrating his or her inability to pay the application fee, together with
any supporting documents or materials that demonstrate proof of enrollment in a State of
California public assistance program, such as Medi-Cal, to the satisfaction of the City
Clerk.
C. Within ten days of submission of the request for a hardship waiver and supporting
documents, the City Clerk shall issue a written determination to approve or not approve
the hardship waiver. If the City Clerk approves the hardship waiver, the application fee
shall be refunded at the time of the written decision. The written determination of the
City Clerk shall be final and shall be served upon the person who applied for the hardship
waiver. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.9 HEARING PROCEDURE
A. A hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than ten (10) or more than sixty (60)
calendar days from the date the appeal is filed.
B. The appellant shall be given the opportunity to (1) testify and present witnesses; (2)
introduce relevant evidence; (3) cross-examine and/or rebut any witness testifying in
support of the declaration of a public nuisance; and (4) be represented by anyone who is
designated by the appellant.
C. The City Compliance Officer will bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the responsible person violated the Piedmont City Code. The California
Evidence Code shall not apply to the administrative hearing. All relevant evidence may
be considered, and the Hearing Officer has the discretion to exclude evidence found to be
irrelevant or redundant.
D. The notice and order to abate and the records submitted by the City Compliance Officer
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.
E. The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from
the City Compliance Officer or the appellant before issuing a written decision.
F. If the responsible person fails to appear at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
automatically uphold the determination of the City Compliance Officer set forth in the
notice and order to abate. The failure of the responsible person to appear at the hearing
shall constitute a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. (Ord. 735 N.S.,
10/2017; Ord. 555 N.S., 7/1993; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.10 DECISION ON APPEAL
A. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing
Abatement of Nuisances
6-10
Officer shall, within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing, issue a written
decision to uphold, modify or reverse the determinations of the City Compliance Officer.
If the Hearing Officer decides that the notice and order should be enforced, the owner or
responsible person shall comply with the order within such period of time as may be
prescribed by the Hearing Officer, and in the absence of any prescribed time, within 10
calendar days from the date of mailing of the final decision. The decision may direct the
City Compliance Officer to proceed and perform the work of abatement if not performed
by the responsible person within a prescribed period of time.
B. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be in writing, be based on the record, and
include a statement of the factual and legal basis of the decision. The decision of the
Hearing Officer shall be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the
conclusion of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be sent by first-class mail to the
appellant at the address specified in the appeal, and by mail to each responsible person
appearing at the hearing.
C. The Hearing Officer’s decision is final on the date the decision is filed with the City
Clerk. Any appeal of the decision is governed by Code of Civil Procedure Section
1094.6, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S.,
7/1990)
SEC. 6.11 ABATEMENT BY CITY
A. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of a responsible person to properly comply with the
notice and order to abate within the prescribed time period, the City Compliance Officer
may cause to be done whatever work is necessary to abate the public nuisance.
B. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the performance of the duties herein
specified for the City Compliance Officer or any authorized officer or employee thereof,
or to refuse to allow any such officer or employee or approved private contractor, to enter
upon any premises for the purpose of abating a public nuisance or to interfere in any
manner whatsoever with said officers, employees, or contractors in the work of
abatement.
C. An account of the cost of abatement shall be kept for each separate assessor’s parcel
involved in the abatement. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.12 RECOVERABLE COSTS
A. When the City has completed the work of abatement, or has paid for the work, the total
abatement costs shall be charged to the owner of the property. Total abatement costs
shall include without limitation:
1. Any time spent by a City officer and employee for activities related to the code
Abatement of Nuisances
6-11
violation, including, but not limited to, inspections and re-inspections, abatement
actions, police services, administration, bookkeeping and accounting, legal
services, supervision, preparing for and attending hearings. Costs based on time
spent by City officers and employees shall include salary, benefits, and overhead;
2. Any fees incurred by City to employ contractors for activities related to the code
violation, including but not limited to, inspections and re-inspections, abatement
actions, police services, administration, bookkeeping and accounting, legal
services, supervision, preparing for and attending hearings;
3. Costs related to the enforcement including, but not limited to, cost of abatement,
notices, administrative costs, and court costs;
4. Any applicable fines, late payment charges, and collection costs.
B. In any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding, the prevailing party shall
be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees, but only if the City elects in writing,
at the initiation of the action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees.
In no event shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the action or proceeding. The City may
recover its attorneys’ fees in the same manner as other costs pursuant to this article.
C. The total abatement costs shall be included in a bill and sent by certified mail to the
address of the responsible party listed on the last equalized assessment roll or on the
supplemental roll, whichever is more current. Simultaneously, the bill may be sent by
regular mail. If the bill sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service is deemed
effective pursuant to regular mail. The bill shall inform the owner that failure to pay the
bill within sixty (60) calendar days from the date of mailing may result in a lien upon the
property. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.13 FAILURE TO PAY RECOVERABLE COSTS
If a responsible person fails to pay the total abatement costs assessed, the obligation may be
enforced by the City as:
1. A personal obligation of the responsible party; and/or
2. If the nuisance is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property in
accordance with this article, which shall remain in effect until all of the
administrative fines, penalties, and recoverable costs are paid in full; and/or
3. A criminal misdemeanor and/or
4. Any other available legal means. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.14 LIEN PROCEDURE
A. Whenever the recoverable costs imposed pursuant to this chapter in connection with the
abatement of a nuisance concerning the condition of real property have not been satisfied
in full within sixty (60) days, this obligation may constitute a lien against any real
Abatement of Nuisances
6-12
property involved.
B. The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the County
Recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and
priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section
697.340 and may be extended as provided in Code of Civil Procedure Sections 683.110
through 683.220.
C. Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied
pursuant to law.
D. Prior to recording any such lien the following must occur:
1. A report shall be prepared and filed with the City Clerk stating the amounts due
and owing.
2. The City Clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing such report and any
protests or objections thereto by the City Council.
3. A written notice to be served on each property owner whose interest is disclosed
by the current County equalized assessment roll not less than ten (10) days prior
to the time set for the hearing.
4. The City Council shall adopt a resolution approving the amount of the lien at least
thirty (30) days prior to recordation. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S.,
7/1990)
SEC. 6.15 PUBLIC HEARING AND PROTESTS OF PROPOSED LIENS
A. Any person owning a legal or equitable interest in real property proposed to be subject to
a lien pursuant to this article may file a written protest with the City Clerk and/or may
protest orally at the City Council hearing.
B. Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the
protesting party has a legal or equitable interest and the grounds of such protest or
objection. The grounds for protest or objection, and any evidence or testimony submitted
in support or in opposition to the imposition of a lien, shall be limited to whether the
amount of any fine, administrative penalty, and/or administrative cost imposed was
satisfied in full within the time allowed by law and/or was successfully challenged by a
timely writ of mandate.
C. The City Council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging, or
modifying the amount of the lien based upon evidence produced at the hearing. (Ord. 735
N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
Abatement of Nuisances
6-13
SEC. 6.16 RECORDING OF LIEN
Thirty (30) days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council imposing a lien, the
City Clerk may file the same as a judgment lien in the Office of the County Recorder of Alameda
County. The lien may carry such additional recoverable costs as set forth by resolution of the
City Council. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.17 SATISFACTION OF LIEN.
Once payment in full is received by the City for outstanding penalties and costs, the City Clerk
shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide any property owner or financial institution
having a legal or equitable interest in the property with a notice of satisfaction so they may
record this notice with the Office of the County Recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall
cancel the City’s lien. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.18 SUMMARY ABATEMENT
A. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the City may summarily abate a nuisance
if the City Compliance Officer determines that the nuisance constitutes an immediate
threat to public health and safety.
B. If a nuisance is summarily abated, the City Compliance Officer shall keep an account of
the recoverable costs of abatement pursuant to Section 6.12, and bill the property owner
for the cost of abatement. The bill shall be sent by certified mail to the last known
address of the property owner. Simultaneously, the bill may be sent by regular mail. If
the bill sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service is deemed effective
pursuant to regular mail.
C. The property owner may contest the validity of the summary abatement by submitting an
appeal to the City Clerk. The appeal and hearing procedures set forth in Section 6.6
through 6.10 of this chapter shall apply to an appeal of a bill for summary abatement
performed by the City.
D. If the bill is not paid within sixty (60) days from the date of mailing, the City Compliance
Officer may proceed to obtain a special assessment and lien against the owner’s property
in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord.
518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.19 TREBLE ABATEMENT COST FOR REPEAT PUBLIC NUISANCE
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period
finding that an owner of property is the responsible person for a condition that may be abated in
accordance with this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code
Section 17980 related to substandard buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble the
Abatement of Nuisances
6-14
costs of the abatement. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 518 N.S., 7/1990)
SEC. 6.20 METHOD OF SERVICE
Unless otherwise provided by this article, all notices served pursuant to this chapter shall be
served by one or more of the methods described below:
1. Certified Mail. Certified mail shall be addressed to the owner at the address
shown on the last equalized assessment roll or as otherwise known, and addressed
to anyone known to the City Compliance Officer to be in possession of the
property at the street address of the property being abated or a responsible person.
Simultaneously, the notice and order to abate must be sent by regular mail.
Service is deemed completed on the day the notice is sent certified and regular
mail. Where a notice and order to abate is served by certified mail, the issuance
date listed in the notice and order to abate shall be the date the notice is sent by
certified and regular mail.
2. Personal Service. Personal service is deemed complete on the date the notice is
personally served. Where a notice and order to abate is served by personal
service, the issuance date listed in the notice and order to abate shall be the date
the notice is personally served.
3. Posting and Publishing. Where the owner’s address is unknown, service may be
accomplished by posting and publication. Posting of the notice and order shall be
conspicuously on or in front of the property. If the property has no frontage,
posting shall be on the portion of the property nearest to a street, highway, or
road, or most likely to give actual notice to the owner. Within five (5) days of
posting the notice on or in front of the property, the notice shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City of Piedmont. The failure of a
person to receive a properly addressed service shall not affect the validity of the
proceedings. Service is deemed complete on the day the notice is posted on or in
front of the property. Where a notice and order to abate is served by posting and
publishing, the issuance date listed in the notice and order to abate shall be the
date the notice is published. (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017; Ord. 555 N.S., 7/1993)
Rev. 2017-11-15 (Ord. 735 N.S., 10/2017)
Excavations
7-1
Chapter 7
EXCAVATIONS GENERALLY
'7.1 Defined
'7.2 Permit required; exception
'7.3 Application for permit; contents
'7.4 Plat to accompany application
'7.5 Filing fee required; schedule of fees
'7.6 Procedure following application-Investigation; Hearing to be had
'7.7 Same-Notice of hearing required; how notice is given; contents of notice
'7.8 Performance bond required
'7.9 Indemnity bond required
'7.10 Matters to be considered by council in granting or denying application
'7.11 Application shall be denied if excavation would endanger public health and safety,
etc.
'7.12 Fee required upon issuance of permit; amount
'7.13 Regulations to be complied with during excavation
'7.14 When council may revoke or suspend permit; hearing provided
'7.15 Permit expires when materials excavated equal amount estimated in application; new
permit required
'7.16 Expiration of permit on nonuse
SEC. 7.1 DEFINED
Excavation. An excavation as used in this chapter shall include the removal of any soil,
rock, sand or other material for purposes of sale, fill, building or other construction usage off the
premises from which removed. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '1)
SEC. 7.2 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause or permit to be made, any excavation
in or under the surface of any land, public or private, in the City without first obtaining a permit
from the City Council in the manner provided in this chapter. A separate permit is not required
to make an excavation for a foundation or a basement in connection with the erection of a building
on the premises in which the excavation is to be made and for which a building permit has been
issued. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '1)
SEC. 7.3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS
The application for a permit required by the preceding section shall be filed with the city
clerk in quadruplicate, the original of which shall be sworn to before some person lawfully
authorized to administer oaths, and shall set forth the following information and shall be
Excavations
7-2
accompanied by the following data:
(a) A full identification of the applicant and all persons to be directly or indirectly
interested in the permit if granted.
(b) The residence and business address and the citizenship of the applicant, including
all members of any firm or partnership or all officers and directors of any corporation applying.
(c) A complete description and location of the property on which the excavation is
proposed to be made.
(d) The exact nature of the proposed excavation and material to be removed and an
estimate of the approximate number of cubic yards to be removed.
(e) A statement of the manner in which is it proposed to excavate and remove the
dirt, rock or other materials, including the slope of the sides and the level of the floor, and the
kind of equipment proposed to be employed in making such excavation and removing such
material.
(f) The proposed route which the applicant proposes to use over the public streets
and over private property in transporting such materials.
(g) The past experience of the applicant in the matter to which the permit appertains
and the name, address and past experience in such matters of the person to be in charge of the
proposed operations.
(h) The location of the place and the name and address of all persons to whom any
materials from the excavation are to be sold or delivered.
(i) Whether or not any permit of the applicant has been revoked and if so the
circumstances of such revocation.
(j) The time within which such excavation is to be commenced after the granting of
the permit and the time when it is to be completed.
(k) Such further information as the city engineer, superintendent of streets or the City
Council may require. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '2)
SEC. 7.4 PLAT TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION
At the time of the filing of the application provided for in the preceding section, the
applicant shall file with the city engineer a topographic map of the property on which the
proposed excavation is to be made covering an area having a radius of three hundred feet, so far as
Excavations
7-3
may be possible, from the exterior boundary of the proposed excavation. (Ord. No. 110 N.S.,
'3)
SEC. 7.5 FILING FEE REQUIRED; SCHEDULE OF FEES
At the time of filing an application and map, the applicant shall pay a filing fee to cover
the City's costs of investigation as follows: If the estimated number of cubic yards of material to
be removed does not exceed ten thousand yards, twenty-five dollars; if the estimated number of
cubic yards to be removed exceeds ten thousand but is not over fifty thousand cubic yards, fifty
dollars; and, if the estimated number of cubic yards exceeds fifty thousand cubic yards, one
hundred dollars. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '3)
SEC. 7.6 PROCEDURE FOLLOWING APPLICATION-INVESTIGATION; HEARING
TO BE HAD
Immediately upon the filing of an application for a permit as provided in Section 7.3, one
copy thereof shall be delivered to the city clerk, one copy to the superintendent of streets, and
one copy to the city engineer. The superintendent of streets and city engineer shall each make an
investigation of the facts set forth in the application and shall make a written report of their
investigation, together with their recommendations, to the City Council, who shall proceed to act
upon the application after a hearing set by the city clerk for a day certain not less than ten days
nor more than thirty days from the date of filing the application. Such hearing may be continued
from time to time as the circumstances may require. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '5)
SEC. 7.7 SAME-NOTICE OF HEARING REQUIRED; HOW NOTICE IS GIVEN;
CONTENTS OF NOTICE
Notice of hearing of the application shall be given by the city clerk by posting a notice on
the premises described in the application and by posting a copy not more than three hundred feet
apart on each public street constituting a direct approach to the premises on which the excavation
is proposed to be made, and not further distant than one thousand feet from the boundary of
such premises, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, and by mailing a copy
addressed to the applicant and to the owners of the property, as appear on the last assessment
rolls of the City, within a five hundred foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
excavation, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain a
statement of the time and place of the hearing of the application, the name of the applicant, a
general description of the premises where the applicant proposes to make the excavation, and a
general statement of the size and nature of the proposed excavation. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '6)
SEC. 7.8 PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED
The City Council shall require, as a condition to the granting of a permit, that the
Excavations
7-4
applicant deposit a surety company bond, in an amount to be fixed by the Council, inuring to the
benefit of the City and the general public, guaranteeing that the applicant will faithfully perform
all of the conditions and requirements under which the permit is issued. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '7)
SEC. 7.9 INDEMNITY BOND REQUIRED
The City Council shall also require, as a condition to the granting of a permit, that the
applicant deposit a certificate of a responsible indemnity company insuring the City and the
public against any loss or damage to persons or property arising directly or indirectly from the
operations of the applicant, or any person acting on his behalf, in carrying on any work
connected directly or indirectly with the issuance of the permit, the amount of the insurance to be
fixed by the Council. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '7)
SEC. 7.10 MATTERS TO BE CONSIDERED BY COUNCIL IN GRANTING OR
DENYING APPLICATION
The City Council, in granting or denying any application for a permit for an excavation,
shall take into consideration the character of the applicant as respects morality, honesty,
integrity, financial responsibility and all pertinent things concerning the proposed application
which may concern the health, safety and general welfare of the public, and shall exercise a
reasonable and sound discretion in the premises. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '8)
SEC. 7.11 APPLICATION SHALL BE DENIED IF EXCAVATION WOULD
ENDANGER PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY, ETC.
Any application for a permit for an excavation shall be denied if it appears from the
investigation thereof that such excavation would remove the lateral and subjacent support of the
adjacent land and result in a dangerous topographic condition, or result in seepage or slides or
create an attractive nuisance dangerous to public safety, or that otherwise would in any manner
endanger the public health and safety or be detrimental to the general public welfare. (Ord. No.
110 N.S., '8)
SEC. 7.12 FEE REQUIRED UPON ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; AMOUNT
At the time of the issuance of the permit for an excavation, the applicant shall pay a
permit fee, to cover the expenses of inspection and examination of the continued operation of the
excavating, in the amount of one dollar for each one thousand cubic yards estimated in the
application to be removed from the proposed excavation. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '4)
SEC. 7.13 REGULATIONS TO BE COMPLIED WITH DURING EXCAVATION
Excavations
7-5
Any person to whom an excavation permit is issued shall comply with the following:
(a) All vehicles transporting rock, earth or other materials from such excavation over
the public streets of the City shall travel only over such route as may be directed by the
superintendent of streets to be least dangerous to public safety, cause the least interference with
general traffic and cause the least damage to the public streets.
(b) The floor of any such excavation shall not be made lower than the level thereof as
set forth in the application provided for in this chapter.
(c) If, in the opinion of the superintendent of streets, any such excavation will
present a dangerous condition if left open, such excavation shall be enclosed by a suitable fence.
(d) Any rock, earth or other material that may be deposited on any public street or
place from any vehicle transporting such materials from any such excavation shall be immediately
removed in a manner satisfactory to the superintendent of streets at the expense of the person to
whom the permit to excavate was issued. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '9)
SEC. 7.14 WHEN COUNCIL MAY REVOKE OR SUSPEND PERMIT; HEARING
PROVIDED
Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the City Council as in its discretion may seem meet and just for any reason for
which the granting of such permit might lawfully be denied, or for any failure to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter. Revocation of such permit shall be made only upon a hearing
granted to the holder of the permit held before the Council after five days' notice to such permit
holder stating the grounds of complaint against him and stating the time and place where such
hearing will be held. If, in the opinion of the Council, the public health, safety or welfare requires
it, they may suspend any permit pending the hearing for the revocation of such permit. Such
revocation or suspension of any permit shall be in addition to any other penalties more
specifically provided in this chapter. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '10)
SEC. 7.15 PERMIT EXPIRES WHEN MATERIALS EXCAVATED EQUAL AMOUNT
ESTIMATED IN APPLICATION; NEW PERMIT REQUIRED
At any time that the number of cubic yards removed amounts to the number of cubic
yards set forth in the estimate filed with the original application, the permit for an excavation
shall terminate and no further materials may be removed from the excavation until a new
application has been filed and a permit granted in the same manner as the original application and
permit. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '4)
SEC. 7.16 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT ON NONUSE
Excavations
7-6
In the event that any excavation for which a permit has been granted, as provided for in
this chapter, is not commenced within three months from the date of granting of such permit, or
in the event work is started on excavations pursuant thereto and the work is abandoned for a
period of three months, such permit shall automatically expire by limitation and cease to be valid
for any purpose. (Ord. No. 110 N.S., '11)
8-1
Chapter 8
FIRE PREVENTION1
§ 8.1 Adoption of California Fire Code
§ 8.2 Establishment and Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention
§ 8.3 Definitions
§ 8.4 Christmas Tree Lots and Pumpkin Patches
§ 8.5 Fire Hazard Abatement
§ 8.6 California Fire Code – Amendments
SECTION 8.1 ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
The 2016 California Fire Code, based on the 2015 International Fire Code, as adopted
and/or amended by the office of the California State Fire Marshal, including Appendices
A through K, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to any changes set forth in the
chapter. The Council, by resolution, may from time to time designate which edition of
the California Fire Code is currently revised, and the edition so designated by Council
resolution shall be the one referred to throughout this Code. One copy of Chapter 8 of the
Piedmont Municipal Code and the California Fire Code shall be kept on file at the
Department of Public Works. (Ord. No.315 N.S., Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 675 N.S.
12/07, Ord. No. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 732 N.S. 06/17)
SECTION 8.2 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE
PREVENTION
(a) The California Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in
the Fire Department of the City of Piedmont, which is hereby established, and
which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
(b) The person in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be the Fire Marshal
and shall be appointed by the Fire Chief.
(c) The Fire Chief, members of the Fire Prevention Division, and personnel assigned
as Fire Arson Investigators shall be peace officers and have the powers as such as
established in Section 830.37(a) of the California Penal Code. Other members of
the Fire Department shall be peace officers and have the powers as such as
established in Section 830.37(b) of the California Penal Code. (Ord. No. 315 N.S.;
Ord. 592 N.S. 10/97, Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02)
SECTION 8.3 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and certain
provisions shall be construed as herein set out unless it shall be apparent from their
context that a different meaning is intended:
1 For charter provisions as to the Chief of the Fire Department, see Char. §3.09. For state law generally as to fires and
fire protection, see H. & S.C. §13000 et seq.
8-2
(a) Abatement Authority. The Chief of the Piedmont Fire Department or his
designee.
(b) Corporation Counsel. Wherever used in the California Fire Code it shall be held
to mean the City Attorney for the City of Piedmont. ()
(c) Defensible Space. The area between a house or unimproved property and an
oncoming fire where the vegetation has been modified to reduce the wildfire
threat and which provides an opportunity for firefighters to safely defend the
house.
(d) Fire Chief. The City of Piedmont Fire Chief or his or her designee.
(e) Fire Prevention Engineer or Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.. Whenever
used in the California Fire Code these terms shall be held to mean the Fire
Marshal of the City of Piedmont.
(f) Flammable Vegetation. Vegetation which is dry, dead, or dying; pyrofites which
have a high resin or sap content including but not limited to Arborvitae, California
Bay, Cedar, Cypress, Douglas Fir, Eucalyptus, Fir, Juniper, Palm, Pine, Spruce,
Yew, California buckwheat, California sagebrush, Chamise or greasewood,
Laurel sumac, Manzanita, Pampas grass, Rosemary, Scotch broom, Spanish
Broom, Sugar bush, and Toyon; and which is over six (6) inches in height.
(g) Hazardous Fire Areas. Areas of the city identified by the Fire Marshal in which
the combination of aspect, slope and/or density of naturally occurring flammable
vegetation create an additional fire hazard. These areas shall be established by the
Fire Marshall and maps indicating the properties subject to this definition shall be
made available to the public.
(h) Jurisdiction. Whenever used in the California Fire Code, it shall be held to mean
the Piedmont Fire Department.
(i) Vegetative Growth. Plant material including but not limited to grasses, weeds,
vines, shrubs and trees which occur naturally or are part of a landscaped area.
(j) Temporary fire department access road for construction. An approved temporary
roadway for emergency vehicle use during the construction of residential and
commercial projects.
(k) Temporary water supply. Water stored for firefighting purposes in an approved
above ground system during the construction of residential or commercial
projects. (Ord. 315 N.S. 05/74, Ord. 592 N.S. 10/97, Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord.
730 N.S. 05/17)
8-3
SECTION 8.4 CHRISTMAS TREE LOTS AND PUMPKIN PATCHES
All Christmas tree and pumpkin patch lots shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Pumpkin patch lots shall not be permitted to operate before October 1 of each
year and Christmas tree lots shall not be permitted to operate before November 22
of each year.
(b) Prior to opening for business, each person or business that intends to operate a
pumpkin patch lot or Christmas tree lot must obtain a permit issued by the Fire
Chief. Approval of the permit is contingent on a determination by the Fire Chief
that the proposed pumpkin patch lot or Christmas tree lot will be maintained and
operated in compliance with all the provisions this Code, Fire Department
Policies and Procedures, and the laws of the State of California. Prior to and
subsequent to issuing a permit, the Fire Chief may inspect the pumpkin patch lot
or Christmas tree lot to ensure compliance. If the Fire Chief determines that a
pumpkin patch lot or Christmas tree lot is operating in violation of this Section,
the Fire Chief may revoke the permit issued to that person or business. An appeal
to a determination by the Fire Chief to revoke an existing permit shall be filed and
process in the same manner as an appeal to a determination of a nuisance and
order to abate as set forth in Chapter 6 of this Code. It shall be a violation of this
Code and a nuisance to operate a pumpkin patch lot or Christmas tree lot without
a permit.
(c) No merchandise, equipment, vehicles, refuse, or other material associated with a
pumpkin patch lot or Christmas tree lot shall block circulation or parking aisles
outside fenced areas on the lot.
(d) No aspect of the pumpkin patch lot or Christmas tree lot operation shall impede
access to any public driveway, nor any parking areas required for the operation of
surrounding uses.
(e) All parking and loading must be done on the pumpkin patch lot or Christmas tree
lot and not on any public street. Parking areas shall be surfaced to prevent mud or
dust from being tracked onto the public right-of-way.
(f) Fencing around the premises shall be properly stabilized.
(g) Signs shall be confined to the designated lot area only and must not obstruct
vision of motorists. Signs shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter
17 of this Code.
(h) If sawdust or other similar material is used to cover the lot, it shall be kept moist.
(i) All trees or pumpkins, merchandise, debris, fences, poles, hay or sawdust and
other evidence of the use must be removed within 7 days after the Halloween or
8-4
Christmas holiday. To the maximum extent possible, all wood products must be
recycled. Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SECTION 8.5 FIRE HAZARD ABATEMENT
Fire hazard abatement in the City of Piedmont may be enforced pursuant to the California
Fire Code or its successor codes.
8.5.1 Authority to Abate. The Abatement Authority may abate any fire hazard within
the City of Piedmont and make the expense of abatement (1) a personal obligation
of the property owner, and (2) a lien against the property on which the fire hazard
exists or is maintained which may be assessed and collected with ordinary
municipal taxes, pursuant to the provisions of the California Fire Code or its
successor codes.
8.5.2 Abatement Procedure. The abatement procedure for fire hazards shall be in
accordance with procedures set forth in Sections 6.5 through 6.16 of the Piedmont
Municipal Code. (Ord. 592 N.S. 10/97, Ord. 634 N.S. 12/02, Ord. 675 N.S.
12/07, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
SECTION 8.6 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE – AMENDMENTS
The following sections of the California Fire Code adopted in Section 8.1 of this Code
are amended to read as follows:
8.6.1 Section 5608.1 Fireworks: The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling
and use of fireworks are prohibited. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling
and use of fireworks or pyrotechnic materials within the jurisdiction of the City are
prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Snap Caps and Party Poppers classified by the State Fire Marshal as
pyrotechnic devices. (Ord. No. 713 N.S. 02/14, Ord. 730 N.S. 05/17)
Rev. 2017-07-19 (Ord. 732 N.S.)
Chapter 9
SOLID WASTE
Divisions:
9.01 Intent and findings
9.02 Franchised collection; contractor requirements
9.03 Generator and service unit requirements
9.04 Construction and demolition
9.05 Prohibitions
9.06-9.09 (Reserved)
9.10 Enforcement
9.11 Definitions
DIVISION 9.01 INTENT AND FINDINGS
Sections:
9.01.010 Intent and findings
9.01.010 Intent and findings.
The city is committed to protecting the public health, safety, welfare and environment. To meet
these goals it is necessary to promote the reduction of garbage going to landfills.
Under California law as embodied in the California Waste Management Act of 1989, as
subsequently amended, (Public Resources Code section 40000 et seq.), Piedmont is required to
prepare, adopt and implement source reduction and recycling elements to reach, maintain or
exceed a minimum diversion rate for solid waste. Pursuant to the Waste Reduction and
Recycling Act of 1990 (Measure D), and as a member agency of the Alameda County Waste
Management Authority, the City is committed to the policy goal of reducing, recycling and
composting the total tonnage of discarded materials generated within Alameda County.
The city council also finds that much of the waste generated in Piedmont can be effectively
segregated and recycled, thus controlling and reducing the cost of waste disposal to Piedmont
residents as well as making recyclable materials available for reuse and remanufacture.
Further, the city council finds that debris from demolition and construction of buildings
represents a large portion of the volume presently coming from Piedmont, and that much of the
debris is particularly suitable for recycling. Reusing and recycling construction and demolition
debris is essential to further the city’s efforts to reduce waste and comply with state law and
Measure D goals. Construction and demolition debris waste reduction and recycling have been
proven to reduce the amount of such material which is land-filled, increase site and worker
safety, and be cost effective. Except in unusual circumstances, it is feasible to divert an average
of 65% of construction and demolition debris from construction, demolition, and renovation
projects.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-2
DIVISION 9.02 FRANCHISE; CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
9.02.010 Exclusive rights
9.02.020 Non-exclusive rights
9.02.030 Collection of recyclable materials by unauthorized persons
9.02.040 Compliance with franchise agreement
9.02.050 Collection rates
9.02.010 Exclusive rights.
The city council may enter into a franchise agreement with any person or entity (the contractor)
granting the exclusive right to collect, process, transfer and dispose of any type of solid waste
generated in the city. The agreement will include terms and conditions that the city council
determines to be in the best interests of the city, consistent with state law. It is unlawful for any
person other than the contractor, to take, collect, process, or dispose of solid waste subject to the
franchise agreement within the city limits during the term of such franchise agreement.
9.02.020 Non-exclusive rights.
The city council has the right to enter into separate agreements pertaining to the collection of any
materials not designated in an exclusive franchise agreement.
9.02.030 Collection of recyclable materials by unauthorized persons.
From time of placement of recyclable materials in a solid waste cart, those recyclable materials
become the property of the city or its contractor. It is a violation of this chapter for any person
other than the contractor to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
items.
9.02.040 Compliance with franchise agreement.
Contractor shall at all times provide solid waste collection services to all service units in full
compliance with the terms set forth in the franchise agreement, including the following:
A. Frequency. The contractor shall collect solid waste from all service units in the city at least
once a week.
B. Curbside collection. Contractor must provide curbside collection to each single-family
dwelling service unit unless the single-family dwelling service recipient subscribes to onpremises
collection.
C. No blocking of streets. Contractor must operate collection vehicles in a manner to avoid
blocking streets, alleyways, driveways, or public rights-of-way. If, in the normal course of
operations, contractor blocks a street, alleyway, driveway, or public right-of-way, upon request
by any service recipient, contractor must promptly move the collection vehicle from the blocked
street, alleyway, driveway, or public right-of-way.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-3
D. Collection hours. Collection from single-family dwelling and multi-family dwelling
proprieties may begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and must terminate no later than 6:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday with no service on Saturday (except for residential holiday service, in
which case normal collection hours apply) or Sunday.
E. Contractor charges. Contractor may only charge service recipients for the collection services
as authorized by the franchise agreement, subject to those maximum rates adjusted periodically
by the city council.
9.02.050 Collection rates
The maximum rates for collection, processing and disposal of solid waste from service units in
the city are established by city council resolution.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-4
DIVISION 9.03 GENERATOR AND SERVICE UNIT REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
9.03.010 Proper disposal required
9.03.020 Minimum solid waste disposal requirements
9.03.030 Use of solid waste carts
9.03.040 Use of overage bags for green waste
9.03.050 Collection and placement of carts
9.03.060 Self-haul permit
9.03.070 Special Events
9.03.010 Proper disposal required.
Every owner of any premises shall ensure that arrangements are made to properly dispose of the
solid waste created, produced, or accumulated on the premises through either maintaining a
subscription for regular solid waste collection service or self-hauling pursuant to a permit issued
under section 9.03.060. The failure to comply with the requirements of this section is a threat to
the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance.
9.03.020 Minimum solid waste disposal requirements.
The owner of any premises shall ensure that solid waste created, produced, or accumulated on
the premises is either collected by the collector or properly removed pursuant to a self-haul
permit at least once a week or more often as may be required to adequately serve the premises. In
order to fulfill the city’s obligations under state law, the director may require the owner of any
premises or the generator of solid waste at any premises to subscribe to and pay for solid waste
collection services in the configuration the director determines is necessary for the preservation
of the public health and/or public safety. The requirements may include: requiring solid waste
bins and carts in the sizes and numbers as needed to store all the solid waste generated at the
service unit during the periods between collections; requiring the owner or generator to change
the frequency of solid waste collection or the size of solid waste bins or carts at the service unit;
and requiring additional efforts in the recycling of recyclable materials and organic materials
generated by businesses and multi-family dwellings. The failure to comply with the
requirements of this section is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance.
9.03.030 Use of solid waste carts.
Each service recipient is required to use solid waste carts and bins provided by the contractor. A
service recipient may request larger or smaller solid waste carts or bins or request additional
solid waste carts or bins.
However, if a single-family dwelling service unit has a permanent, in-ground, receptacle for
temporary storage of solid waste that is not a public nuisance or in any degree offensive, and that
provides easy and safe access to the contractor for the collection of solid waste, and if the
contractor agrees to use the permanent, in-ground, receptacle for collection of solid waste, then
the single-family dwelling service recipient is not required to use solid waste carts provided by
the contractor.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-5
9.03.040 Use of overage bags for green waste.
On a periodic basis, if a single-family or multi-family dwelling service recipient has additional
green waste in excess of what can be placed in the organic waste cart provided by the contractor,
a single-family dwelling or multi-family service recipient may place green waste materials in
overage bags provided by the contractor or a biodegradable bag provided by the generator. Each
loaded bag may not weigh more than 50 pounds.
9.03.050 Collection and placement of carts.
Each single-family dwelling collection service will be curbside collection unless a single-family
dwelling service recipient subscribes to on-premises collection.
A. Curbside placement and removal. Single-family dwelling service recipients that are
subscribed to curbside collection of solid waste carts must temporarily place solid waste carts at
the front property line within three feet from curb or street no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day
before the scheduled collection day. They must remove the solid waste carts from the front
property line no later than 11:59 p.m. on the scheduled collection day. Service recipients may not
place solid waste carts in a public street or public sidewalk, but may place solid waste carts for
collection in the right-of-way parking strip.
B. On-premises placement. Service recipients that are subscribed to on-premises collection of
solid waste carts must place and maintain the solid waste carts in the side yard or backyard of
their premises where the carts will not be a public nuisance or in any degree offensive. The
location must allow for easy and safe access to the contractor.
9.03.060 Self-haul permit.
A. Permit required. An owner or an occupant of any premises may elect to self-haul solid waste
generated at the premises directly to a disposal or processing facility holding all applicable
permits to accept the material. Any such owner or occupant desiring to do so as a means of
satisfying the owner's obligation under Section 9.03.010 shall obtain a self-hauling permit to do
so from the director prior to commencing self-hauling.
B. Term. A permit to self-haul shall be good for one calendar year, or such part of the calendar
year that is remaining after the issuance of the permit. All self-haul permits shall expire on
December thirty-first, and may be renewed annually. An application for a renewal permit should
be filed at least sixty days prior to the expiration date of the permit to allow adequate time for
processing, inspection and verifications required to issue the permit.
C. Issuance of permit. Applications for a self-haul permit shall be submitted on an application,
on a form approved by the director, with all required information supplied. The director shall
issue a self-haul permit within ten working days of the receipt of an application deemed
complete by the director only if the person requesting a self-haul permit satisfies the following
requirements:
1. Produces for inspection the vehicle that such person intends to use for hauling solid
waste, and the vehicle meets the following standards:
a. The vehicle is capable of safely hauling solid waste in a safe and sanitary manner
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-6
so that such matter will not spill, leak, drip, blow, scatter or fall from the vehicle;
b. If the vehicle is not fully enclosed, the applicant produces a tarp or other material
that will be used to completely secure the materials being self-hauled; and
c. The vehicle is operational and meets all applicable Vehicle Code standards.
2. Produces evidence that such person owns or leases the vehicle or has a written agreement
to use the vehicle for the hauling of solid waste;
3. Produces evidence that such person has a valid California driver's license to operate the
vehicle produced for inspection and that the vehicle is registered in the State of
California;
4. Provides the director with a certificate of automobile insurance for the vehicle;
5. Provides the director with proof that the applicant has containers for the storage of solid
waste on the applicant's property before the materials are hauled to a disposal facility;
and
6. Pays the fee for a self-hauling permit authorized by resolution of the city council.
D. Operational standards.
Self-haul permittees shall comply with the following operational conditions:
1. Permittees must dispose of solid waste and retain weekly receipts from any licensed or
permitted landfill or other licensed or permitted disposal facility.
2. Receipts shall be submitted to the city for the preceding one-quarter calendar year on a
quarterly basis upon reasonable request by appropriate city authority. Failure to show
proof of solid waste disposal for each week that a person is permitted to self-haul shall
constitute a public health and safety nuisance sufficient to permit city to revoke the
permittee’s self-hauling permit.
3. Permittees must notify the city of any change in the vehicle being used to haul solid
waste by the permittee. Permittees must bring the new vehicle in for an inspection and
demonstrate compliance with items 1 through 5 of paragraph C of this section before the
new vehicle is used to haul any materials under the permit.
4. Permittee must keep on file with the city copies of the current automobile insurance and
registration for the vehicle used to self-haul and the permittee’s current California driver's
license. Permittee must provide proof to city of renewed automobile insurance, vehicle
registration, and California driver's license within five days of expiration of respective
document.
5. Permittees must separate and bag garbage, recyclable material and organic waste capable
of being composted.
6. Permittees are liable for any damages and clean-up costs resulting from any solid waste
spilling, leaking, dripping, blowing, scattering or falling during the course of the
permittees self-hauling activity.
7. Permittees shall, at such times as the director may specify, report to the city the type,
quantity, volume and weight of solid waste to be removed, and shall pay an AB939
information reporting fee, in an amount to be set by the city council by resolution.
E. Revocation.
The director may revoke the self-haul permit if he or she finds that the permit holder has not
complied with the terms of the permit or the conditions of this section. A self-haul permittee may
appeal a determination made under this paragraph to the city administrator. In order to appeal,
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-7
the self-haul permittee shall file a written appeal with the city clerk within 10 days after the
determination of the building official, stating the reasons for the appeal and deposit the appeal
fee, as set by resolution of the city council. The city administrator may designate a hearing
officer for consideration of the appeal. The city administrator, or hearing officer if designated,
shall hear the appeal within 30 calendar days of receiving the appeal. The decision of the city
administrator or hearing officer shall be final. Upon revocation of the self-haul permit, the
director shall order the owner to comply with section 9.03.010. The director shall not, for a
period of 12 months following the revocation, grant a self-haul permit to a person from whom a
self-haul permit was revoked, and, thereafter, the director is authorized in his or her discretion to
deny, or impose additional conditions on, the issuance of a self-haul permit to a person from
whom a self-haul permit was previously revoked.
9.03.070 Special events.
For any special event within the city, the party responsible for the special event shall ensure that
containers are placed throughout the event to sufficient to make source separation of recyclable
materials, organic materials and garbage convenient for the employees, volunteers, contractors,
and attendees of the event, and arrange for commingled or source-separated collection and
processing of garbage, recycling and organics with the contractor. The party responsible shall
arrange for collection and appropriate processing of all garbage, organics and recycling collected
during the special event. During the term of any exclusive franchise pursuant to section 9.02.010,
the responsible party may use commingled service or source separated collection services from a
service provider other than the contractor only with the agreement of the contractor. Such
service must also comply with the following requirements:
A. The minimum number of recycling and organic containers must exceed the number of
garbage containers. Containers for garbage, organics and recyclables must be collocated
throughout the event location to provide equally convenient access to users.
B. All of the containers must have appropriate signage and be color coded to identify the
type of materials to be deposited and meet any additional design criteria established by the
city.
C. Food vendors must have at least one separate container each for recyclable materials,
organic materials and garbage for use by customers and visitors. Multiple food vendors that
provide disposable food service ware and share a common eating area may share an
appropriate number, size, and placement of containers, located within a reasonable
proximity of the vendors.
D. The types of recyclable materials suitable for deposit into each container must include, at
a minimum; plastic bottles and jars, paper, cardboard, glass, newspaper, metal containers,
and cans. Each recycling container must be clearly identified as a recycling container and
display a list of types of recyclable materials which may be deposited into the container.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-8
DIVISION 9.04 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
Sections:
9.04.010 Diversion requirement
9.04.020 Waste management plan
9.04.030 Waste diversion report
9.04.040 Determination of compliance
9.04.050 Infeasibility exemption
9.04.060 Appeal
9.04.010 Diversion requirement.
A. Diversion Requirement. Owners and builders generating any construction and demolition
debris on a project must comply with the minimum requirements regarding recycling or reuse for
salvage set forth in the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11, as
adopted by sections 5.12 and 5.13 of the Piedmont City Code, any applicable state law
requirements, and the requirements of this section.
B. Proper Processing Facilities. Mixed construction and demolition debris must be processed at
processing facilities that are permitted to accept, process and/or dispose of construction and
demolition debris under applicable law.
C. Inspection. The building official may audit, inspect, and monitor all projects to determine
levels of actual diversion activities and validate the information provided by the applicant to
determine compliance. The applicant shall retain the receipts or weight tickets for the quantities
of materials reused, salvaged, recycled and landfilled for one year after the final inspection.
9.04.020 Waste management plan.
To ensure compliance with the diversion requirement in this division, each applicant shall submit
a completed waste management plan in a manner and form determined by the building official
prior to issuance of a city building permit. The building official shall approve the waste
management plan only if it will meet the diversion requirements of this division. To further
secure compliance, the building official may require an applicant to deposit a performance
security in an amount not exceeding two percent of the anticipated total project cost. Such
security may be provided in the form of a cash deposit, money order or alternate security
approved by the city attorney. Compliance with this section is not required where the building
official has determined that an emergency demolition is required to protect the public health and
safety.
9.04.030 Waste diversion report.
Before the final inspection, the applicant shall submit to the building official a waste diversion
report showing the project has met the diversion requirement. This waste diversion report shall
include all of the following:
A. Receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received each material showing
the actual weight or volume of that material;
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-9
B. A copy of the waste management plan with the addition of the actual volume or weight of
each material diverted and/or placed in a landfill;
C. Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant in determining efforts to
comply in good faith with this division.
Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all materials salvaged are measured and
recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical,
salvaged materials shall either be weighed by measurement on scales in compliance with all
regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance, or for salvaged material for which
weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement
shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the
standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose. For salvaged materials or
items that were donated or sold for reuse, an itemized list of such items specifying the weight,
size and number of items shall be provided prior to the final building permit inspection,
accompanied by receipts from the charitable organization or salvage operation receiving the
items.
9.04.040 Determination of compliance.
A. Building official determination. Prior to the final inspection approval, the building official
shall review the information submitted by the project applicant pursuant to this division and
determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement and the waste
management plan.
1. Full compliance. If the building official determines that the applicant has fully
complied with the diversion requirement, he or she shall cause the full performance
security to be released to the applicant within 30 days of the applicant’s submission of the
documentation required under section 9.04.030.
2. Good faith effort to comply. If the building official determines that the diversion
requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis
whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter. In making
this determination, the building official shall consider the availability of markets for the
construction and demolition debris placed in a landfill, the size of the project, and the
documented efforts of the applicant to divert construction and demolition debris. If the
building official determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply
with this chapter, he or she shall release the performance security, or a portion of it in
proportion to the degree of compliance, to the applicant within 30 days of the applicant’s
submission of the documentation required under section 9.04.030.
3. Noncompliance. If the building official determines that the applicant has not made a
good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the
documentation, then, at the building official’s discretion, (a) the final inspection approval
will not be issued, or (b) the performance security shall be forfeited to the city, or (c)
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-10
both. Additionally, noncompliance may be subject to further penalty as set forth in
division 9.10.
4. Use of forfeited security. Forfeited performance securities shall be deposited into a
special account and used for the purposes of (a) payment of any fines which may be
assessed against the city, and (b) promoting diversion and recycling within the city.
B. Cost recovery. The city council, by resolution, may set a fee to recover all costs of
determining compliance with this division.
9.04.050 Infeasibility exemption.
A. Application. If an applicant experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes
make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an
exemption at the time that he or she submits the waste management plan required under section
9.04.20. The applicant shall indicate on the waste management plan the maximum rate of
diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or
she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.
B. Granting of exemption. If the building official determines that it is infeasible for the applicant
to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall determine the
maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate to the applicant in a
letter, and the waste management plan shall be deemed approved as modified by such letter.
C. Denial of exemption. If the building official determines that it is possible for the applicant to
meet the diversion requirement, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant
shall have 30 days to resubmit a waste management plan.
9.04.060 Appeals.
An applicant may appeal a determination made under this division to the city administrator. In
order to appeal, the applicant shall file a written appeal with the city clerk within 10 days after
the determination of the building official, stating the reasons for the appeal and deposit the
appeal fee, as set by resolution of the city council. The city administrator may designate a
hearing officer for consideration of the appeal. An appeal is limited to the following issues:
A. the granting or denial of an infeasibility exemption;
B. whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with the waste
management plan; and
C. the amount of security to be released.
The city administrator, or hearing officer if designated, shall hear the appeal within 60 calendar
days, and shall give 10 days prior written notice to the applicant. The decision of the city
administrator or hearing officer shall be final.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-11
DIVISION 9.05 PROHIBITIONS
Sections:
9.05.010 Burning or burying solid waste prohibited
9.05.020 Littering and dumping prohibited
9.05.030 Collection vehicles weight restriction
9.05.040 Prohibited materials in solid waste carts
9.05.010 Burning or burying solid waste prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to burn or bury any solid waste in any yard or open space within the
city.
9.05.020 Littering and dumping prohibited1.
It is unlawful for a person to litter or dump any solid waste in the city.
9.05.030 Collection vehicles weight restriction.
A vehicle removing or carrying solid waste or construction and demolition debris may not
exceed 18,000 pounds per axle, and may not exceed 52,000 pounds gross vehicle weight when
loaded.
9.05.040 Prohibited materials in solid waste carts.
No person shall place any exempt waste, e-waste, u-waste, human waste and other potentially
infectious material in any solid waste cart.
1 For state law as to deposit of offensive matter upon roads or private property, see Pen. C. §374b.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-12
DIVISION 9.10 ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
9.10.010 Enforcement authority
9.10.020 Container removal fine
9.10.030 Misdemeanor, Penalty, City Remedies
9.10.010 Enforcement Authority.
The director has the authority to enforce this chapter, in addition to the authority granted to
police officers. The director is authorized to establish rules and regulations for the purpose of
enforcing of the provisions of this chapter.
9.10.020 Container removal fine.
The city will provide written notification to single-family dwelling service recipients who violate
Section 9.04.050. For the fourth and subsequent violation of this section in any one calendar
year, the city may impose fines as follows:
Forth offense $50.00 fine
Fifth offense $100.00 fine
Six offense $150.00 fine
The failure to pay fines imposed, or the seventh offense for failure to comply with the
requirements of Section 9.04.050, constitutes a violation of this chapter. If a violation has
occurred, the director may require that the single-family dwelling service recipient subscribe to
and pay for on-premises collection as provided by the contractor.
9.10.030 Misdemeanor, Penalty, City Remedies.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of
the requirements of this chapter. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a violation of any of
the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code shall
constitute a misdemeanor except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any such
violation constituting a misdemeanor under this code may, in the discretion of the attorney
having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.
B. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter, unless
provision is otherwise made in this code, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months,
or by both fine and imprisonment.
C. Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
the violation of any such provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-13
D. Each such person may be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which a violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted
by such person, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable accordingly.
E. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist
in violation of any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be
summarily abated as such by this city, and each day that such condition continues shall be
regarded as a new and separate offense.
F. In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may
be enforced by civil action brought by the City. In any such action, the City may seek, and the
court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:
1. A temporary and/or permanent injunction;
2. Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring
survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of
preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection (including attorneys' fees);
3. Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting
from the violation (including attorneys' fees).
G. The city may enforce this chapter by any lawful means possessed by the city, including but
not limited to those set forth in section 1.7 and 1.9 of the code, and any remedies available under
any applicable state or federal law pursuant to any other lawful power the city may possess.
Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other
remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-14
DIVISION 9.11 DEFINITIONS
Sections:
9.11.010 Definitions
9.11.010 Definitions.
In this chapter:
Applicant means the person or entity (or the authorized representative) who submits an
application for approval for a city permit to undertake any construction, demolition, or
renovation project in the city. An applicant need not possess legal title to the subject property, so
long as the applicant is an authorized agent with the written consent of the property owner.
Business service unit means a retail, professional, office, or other commercial enterprise offering
goods or services to the public.
Collection means the process whereby solid wastes are removed and transported to a disposal
facility, organic wastes processing facility, organic waste processing facility or materials
recovery facility, as appropriate.
Collection services means single-family dwelling (SFD) collection service, multi-family
dwelling (MFD) collection service, City collection service, and Commercial collection service.
Commercial collection service means collection of garbage, organic waste, large items, and
recyclables materials from a business service unit.
Construction means the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including
owner or tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.
Construction and demolition debris means commonly used or discarded materials removed from
construction, remodeling, repair, demolition, or renovation operations on any pavement, house,
commercial building, or other structure, or from landscaped areas. Such materials include, dirt,
sand, rock, gravel, bricks, plaster, gypsum wallboard, aluminum, glass, asphalt material, plastics,
roofing material, cardboard, carpeting, cinder blocks, concrete, copper, electrical wire, fiberglass,
Formica, granite, iron, lad, linoleum, marble, plant debris, pressboard, porcelain, steel, stucco,
tile, vinyl, wood, masonry, trees, remnants of new materials, including paper, plastic, carpet
scraps, wood scraps, scrap metal, building materials, packaging and rubble. Construction and
demolition debris does not include exempt waste.
Construction and Demolition Debris Processing Facility means a facility that is operated and
legally permitted for the purpose of accepting construction and demolition debris for receiving,
sorting, processing, storing and/or preparing construction and demolition debris for sale.
Contractor means the person or entity designated by the city council to provide exclusive
collection of solid waste within the city limits.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-15
Demolition means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility,
structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.
Director means the Public Works Director or his or her designee.
Divert means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation
facility.
Dwelling unit means a room or a suite of connecting rooms, which provides complete,
independent living quarters for one or more persons, including permanent facilities for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and which complies with all building and construction
code requirements.
E-Waste means discarded electronics equipment such as cell phones, computers, monitors,
televisions, and other items containing cathode ray tubes (CRTs), LCDs or plasma screens and
monitors.
Exempt waste means biohazardous or biomedical waste, hazardous waste, household hazardous
waste, sludge, automobiles, automobile parts, boats, boat parts, boat trailers, internal combustion
engines, lead-acid batteries, and those wastes under the control of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
Food waste means food scraps and trimmings from food preparation, including but not limited
to: meat, fish and dairy waste, fruit and vegetable waste, grain waste, and acceptable food
packaging such items as pizza boxes, paper towels, waxed cardboard and food-contaminated
paper products.
Franchise agreement means the agreement entered into between the city and the city’s
designated contractor for the exclusive collection of solid waste generated within the city limits.
Garbage means all non-recyclable packaging, and putrescible waste attributed to normal
activities of a service unit. Garbage must be generated by and at the service unit wherein the
garbage is collected. Garbage does not include those items defined as recyclable materials,
organic waste, large items, E-waste, U-waste, or exempt waste.
Green Waste means any vegetative matter resulting from normal yard and landscaping
maintenance that is not more than three feet in its longest dimension or six inches in diameter
and fits in the organic waste cart or overage bag used by the service recipient. Green waste
includes plant debris, such as palm, yucca and cactus, ivy, grass clippings, leaves, pruning,
weeds, branches, brush, holiday trees, and other forms of vegetative waste and must be generated
by and at the service unit wherein the green waste is collected. Green waste does not include
exempt waste.
Large items means those materials including furniture; carpets; mattresses; white goods; brown
goods; E-waste; clothing; tires without rims; large green waste that does not exceed seven feet by
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-16
four feet by two feet (7’x4’x2’) and weighing no more than 60 pounds, which are attributed to
the normal activities of a single-family dwelling service unit, multi-family dwelling service unit
that receives cart collection, or city service unit. Large items must be generated by and at the
service unit where the large items are collected. Large items do not include exempt waste.
Large green waste means oversized green waste such as tree trunks and branches with a diameter
of not less than six inches and not more than two feet and a length of not more than five feet in
its longest dimension, which are attributed to the normal activities of a single-family dwelling,
multi-family dwelling, or city service unit. Large green waste must be generated by and at the
service unit where the large green waste is collected.
Mixed construction and demolition debris includes the waste building materials, packaging and
rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements,
houses, commercial buildings and other structures.
Multi-family dwelling collection service means collection of garbage, organic waste, large items,
and recyclables materials from a multi-family dwelling service unit.
Multi-family dwelling service unit means any combination of dwelling units in the service area
using a common bin for the accumulation and set-out of garbage.
Organic waste includes food waste and green waste.
Overage bag means a biodegradable bag provided by the contractor to single-family dwelling
and multi-family dwelling service units for the periodic collection of green waste. Overage bags
will have a capacity ranging from 20 to 45 gallons and a load capacity of up to 50 pounds.
Project means an activity involving construction, demolition, or renovation, and which requires
issuance of a city building permit. For the purpose of section 9.04.010, project also includes any
city construction, demolition, or renovation over $25,000.
Recyclable material means those materials designated by the city which are capable of being
recycled and which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as garbage. Recyclable
materials includes: newsprint (including inserts); mixed paper (including magazines, catalogs,
envelopes, junk mail, corrugated cardboard, brown bags and paper, paperboard, paper egg
cartons, office ledger paper, and telephone books); glass containers; aluminum beverage
containers; small scrap and cast aluminum (not exceeding 40 pounds in weight nor two feet in
any dimension for any single item); steel including “tin” cans, aerosol cans (empty, non-toxic
products) and small scrap (not exceeding 40 pounds in weight nor two feet in any dimension for
a single item); bimetal containers; #1-7 plastics regardless of form or mold (including plastic
containers, bottles, wide mouth tubs, plastic bags, film plastic, and polystyrene), aseptic
containers, aluminum foil and pans; dry cell household batteries and cell phones when contained
in a sealed plastic bag; and other materials added by the city or the contractor from time to time.
Recycling means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting
materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-17
mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the
quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.
Renovation means a change, addition, or modification in an existing structure.
Reuse means the recovery or reapplication of the material for uses similar or identical to its
originally intended application, without manufacturing or preparation processes that significantly
alter the material.
Self-haul means when a generator collects solid waste at their premises or place of business for
the purpose of hauling those materials in their own vehicles to a permitted solid waste facility in
compliance with the requirements of the code.
Service recipient means a single-family dwelling service unit, multi-family dwelling service unit,
city service unit, or commercial service unit receiving collection service.
Service unit means single-family dwelling service units, multi-family dwelling service units, City
service units, and commercial service units.
Single-family dwelling collection service means collection of garbage, organic waste, large items,
and recyclables materials from a single-family dwelling service unit.
Single-family dwelling service unit means a dwelling unit in the service area using a garbage cart,
or any combination of dwelling units sharing garbage carts, for the accumulation and set out of
garbage.
Solid waste means garbage, recyclable materials, organic waste, construction and demolition
debris, bulky items, e-waste, universal waste or exempt waste, and other discarded solid and
semi-solid wastes as defined in the California Public Resource Code Section 40191, as that
section may be amended from time to time. Solid waste does not include any of the following
wastes: (1) hazardous waste; (2) radioactive waste; and (3) medical waste regulated pursuant to
the Medical Waste Management Act.
Solid waste bin means a metal or plastic container, with a capacity of between one and ten cubic
yards for the collection of garbage, organic waste and recyclables materials and designed or
intended to be mechanically dumped into a loader packer type truck that is approved for such
purpose by the city. Solid waste bins may also include compactors that are owned by the multifamily
dwelling or commercial service unit where the multi-family dwelling or commercial
collection service occurs.
Solid waste cart means a heavy plastic receptacle with wheels and a rated capacity of between 20
gallons and 96 gallons, having a hinged, tight-fitting lid and wheels that is approved by the city
representative for use by service recipients for collection of garbage, organic waste, and
recyclables materials.
Chapter 9 – Solid Waste
9-18
Special event means an occasional or recurring event scheduled to occur on public property,
whether publicly or privately organized or sponsored. Special events include, but are not limited
to: fairs, festivals, parades, sporting events, concerts, outdoor movies and catered events.
Universal waste or U-waste means fluorescent lamps, cathode ray tubes, non-empty aerosol
cans, instruments and switches that contain mercury, and dry cell batteries containing cadmium
copper, or mercury.
Rev. 2018-06-20 (Ord. 744 N.S. – 05/2018)
Licenses
10-1
Chapter 10
LICENSES1
§10.1 Purpose of chapter
§10.2 Definitions
§10.3 Tax imposed
§10.4 Tax receipt
§10.5 Exemptions from tax
§10.6 Exclusions from chapter
§10.7 Amount of tax
§10.8 Failure to pay
§10.9 Penalties
§10.10 Hearing
§10.11 Appeal
§10.12 Delinquent tax collection
§10.13 Enforcement of chapter; powers and duties of city clerk
§10.14 Garage sales
SEC. 10.1 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER
10.1.1: Purpose. This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal
purposes and is not intended for the purpose of regulation. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 522
N.S., 9/90)
10.1.2: Effective Date. The liability for taxes on rental property imposed by this
Chapter 10 shall commence July 1, 1991. Business taxes on rental property for the period July 1,
1991 through December 31, 1991 shall be due and payable on or before March 1, 1992. All
taxes for rental property for each calendar year after 1991 shall be due and payable on or before
March 1 of the next calendar year. Liability for all other taxes paid under this chapter shall be
quarterly or annually. (Ord. No. 525 N.S 4/91, 552 N.S. 1/94.)
SEC. 10.2 DEFINITIONS
10.2.1: For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and
certain provisions shall be construed as herein set out unless it shall be apparent from their
context that a different meaning is intended:
10.2.2: Advertising Material Distribution. The business of distributing,
circulating or delivering of any paper, advertisement, broadside, handbill, circular, dodger, card,
1 For state law as to authority of City to license for revenue and regulation purposes, see Gov. C., '37101.
As to authority of City to license in exercise of police power and for purpose of regulation, see B. &
P.C. '16000. As to licensing by cities generally, see B.& P.C.''16000 to 16003. As to dog licenses, see
''4.2 to 4.12 of this Code.
Licenses
10-2
poster, sample, booklet, pamphlet or other advertising medium of similar nature.
10.2.3: Apartment House. Any building or portion thereof which is designed,
built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or
residence of three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking in the building and shall include flats and apartments.
10.2.4: Charitable. For the benefit of underprivileged or economically and
socially disadvantaged persons.
10.2.5: Construction. Trades and service providers who perform any act related to
the maintenance, repair, renovation or other alteration, demolition or construction of existing or
new structures or portions of structures, or of fixtures within structures, including but not limited
to general building contractors, subcontractors, carpenters, electricians, plumbers, masons,
concrete finishers, heating and air conditioning service and installation, painters, and roofers.
(Ord. No. 529 N.S.)
10.2.6: Employee. All persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any
business, whether as owner, any member of the owner's family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor
and any and all other persons employed or working in such business.
10.2.7: Engaging in Business. Selling or offering for sale any goods or services.
(Ord. No. 238 N.S., 8/63; Ord. No. 247 N.S., 6/64; 552 N.S. 1/94)
10.2.8: Fixed Place of Business. A place of business in the City regularly kept
open with someone in charge thereof for the transaction of the particular business engaged in
during the hours customary to transact such business or, for purposes of the rental property tax, a
single family residential unit or second unit, apartment building, or commercial or office
building.
10.2.9: Gross Receipts. "Gross receipts" as used in this chapter shall mean gross
receipts for business conducted in the City of Piedmont and shall include: the total amount
actually received or receivable from all sales, leases and rentals; the total amount or
compensation actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, or
whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act
or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or
merchandise; and gains realized from trading in stocks or bonds, interests discounts, rents,
royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, or other emoluments, however designated. Included in
"gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash credits and property of any kind or nature from
business conducted in the City of Piedmont, without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs sold, the cost of
materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses
whatsoever, except that the following shall be excluded therefrom:
(a) Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales.
(b) Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which
Licenses
10-3
property may later be sold, at which time the sale price shall be included as gross
receipts.
(c) Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and
collected from the consumer or purchaser.
(d) Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of a
contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit.
(e) Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when forfeited and
taken into income of the business shall not be excluded.
(f) Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to
the extent that such amounts are paid to those for who collected, provided the
agent or trustee has furnished the bureau permits and licenses with the names and
addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not
apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained by the agent or trustee.
(g) Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the
same business.
(h) Transactions between a partnership and its partners.
(i) Receipts from services or sales in transactions between affiliated corporations.
An "affiliated corporation" is a corporation: (i) the voting and nonvoting stock of
which is owned at least eighty percent by such other corporation with which such
transaction is had; or (ii) which owns at least eighty percent of the voting and
nonvoting stock of such other corporation; or (iii) at least eighty percent of the
voting and nonvoting stock of which is owned by a common parent corporation
which also has such ownership of the corporation with which such transaction is
had.
(j) Receipts from investments where the holder of the investment receives only
interests and/or dividends.
(k) Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or surplus trade
fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the licensee in the regular course
of the licensee's business.
10.2.10: Office Building. Any building containing one or more rooms which are
used or designed and intended to be used as an office or store of any kind.
10.2.11: Peddle. To offer for sale and to sell goods, services, or both to residents
without a prior invitation at any place in the city other than a fixed place of business.
10.2.12: Peddler. A person who peddles.
Licenses
10-4
10.2.13: Person. All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates,
joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or common
law trusts, societies and individuals and their agents.
10.2.14: Regular Employee. A person employed full time in accordance with the
general accepted standards for the particular trade or occupation in which he is engaged.
10.2.15: Solicit. To request (1) a resident's attention for an uninvited message or
(2) a donation for a specified purpose or cause.
10.2.16: Solicitor. One who solicits.
10.2.17: Unit. A single family residence, a building or buildings rented for
commercial use, a second unit, an apartment building, or space in a combined-use building
rented for commercial or residential use.
SEC. 10.3 TAX IMPOSED
10.3.1: General. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each business
which operates or otherwise in any way carries on business in the City shall pay a business tax.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either personally or for any other person, to commence,
transact or carry on any business in the City not excluded or exempt by the terms of this chapter,
unless the tax is paid and a receipt is obtained from the City first.
10.3.2: Method of Payment. Except for the dates provided in Section 10.1.2,
every person required to pay a business tax by this chapter shall submit an application for a tax
receipt to the city clerk and pay the tax due on or before expiration of the existing tax receipt or,
in he case of a new business, one or more days before beginning to conduct business in the City.
This application shall be a written statement on the form provided by the city clerk. The
application shall st forth such information as may be required to determine the amount of the
business tax to be paid by the applicant, including but not limited to a statement of gross receipts.
(Ord. No. 238 N.S., 552 N.S. 1/94
10.3.3: Method of Payment, Property Rentals. Except as provided in Section
10.1.2 for the first year of the business tax on rental property, any person renting or leasing a
single family residence, a second unit, office, other commercial space or apartments in the City
to other shall pay a business tax on or before March 1 of every year based on all gross receipts
for the prior calendar year.
10.3.4 Evidence of Liability for Tax In any action brought under or arising out
of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any ordinance imposing a business tax, the fact that
a party thereto represented himself as engaged in any business or calling for the transaction of
which a tax receipt is required or that such party exhibited a sign indicating such business or
calling shall be conclusive evidence of the liability of such party to pay for a license for such
business. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 522 N.S., 9/90, Ord. No. 525 N.S.)
Licenses
10-5
10.3.5: Application Information Not Conclusive. The information supplied on the
application for a tax receipt of renewal is not conclusive as to the matters set forth nor shall filing
an application preclude the City from collecting, by appropriate action, such sum as is actually
due and payable. The statement and each item in it shall be subject to audit and verification by
the city clerk or other employees of the City who are authorized to audit and inspect the records
of any business-taxpayer or applicant for a tax receipt as may be necessary in their judgment to
verify or ascertain the amount of business tax due. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2)
10.3.6: Examination of Applicant's Records. For the purpose of ascertaining the
validity of any statement filed or the amount of any business tax paid, the city clerk or any
person designated by him for that purpose is authorized to require production of and to examine
any papers, records and memoranda bearing upon the matter, including but not limited to
Schedule E of the federal Form 1040 or Schedule C of the State Form, and may require
attendance of any person having knowledge of the business and may take his testimony with
reference thereto. (Ord. No. 238 N.S. §2, 552 N.S. 1/94)
10.3.7: Confidential Nature of Required Information. The information furnished
or secured pursuant to the provision of this chapter shall be deemed confidential in character and
shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents shall not become
known except to the persons charged with the administration of this chapter. Unless in
compliance with judicial order or as may be required for the proper administration of this
chapter, the city clerk, his agents and employees shall not divulge facts or information obtained
in the administration of this chapter. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2)
SEC. 10.4 TAX RECEIPT
10.4.1: Contents of Tax Receipt. All tax receipts shall be prepared and issued by
the city clerk upon the payment of the sum required and each receipt shall be serially numbered
and state the following:
(a) The name of the person to whom the receipt is issued.
(b) The kind or kinds of business taxed.
(c) The location of such business.
(d) The date of issuance and expiration of such receipt. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2; Ord.
No. 522 N.S., 9/90)
In addition, the city clerk may provide such tangible proof of payment - a sticker, card, or
the like - and prescribe its display as deemed appropriate by the city clerk from time to time.
10.4.2 Displaying or Carrying of Tax Receipt Every person having a tax receipt
under the provisions of this chapter and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business
shall keep such receipt posted and exhibited while in force in some conspicuous part of such
Licenses
10-6
place of business. Every person having such a receipt and not having a fixed place of business
shall carry such receipt with him at all times while carrying on the business for which the same
was granted. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 522 N.S., 9/90, Ord. No. 525 N.S.)
10.4.3 Duplicate Tax Receipts Duplicate tax receipts may be issued by the city
clerk to replace any receipt previously issued which has been lost or destroyed. A fee in an
amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 238 N.S.,
§2; Ord. No. 367 N.S., §3; Ord. No. 522 N.S., 9/90, Ord. No. 525 N.S.)
10.4.4 Transfer and Amendment of Tax Receipt No tax receipt issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be transferred except under the following conditions:
(a) When a business transfers his from one location to another in the City, the tax
receipt previously issued may be amended to authorize the conduct of the
business at the new location.
(b) When a business conducted a from a fixed place of business is sold, a new tax
must be paid by the purchaser.
(c) When a peddling and soliciting tax receipt has been issued to and paid for by any
employer under the provisions of this chapter on behalf of a particular employee
or employees and there is a change in the personnel peddling or soliciting in the
City for such employer, such receipt may be amended to authorize peddling and
soliciting by such other personnel for the unexpired portion of the receipt.
(d) The tax receipt transfers and amendments authorized in this chapter may be
obtained upon application to the city clerk and payment of a fee as may be set
from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2; Ord.
No. 367 N.S., §4; Ord. No. 522 N.S., 9/90, Ord. No. 525 N.S.; Ord. 552 N.S.)
10.4.5 Tax Receipt Not To Authorize Conduct of Illegal Business No tax
receipt issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct
or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business or any business in violation of any ordinance
of the City. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2, Ord. 525 N.S.)
SEC. 10.5 EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX
Persons in the following categories shall be exempt from the payment of a business tax:
1. Any charitable institution, organization or association organized for charitable
purposes and conducted for charitable purposes only.
2. Any person conducting or staging any concert, exhibition, lecture, dance, amusement
or entertainment where the receipts, if any, derived therefrom are to be used solely for charitable
or benevolent purposes and not for private gain.
Licenses
10-7
3. Any religious, fraternal, educational, veteran, state, county or municipal organization
or association for the conducting of any business which is open to the members thereof only and
not open to the public.
4. Any religious, fraternal, educational, veteran, state, county or municipal organization
or association for the conducting or staging of any amusement or entertainment, concert,
exhibition, lecture, dance or athletic event when the receipts derived are to be used wholly for the
benefit of such organization and not for private gain of any person.
5. Any student organization or association sanctioned by the educational institution from
which the membership is drawn for the conducting or staging of any amusement or
entertainment, concert, exhibition, lecture, dance or athletic event when the receipts derived are
to be used wholly for the benefit of such organization and not for private gain of any person.
6. Any organization or association for the conducting or staging of any amusement or
entertainment, concert, exhibition, lecture, dance or athletic event when the use of the premises
upon which such activity is conducted or staged is a municipal use. "Municipal use" is a use or
performance which benefits the City as a whole or an organization or activity which benefits the
City or the Piedmont Unified School District and which has been endorsed by resolution of
either body. (Ord. 552 N.S. 1/94)
7. For the purposes of subsections (b), (d) and (e) above, the payment of necessary
expenses incurred in the conducting or staging of any amusement or entertainment, concert,
exhibition, lecture, dance or athletic event from the receipts derived therefrom shall not be
deemed to be the use of such receipts for private gain of any person.
8. Any person collecting rubbish or garbage under contract with the City for the portion
of such business done under such contract.
9. Solicitors engaged in interstate commerce when a business tax casts a burden upon
such interstate commerce.
10. Any peddler or solicitor who is an inmate of the state industrial home for the blind or
who has been honorably discharged or released from the armed forces of the United States and
who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor and who is a qualified elector of
the City.
11. Every natural person of the age of sixteen years or under whose annual gross
receipts from any and all business are five hundred dollars or less. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2)
12. Private schools and tutors. (Ord. No. 522 N.S., 9/90)
13. Persons employed as solicitors or peddlers by any person who has a fixed place of
business in the City and who holds a valid unexpired tax receipt for such business in the City.
The employer shall make application to the city clerk and shall furnish such information and
make such affidavits as may be required. Upon the determination being made that such solicitor
Licenses
10-8
or peddler is entitled to exemption under the provisions of this section and upon his complying
with the provisions of all other ordinances relating to peddling or soliciting, the city clerk shall
issue a free receipt to such person, which shall show upon its face that the business tax is exempt.
(Ord. No. 238 N.S. 4,6 2; Ord. No. 297 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 367 N.S., §8; Ord. 552 N.S. 1/94)
14. Any person required to conduct a business under any other ordinance of the City.
(That person shall nevertheless remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such ordinance.)
(Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2)
SEC. 10.6 EXCLUSIONS FROM CHAPTER.
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the terms hereof shall not be
deemed or construed to apply to any of the following persons:
(a) Any public utility which pays to the City a tax under a franchise or similar
agreement.
(b) Banks, including national banking associations as provided by Article XIII,
Section 16, Subdivision 1(a) of the state Constitution.
(c) Insurance companies and associations as provided by Article XIII, Section 14 of
the state Constitution.
(d) Any corporate political subdivision operating or causing work to be performed in
the City.
(e) Any person who the City is not authorized to tax under the constitution or any law
of the United States or the state.
The city clerk may require the filing of a verified statement from any person claiming to
be excluded by the provisions of this section, which statement shall set forth all facts upon which
the exclusion is claimed. (Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 522 N.S., 9/90, Ord. No. 525 N.S.)
SEC. 10.7 AMOUNT OF TAX
10.7.1: Basis of Tax. All business taxes shall be based upon gross receipts as
defined in Sec. 10.2.11 and set at the rates enumerated in Sec. 10.7.2.
10.7.2 Minimum Tax Any provision of this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, a minimum annual tax shall be set as follows and may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 238 N.S.; 367 N.S.; 522 N.S. 9/90; 552 N.S. 1/94)
Professional services including but not limited to attorneys; financial analysts; insurance brokers;
real estate brokers; medical, dental or other health professionals; engineers; accountants;
architects; MIS or computer consultants; graphic designers, auctioneers and all other consultants.
Rate: $2.00/thousand of gross Minimum: $100
Licenses
10-9
Sales including but not limited to both retail and grocers.
Rate: $2/thousand of gross Minimum $100
Rental space including but not limited to apartment, second units, single family or commercial
units.
Rate: $13.95/thousand of gross Minimum $200
Construction including but not limited to all state licensed contractors who perform landscape
renovation, building, structural repair, roofing, pool installation or repair, including subcontractors
such as plumbers, carpenters, electricians, painters, etc.
Gross receipts less than $25,000 $50/qtr or $100/year
Gross receipts greater than $25,000 $100/year
Gross receipts greater than $50,000 $2/thousand of gross
Commercial movie or video filmmaker whether or not the film is produced for a non-profit
enterprise
Rate: $500/day Minimum $500
Auctioneers
Rate: $200/day Minimum $200
Home occupations having a seller's permit and gross receipts of less than $3,000 per 12 months.
$50
Businesses not otherwise enumerated in Sec. 10.7.2 including but not limited to gardeners,
chimney sweeps, pest control, craft or art related businesses and all home occupations not
specifically covered above.
Gross receipts less than $5,000 $50
Gross receipts less than $50,000 $100
Gross receipts greater than $50,000 $2/thousand of gross
10.7.3 Engaging in Two or More Businesses at the Same Location Whenever
any person is engaged in two or more businesses at the same location, that person shall not be
required to pay a separate business tax for conducting each of these businesses but shall be
issued one tax receipt which shall specify on its face all the businesses, and the business tax to be
paid shall be computed as if one business were being conducting at that location. (Ord. No. 238
N.S. §2, Ord No. 525 N.S.; 552 N.S. 1/94)
10.7.4: Prior Year Assessments. If any person has failed to apply for and secure a
valid business tax receipt, the business tax due shall be that amount due and payable from the
first date on which the person was engaged in business in the City of Piedmont, together with
applicable penalties and interests.
Licenses
10-10
10.7.5: Notice Not Required. The city clerk is not required to send a renewal,
delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter and
failure to send such notice of bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the
provisions of this chapter.
SEC. 10.8 FAILURE TO PAY
10.8.1: Failure to Pay a Violation. Conducting any business without first paying
the tax and obtaining a receipt from the City shall constitute a misdemeanor. A separate
violation of this chapter shall occur for each and every day that such business is so conducted.
(Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2)
10.8.2: Conviction for Violation Not Waiver of Business Tax. The conviction and
punishment of any person for transaction any business without a business tax certificate shall not
excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any business tax due or unpaid at the time of
such conviction, and nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution of any violation of the
business tax provisions of this Chapter (Ord. No. 525 N.S.)
10.8.3: Determination of Tax. If any person fails to file any required statement
within the time prescribed, or if, after demand therefore has been made by the city clerk, he fails
to file a corrected statement within fifteen days after notification so to do or it appears to the
satisfaction of the city clerk that a statement filed does not set forth the true facts of the business
for which a tax receipt is required, the city clerk shall determine the amount of business tax due
from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain.
10.8.4: Notice of Determination. In case such determination is made, the city
clerk shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in
the United States post office, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at the address
appearing on his last receipt or application. If the business tax as finally determined under this
chapter exceeds the amount of such tax paid by the due date by 20 percent (20%) or more, then
the penalty herein shall apply to the entire amount of such tax which has not been paid by the
due date.
SEC. 10.9 PENALTIES
10.9.1: Penalty for Non-Payment of Annual Business Tax. The following are
delinquent: Every business tax which is not paid on or before the date set forth in Section 10.7.
The business taxpayer shall pay a penalty equal to 25 percent (25%) of the amount of tax if
delinquent from one to thirty (1-30) days, 50 percent (50%) for delinquency from thirty-one to
sixty (31-60) days, and 100 percent (100%) if delinquent more than sixty (60) days.
If a dispute arises regarding the date a payment was received by the City, the burden of
proof is on the taxpayer. Only the following are considered proof of timely payments:
(a) Cash register receipt issued by the city clerk to those taxpayers making payment
in person at City Hall.
Licenses
10-11
(b) Certificate of mailing issued by the U.S. Post Office.
(c) Certificate of registered or certified mail issued by the U.S. Post Office.
(d) Receipt of delivery to private mail services.
10.9.2: Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any person who fails to
remit any business tax imposed by the business tax provisions of this chapter shall pay interest at
the rate of one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) per month or fraction thereof, on the amount of the
tax and penalties from the date on which the business tax first became delinquent until paid.
10.9.3: Return Check Penalty. Whenever a check is submitted in payment of a
business tax and the check is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank upon which the check is
drawn, and the check is not redeemed prior to the expiration of the renewal or registration due
date, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus penalties and interest as provided for
in Section 10.11.2.
SEC. 10.10 HEARING
10.10.1: Request for Hearing. Any person receiving notice of determination of tax
under Section 10.8.4 may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make
application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount of business tax. If such
application is made, the city clerk shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner
prescribed herein to the business-taxpayer to show cause, at a time and place fixed in such
notice, why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax. (Ord. 552 N.S. 1/94)
10.10.2: Hearing. At such hearing the business-taxpayer may appear and offer
evidence why such specified tax should not be fixed as the business tax.
10.10.3: Final Determination of Tax. After such hearing, the city clerk shall
determine the proper tax to be charged shall forthwith give written notice to the businesstaxpayer
in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax. If
application by the business-taxpayer for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the
business tax determined by the city clerk shall become final and conclusive. (Ord. No. 238 N.S.,
§2)
SEC. 10.11 APPEAL
10.11.1: Appeal to City Council. Any person aggrieved by any decision of an
administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a tax receipt or
the amount of a business tax may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the
city clerk within fifteen days of such decision. (Ord. 552 N.S. 1/94)
10.11.2 Notice The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal,
and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such person of the time and place of hearing by
Licenses
10-12
serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person at the address appearing on his last receipt or application.
10.11.3 Action The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive, except
as the applicant may have the right to a judicial review of the matter. The findings of the
Council shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice
of hearing. The amount of any business tax finally determined as provided in this Section or
Section 10.7.2 shall be due and payable, together with any penalties that may be due thereon;
provided, however, if the amount of such business tax shall be fixed in accordance with the
original statement of the applicant, then no penalty shall attach by reason of any delinquency.
(Ord. No. 238 N.S., §2, Ord. No. 525 N.S.; Ord. 552 N.S. 1/94)
SEC. 10.12 DELINQUENT TAX COLLECTION
10.12.1: Business Tax a Debt. The amount of any business tax and penalty
imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City of Piedmont and any person carrying
on any business without first having procured a business tax receipt from the City shall be liable
to an action in the name of said City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of tax
and penalties imposed on such business.
The amount of tax, penalty and interest imposed under the provisions of this chapter is
hereby assessed against the business property on which the tax is imposed in those instances
where the owner of the business and the business property are one and the same. If the taxes are
not paid when due, the tax penalty and interest shall constitute an assessment against the business
property and shall be a lien on the property for the amount due, which lien shall continue until
the amount including all penalties and interest are paid, or until it is discharged of record.
10.12.2: Notice of Hearing on Lien. The city clerk shall file with the City
Administrator a written notice of those persons against whose property the City will file liens.
Upon receipt of such notice the City Administrator shall present same to the City Council, and
the City Council shall forthwith, by resolution, fix a time and place for a public hearing on such
notice.
The city clerk shall cause a copy of such notice to be serviced upon the owner of the
business/business property not less than ten (10) days prior the time fixed for the hearing.
Mailing a copy of such notice to the owner of the business/property at the address listed in the
most recent property ownership records provided to the City by the County Assessor as of the
date that the city clerk causes notice to be mailed shall compromise proper service. Service shall
be deemed complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail.
10.12.3: Collection of Delinquent Taxes By Special Tax Roll Assessment. With
the confirmation of the report by the City Council, the delinquent business tax charges which
remain unpaid by the owner of the business/business property shall constitute a special
assessment against said business property and shall be collected at such time as is established by
the County Assessor for inclusion in the next property tax assessment.
Licenses
10-13
The city clerk shall turn over to the County Assessor for inclusion in the next property tax
assessment the total sum of unpaid delinquent business tax charges consisting of the delinquent
business taxes, penalties, interest and including any amount charged by the Alameda County
Recorder's Office for recordation of the lien.
Thereafter, said assessment may be collected at the time and in the same manner as
ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure of sale as provided for delinquent ordinary municipal taxes. The assessment liens
shall be subordinate to liens except for those of state, county and municipal taxes with which it
shall be upon parity. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest and charges due
and payable thereon are paid. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of
municipal taxes shall be applicable to said special assessments. (Ord. 552 N.S. 1/94)
10.12.4: Recordation of Lien for Delinquent Charges. Upon conformation of the
report of delinquent business tax charges by the City Council, a lien on the real property for
delinquent business tax charges which were assessed will be recorded with the Recorder of the
County of Alameda.
SEC 10.13 ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER; POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY
CLERK
The city clerk shall enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. Each
department of the City which issues permits for work to be done shall require the production of a
valid unexpired tax receipt prior to the issuance of such permit.
The city clerk, personally or acting through a deputy or other duly authorized assistant,
shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the City to ascertain whether the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
The city clerk and each and all assistants and any police officer shall have the power and
authority to enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be
taxed herein and demand an exhibition of its tax receipt. Failure to produce a tax receipt on
demand constitutes a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties in this chapter provided. It
shall be the duty of the city clerk and each of his assistants to cause a complaint to be filed
against any and all persons found to be violating any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. No.
238 N.S. §2)
SEC. 10.14 GARAGE SALES
During each calendar year, at any single-family residence in the City, there may be sales
of personal property, commonly known as "garage sales", on no more than two calendar days.
Such sales shall be restricted to personal property owned by persons regularly residing in the
residence. No business license tax shall be assessed for such garage sales, but a permit
application fee in an amount set from time to time by resolution of the City Council shall be
obtained from the City and shall be plainly exhibited at all times at the place of sale.
Licenses
10-14
The provisions of this Code and all other City ordinances regulating signs apply to garage
sales. (Ord. No. 306 N.S., ''1, 4; Ord. No. 370 N.S., '1; Ord. No. 522 N.S., 9/90, Ord. No. 525
N.S; Ord. 552 N.S. 1/94.)
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-1
Chapter 11
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§11.1 Definitions
§11.2 Application of chapter to authorized emergency vehicles
§11.3 Restrictions on certain streets-Council may direct by resolution
§11.4 Same-superintendent of streets may permit exception
§11.5 Restriction on vehicles weighing over eight tons - Generally
§11.6 Operation of Skateboards, Skates or In-Line Skates
§11.7 Commercial vehicles not to be driven across private driveways, etc.
§11.8 Driving through processions etc.; direction of procession, etc., subject to order of
police department
§11.9 Clinging to moving vehicle
§11.10 Driving on new pavement or freshly-painted markings
§11.11 Entering intersections generally
§11.12 Roller skates, coasters, etc., prohibited on streets and sidewalks of business district
§11.13 Animals and vehicles not to be driven or ridden across or on sidewalks; exceptions
§11.14 Vehicles with cleats, etc.
§11.15 Designation of intersections at which turns prohibited
§11.16 One-way streets
§11.17 Council may control through streets, stop intersections and railroad crossings by
resolution - Generally
§11.18 Same-chief of police to erect and maintain signs
§11.19 REVOKED
§11.20 Violations of chapter
ARTICLE II. TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
§11.21 Authority of officers of police departments
§11.22 Obedience to traffic officers
§11.23 Direction of traffic by unauthorized person prohibited
§11.24 Public employees to obey traffic regulations
§11.25 Accidents involving damage to public or public utility property-report to be filed
§11.26 Same-contents of report
§11.27 Same-when operator incapable of making report
§11.28 Furnishing traffic accident data to interested parties; fee; exemption of political sub
1 For state traffic laws generally, see Veh. C., §1 et seq. As to uniformity of state traffic laws and applicability to
municipalities, see Veh. C., §21. As to powers of local authorities to regulate traffic, see Veh. C., §21100 et
seq. As to dogs in vehicles being deemed on premises of operator, see §4.13 of this Code. As to requirements
for vehicles removing or carrying garbage, see §'9.4, 9.7. As to prohibition against intoxicated persons from
being in or about vehicles, see §12.6. As to cleaning vehicles on streets or alleys, see §18.3.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-2
divisions from payment of such fees
ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§11.29 Police chief to place and maintain
§11.30 Installation in order to conform to state law
§11.31 Resolution of Council to require installation, etc.
§11.32 Requirements before enforcement against violators
§11.33 Obedience to instructions
§11.34 Hours of operation
§11.35 Painting center and lane lines
§11.36 Painting curbs
§11.37 Signs regulating parking-erection generally
§11.38 Same-obedience to signs required
§11.39 Markers and signs at intersections
§11.40 Street barriers and signs
ARTICLE IV. PEDESTRIANS
§11.41 Crosswalks generally-designation by police chief or Council
§11.42 Same-use by pedestrians
§11.43 Route of pedestrians crossing roadways
§11.44 Standing in roadway or crosswalk
§11.45 Pedestrians to obey special traffic signals
ARTICLE V. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§11.46 Application of article
§11.47 Unlawful parking generally
§11.48 Parking within allotted space
§11.49 Parking on sidewalks
§11.50 Parking on one-way streets
§11.51 Parking inside limit markers for funderals
§11.52 Parking for consecutive period exceeding seventy-two hours
§11.53 Parking on street to be cleaned, repaired, etc.
§11.54 Parking for principal purpose of sale or demonstration
§11.55 Parking on grades exceeding three percent
§11.56 Parallel parking required; exception
§11.57 Angle parking
§11.58 Standing for more than ten minutes during certain hours
§11.59 Temporary, emergency, etc., no-parking signs
§11.60 Repairing, greasing, etc., vehicles in street
§11.61 Parking on private property
§11.62 Parking time limits-Council to establish by resolution; violations unlawful
§11.63 Same-Council may waive by resolution
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-3
§11.64 Green curb markings
§11.65 Yellow curb markings
§11.66 White curb markings
§11.67 Special passenger loading zones
§11.68 Loading zones generally
§11.69 Coach zones
§11.70 Impoundment of vehicles-authority to remove illegally parked vehicles
§11.71 Same-storage of removed vehicle
§11.72 Same-notice to owner of vehicle removed
§11.73 Same-lien of garage keeper where removed vehicle stored
§11.74 When disabled persons are excepted from provisions of article
§11.75 Vehicles emerging from alleys, etc., required to stop
ARTICLE VI. PARADES
§11.76 Information sheet required; filing; fee; contents
§11.77 Time limitation generally
§11.78 Permitted on certain streets
§11.79 Limitation on space used
ARTICLE VII. NEIGHBORHOOD PARKING DISTRICTS
§11.80 Creation
§11.81 Parking district requirements
§11.82 Violations
§11.83 Artuna Avenue preferential parking
§11.84 Permit parking in front of private driveways
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 11.1 DEFINITIONS2
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BICYCLE. A light vehicle without a motor, having two wheels, handlebars and a
seat, propelled by the operator.
BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a street, when fifty percent or
more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three hundred feet or more, is occupied by
buildings in use for retail business; also, any territory contiguous to a street which is
2 For state law definitions contained in Vehicle Code, see Veh. C. §§100 to 675.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-4
immediately adjacent to or a continuation of a street within a business district when such
territory is so designated by a resolution of the City Council.
COACH. Any motorbus, motorcoach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a
common carrier of passengers.
CURB. The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such a curb be marked by
curbing construction, or not so marked. The word "curb" as used in this chapter shall not include
the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from
tracks or rights of way of public utility companies.
DIVISIONAL ISLAND. A raised island located in the roadway and separating
opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.
HOLIDAYS. Holidays, within the meaning of this chapter, are the first of January,
twelfth day of February, twenty-second day of February, thirtieth day of May, fourth day of July,
ninth day of September, first Monday in September, twelfth day of October, eleventh day of
November, twenty-fifth day of December, Good Friday from 12:00 noon until the hour of 3:00
p.m., and every day appointed by the President of the United States or by the Governor of this
state for a public fast, thanksgiving or holiday.
If any of the above-mentioned dates should fall upon a Sunday, the Monday following
is a holiday.
LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or
official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction.
PARK. To stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of
passengers or materials.
PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the police department of the City or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
STOP. When required, means complete cessation of movement.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-5
STOPPING OR STANDING. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.
TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, trains and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this chapter but
are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state thereto, such definitions are incorporated in this
chapter and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein as though fully set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.2 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES
The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of
vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles operated by the police or fire
department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which
public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle,
when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the state
Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.
The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the operator of any such
vehicle from the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of others. (Ord. No. 199
N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.3 PROHIBITION OF VEHICLES FROM CERTAIN STREETS
A. The City Council may from time to time by resolution prohibit the use of
particular streets by certain types of vehicles, including but not limited to commercial vehicles.
B. Whenever any resolution of the City Council designates and describes any street
or portion hereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited for any particular type of vehicle, the
Director of Public Works shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by
such resolution.
C. Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 35701a, and except as later modified
or revoked by City Council resolution, commercial vehicles exceeding five (5) tons are
prohibited on the following streets except at those times when it is necessary for said vehicles to
travel on said streets for the sole purpose of reaching a destination for loading or unloading,
provided that the route of travel on said street is the shortest deviation from the nearest truck
route or non-prohibited street:
1. Highland Avenue
2. Oakland Avenue from Grand Avenue to Scenic Avenue.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-6
3. St. James Drive from Park Blvd to LaSalle.
(Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58; Ord. No. 475 N.S., 2/86)
SEC. 11.4 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS MAY PERMIT EXCEPTION
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or operate upon any of the City streets any
vehicle in violation of such posted prohibitions pursuant to Section 11.3 of the City Code, or to
so move or operate any vehicle with a load in excess of those permitted by the state Vehicle
Code without a written permit from the Director of Public Works or his designee.
The Director of Public Works or his designee may, by written permit, authorize a load
in excess of those allowed for in the state Vehicle code, if, in his judgment, the streets upon
which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight, or if the
applicant will guarantee to the City that all costs of repair to the streets or to the public property
of the City damaged by the movement of such load will be paid in full. Such permit shall be
granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the Director of Public Works or
his designee in his discretion may require. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58; Ord. No. 475 N.S., 2/86)
SEC. 11.5 DESIGNATION OF TRUCK ROUTES
A. The City Council may from time to time designate certain streets as truck routes
for operation of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five (5) tons.
B. Whenever any resolution of the City Council designates and describes any street
or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any commercial vehicle or by any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five (5) tons, the Director of Public Works is
hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "Truck Routes" for
the movement of commercial vehicles or by vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of
five (5) tons.
C. When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by
appropriate signs, the operator of any commercial vehicle or any vehicle exceeding a maximum
gross weight limit of five (5) tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other, except
when necessary to traverse another street or streets to a destination for the purpose of loading or
unloading, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably
necessary.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-7
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: (1) passenger buses under the
jurisdiction of the Public Works Utilities Commission, (2) any vehicle owned by a public utility,
(3) refuse collection vehicles which operate on city streets pursuant to provisions of the City
Code, and (4) emergency vehicles.
E. Pursuant to California Vehicle Code and posted as 35700(a), the following streets
and street segments shall be designated as "Truck Routes" for commercial vehicles exceeding a
maximum gross weight limit of five (5) tons; except as such streets and street segments may be
modified or removed by resolution of the City Council:
(1) MORAGA AVENUE from the easterly City limit east of Maxwelton Road
to the westerly City limit at Ramona Avenue.
(2) GRAND AVENUE from the northerly City limit at Rose Avenue to the
southerly City limit at Wildwood Avenue.
(3) OAKLAND AVENUE from Grand Avenue to the westerly City limit west
of Olive Avenue.
SEC. 11.6 OPERATION OF SKATEBOARDS, SKATES, OR IN-LINE SKATES
11.6.1 Prohibition on City Streets - No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or inline
skates on the following streets in the City of Piedmont:
a. Blair Avenue
b. Crocker Avenue
c. Estates Drive
d. Grand Avenue
e. Hampton Road
f. Highland Avenue
g. LaSalle Avenue above Hampton Field
h. Lincoln Avenue
i. Linda Avenue
j. Magnolia Avenue
k. Moraga Avenue
l. Oakland Avenue
m. Trestle Glen Road
n. Wildwood Avenue
o. Winsor Avenue
11.6.2 Prohibited on Streets with Bots Dots - No person shall operate a skateboard,
skates or in-line skates on any street in the City of Piedmont on which Bots dots are located.
11.6.3 Prohibited on Private Property - No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-8
in-line skates on private property which has been properly posted without the prior written
permission of the owner.
11.6.4 Violations an Infraction Violations of Section 11.6 of this Code are an
infraction and subject to a fine of $25. (Ord. 628 N.S. 1/02)
SEC. 11.7 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ACROSS PRIVATE
DRIVEWAYS, ETC.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or
across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent
of the owner or occupant of the property, if signs or markings are in place indicating that the use
of such driveway is prohibited.
For the purpose of this section, a commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a
rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.8 DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS, ETC.; DIRECTION OF PROCESSION,
ETC., SUBJECT TO ORDER OF POLICE DEPARTMENT3
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral procession or a parade; provided, however, that such vehicles are
conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which
such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be entirely subject to the order of the
police department. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.9 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or
hold onto with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of
receiving motive power therefrom. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.10 DRIVING ON NEW PAVEMENT OR FRESHLY-PAINTED MARKINGS
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or across
any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in
place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in
place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.11 ENTERING INTERSECTIONS GENERALLY
3 For state law as to power of local authorities to regulate processions, see Veh. C.A., §21100 et. seq.
As to parking inside limit markers for funeral services, see §11.51 of this code.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-9
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter an intersection or a marked
crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or
pedestrians notwithstanding any traffic-control signal to proceed. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.12 ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, ETC., PROHIBITED ON STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS OF BUSINESS DISTRICT
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any
coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway or upon the sidewalk in the
business district. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.13 ANIMALS AND VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN OR RIDDEN ACROSS OR
ON SIDEWALKS; EXCEPTION
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any
vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk except over permanently constructed driveways
and except when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a
sidewalk; provided, that the sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two
inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the superintendent of streets.
Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours
from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. (Ord No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.14 VEHICLES WITH CLEATS, ETC.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate over the City streets any vehicle, piece of
equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges or other projections on the wheels or
tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or corrugations, a filler block may be placed on
each section so that a flat bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times. (Ord.
No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.15 DESIGNATION OF INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TURNS PROHIBITED4
The City Council may by ordinance designate those intersections at which it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a right, left or U-turn, and shall direct the chief
of police to place appropriate signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the
same shall be plainly indicated on the signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is
permitted, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to disobey the directions of any
4 For state law as to power of local authorities to prohibit the making of turning movements at intersections, see
Veh. C.A., §21961.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-10
such sign. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.15A DESIGNATION OF SPECIFIC INTERSECTIONS LIMITING TURNS
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a turn in that vehicle at the
following intersections within the time periods set forth hereafter:
(a) Left turns from Moraga Avenue to Estrella Avenue between the hours of 6:30
a.m. to 9:30 a.m. shall be prohibited. (Ord. No. 530 N.S., 12/91)
(b) Left turns from Moraga Avenue to Monte Avenue between the hours of 6:30 a.m.
to 9:30 a.m. shall be prohibited. (Ord. No. 533 N.S., 2/92)
(c) Left turns from Moraga Avenue to Mesa Avenue between the hours of 6:30 a.m.
to 9:30 a.m. shall be prohibited. (Ord. No. 533 N.S., 2/92)
The chief of police shall place appropriate signs at such intersection setting forth such
prohibition, including the hours during which such left turns shall be prohibited. (Ord. No. 530
N.S., 12/91)
SEC. 11.16 ONE-WAY STREETS5
The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to suitably indicate by
appropriate signs those streets or portions of streets designated by resolution of the Council as
one-way streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on any one-way street except
in the direction indicated by signs posted at intersections of such one-way streets. (Ord. No. 199
N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.17 COUNCIL MAY CONTROL THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS
AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS BY RESOLUTION-GENERALLY
The Council may by resolution designate and describe any street or portion thereof as
a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more
entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop. (Ord.
No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.18 SAME-CHIEF OF POLICE TO ERECT AND MAINTAIN SIGNS
The chief of police shall erect and maintain stop signs on each street intersecting a
through street or portion thereof so designated by resolution of the Council, and at those
5 As to parking on one-way streets, see §11.50 of this Code.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-11
entrances of other intersections where a stop is required, and at any railroad grade crossing so
designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the state
Vehicle Code. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.19 REVOKED: Ord. No. 563 N.S., 4/95
SEC. 11.20 VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this chapter or any section thereof
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
In addition to all other punishments herein provided, the court may, for a definite
period, suspend or revoke an operator's or chauffeur's license, upon conviction of the licensee for
a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
ARTICLE II. TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 11.21 AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT
Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of
police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in
conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to
expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the
fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to
the contrary contained in this chapter or the state Vehicle Code.
At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have gathered,
nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any police officer from prohibiting any
person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any
pedestrian from using any street or sidewalk, and the police officer shall have authority to direct
the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is hereby declared
unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey the police officer's order, signal or command,
regardless of any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-12
SEC. 11.22 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC OFFICERS6
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with or to perform any
act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer or a member of
the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of policy or by law. (Ord. No. 199 N.S.,
9/58)
SEC. 11.23 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSON PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person other than an officer of the police department or
members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person
authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that
persons may operate any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.24 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or
used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city, and it shall be
unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise
permitted in this chapter or by the state Vehicle Code. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.25 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO PUBLIC OR PUBLIC UTILITY
PROPERTY-REPORT TO BE FILED
The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any
accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility,
including but not limited to any fire hydrant, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power
pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature
located in or along any street shall, within twenty-four hours after such accident, make a written
report of such accident to the police department. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.26 SAME-CONTENTS OF REPORT
Every report required by the preceding section shall state the time when and the place
where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person
operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and
shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
6 For state law requiring obedience to traffic and police officers, see Veh. C.A., §2800.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-13
SEC. 11.27 SAME-WHEN OPERATOR INCAPABLE OF MAKING REPORT
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the
requirements or penalties of the two preceding sections, if at the time he is physically incapable
of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in Section 11.25 within
twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.28 FURNISHING TRAFFIC ACCIDENT DATA TO INTERESTED PARTIES;
FEE; EXEMPTION OF POLITICAL SUB-DIVISIONS FROM PAYMENT OF
SUCH FEES
Upon the termination of any criminal proceedings arising out of a traffic accident, or
upon the determination by the proper authorities not to file any criminal charges as a result of
such accident, but in all cases upon the termination of a period of six months after the date of the
accident, the police department is authorized to furnish photostatic or other reproduction of all
factual data authorized by Section 488.5 of the state Vehicle Code to the interested parties named
in Section 488 of the state Vehicle Code.
The City Council from time to time shall prescribe by resolution the fee to be charged
by the police department for furnishing such data.
No federal, state, county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any
department thereof, nor any governmental agency, nor any public office, board or body acting in
its official capacity, shall be required to pay the fee provided for in this section. (Ord. No. 164
N.S., 3/54)
ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES7
SEC. 11.29 POLICE CHIEF TO PLACE AND MAINTAIN
The chief of police shall place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained
official traffic- control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.30 INSTALLATION IN ORDER TO CONFORM TO STATE LAW
Whenever the state Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision
thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of
such law, the chief of police is hereby authorized to install the necessary devices subject to any
limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
7 For state law as to traffic signs, signals and markings, see Veh. C.A., §§21350 to 21463.
As to obedience to traffic signals by pedestrians, see §11.45 of this Code.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-14
SEC. 11.31 RESOLUTION OF COUNCIL TO REQUIRE INSTALLATION, ETC.
The chief of police may also place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices
as the City Council may, by appropriate resolution, deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic
or to guide or warn traffic. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.32 REQUIREMENTS BEFORE ENFORCEMENT AGAINST VIOLATORS
No provision of the state Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place and are
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions
of the traffic laws. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.33 OBEDIENCE TO INSTRUCTIONS8
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle or train to disobey the instructions
of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with this article, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer or other authorized person, subject to the exceptions granted the
operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Ord. No.
199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.34 HOURS OF OPERATION
The chief of police shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control
device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are
specified by resolution or ordinance of the City Council. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.35 PAINTING CENTER AND LANE LINES
The chief of police is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the
surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs
temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of
the center line of the highway. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.36 PAINTING CURBS
It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the City, to paint any street or
curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a
curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance
of the City pertaining thereto. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.37 SIGNS REGULATING PARKING9-ERECTION GENERALLY
8 For state law as to obedience to official traffic signs, see Veh. C.A., §21462.
9 As to temporary, emergency, etc., no-parking signs, see §11.59 of this Code.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-15
The chief of police is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint
upon the curb surface, all no-parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described
in this chapter. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.38 SAME-OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS REQUIRED
When curb markings or signs are in place, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.39 MARKERS AND SIGNS AT INTERSECTIONS10
The chief of police is authorized to place markers, signs or devices within or adjacent
to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections.
(Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.40 STREET BARRIERS AND SIGNS
It shall be unlawful for any person, public utility or department in the City to erect or
place any barrier or sign on any street, unless of a type approved by the superintendent of streets,
or to disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed
on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this City. (Ord. No. 199 N.S.,
9/58)
ARTICLE IV. PEDESTRIANS
SEC. 11.41 CROSSWALKS GENERALLY-DESIGNATION BY POLICE CHIEF OR
COUNCIL
The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish and maintain crosswalks at
intersections and to designate them by appropriate devices or painted signs upon the surface of
the roadway. The City Council may, by ordinance, designate those places where crosswalks
should be located between intersections. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.42 SAME-USE BY PEDESTRIANS
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross a roadway in any business district other
than by a crosswalk. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
10 For state law as to power of local authorities to place signs, etc., indicating turns at intersections, see Veh.
C.A., §22100.
For state law as to power of local authorities to place distinctive roadway markings, see Veh. C.A., §21459.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-16
SEC. 11.43 ROUTE OF PEDESTRIANS CROSSING ROADWAYS
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross a roadway at any place other than by a
route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a marked
crosswalk. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.44 STANDING IN ROADWAY OR CROSSWALK
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in any roadway or in a crosswalk if such
action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public
officer or employee, or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in the line of
duty. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.45 PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY SPECIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS
Pedestrians shall obey the indication of special traffic signals installed for pedestrians
only and shall disregard the indication of a vehicular signal at any location where special
pedestrian traffic signals are in place. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
ARTICLE V. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING11
SEC. 11.46 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or
public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or
operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection,
transportation or delivery of United States mail.
The provisions of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a
vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or official traffic-control device.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of this Code,
the state Vehicle Code or other ordinances of the City prohibiting or limiting the standing or
parking of vehicles in specified places at specified times. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.47 UNLAWFUL PARKING GENERALLY12
11 For state law as to power of local authorities to prohibit, etc., parking, see Veh. C.A., §21362. As to
stopping, standing or parking generally, see Veh. C.A., §§22504 to 22512. See also, Veh. C.A., §22509.
As to signs regulating parking, see §§11.37, 11.38 of this Code.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-17
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, park or leave
standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized
officer, or traffic sign or signal.
(a) Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with
appropriate signs or markings.
(b) Within fifteen feet of the property line of another street that crosses, intersects or
terminates in such street.
(c) On any street within the area opposite a street terminating into the first street
where the first street is less than fifty feet wide.
(d) On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public
walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street when such area is indicated
by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
(e) In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no-parking area, when
such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
SEC. 11.48 PARKING WITHIN ALLOTTED SPACE
In such areas where any painted or marked lines have been placed on the pavement for
the purpose of allotting space to parked vehicles, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle to park his vehicle, unless the vehicle is entirely within the limits of the allotted space.
(Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.49 PARKING ON SIDEWALKS13
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or leave standing any vehicle, or any
part thereof, on any sidewalk. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.50 PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS14
Any vehicle parked on a street designated as a one- way street shall be parked in
accordance with the provisions of this article, except that such vehicle shall be faced in the
direction indicated by the one-way street sign, and both wheels of such vehicle on the side
12 For state law as to prohibition against parking in specified places, see Veh. C.A., §22500.
13 For state law as to stopping, standing or parking on sidewalks, see Veh. C.A., §22500.
14 As to one-way streets generally, see §11.16 of this Code.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-18
nearest the curb shall not be more than one foot distant from the curb. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.51 PARKING INSIDE LIMIT MARKERS FOR FUNERAL SERVICES15
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park his vehicle for
any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and not to
exceed three minutes at any place between the limit markers or signs placed within the projected
real property boundaries of any private residence or any public or private place at any time
during or within forty minutes prior to the beginning of any funeral or funeral service, unless the
operator of the vehicle is directed by or has received permission from the director or other person
in charge of such funeral or funeral service to park such vehicle in such place; provided, that
such director or person in charge shall have placed and maintained prior to and during the time
limit herein specified two approved portable signs, one at each extremity of such place, upon the
sidewalk or pavement area and within two feet of the curb. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.52 PARKING FOR CONSECUTIVE PERIOD EXCEEDING SEVENTY-TWO
HOURS
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing or cause to be parked or
left standing any vehicle upon any public street in the City for seventy-two or more consecutive
hours. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58; Ord. No. 252 N.S., 11/64)
SEC. 11.53 PARKING ON STREET TO BE CLEANED, REPAIRED, ETC.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street,
or portion thereof, where the use of such street or portion thereof is necessary for cleaning,
painting, repairing or constructing of such street or for the installation of underground utilities
and authorized signs giving notice thereof have been posted at least twenty-four hours before
such work is to commence. If such signs give notice that the vehicle may be removed and such
signs have been posted at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal, any police officer may
remove or have the vehicle removed to any public garage not more than four miles from the
City. Notice shall be given to the owner of the vehicle and a lien shall be created for towing and
storage charges, all as provided in Section 585 of the state Vehicle Code. (Ord. No. 199 N.S.,
9/58)
SEC. 11.54 PARKING FOR PRINCIPAL PURPOSE OF SALE OR DEMONSTRATION
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle upon any street
in the City for the principal purpose of demonstrating it or displaying it for sale, unless
authorized by resolution of the Council. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.55 PARKING ON GRADES EXCEEDING THREE PERCENT16
15 As to driving through funeral processions, etc., see §11.8 of this Code.
16 For state law as to local regulation of parking on hills, see Veh. C.A., §22509.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-19
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stand or park such vehicle upon
any street, the grade of which exceeds three percent, without setting the brakes thereon and
blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. No.
199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.56 PARALLEL PARKING REQUIRED; EXCEPTION
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in a roadway,
other than parallel with the curb and with the two right-hand wheels of the vehicle within one
foot of the regularly established curb line; provided, however, that upon those streets which have
been marked for angle parking, as provided in the following section, vehicles shall be parked at
the angle to the curb indicated by such marks; provided further, that upon those streets which
have been marked as one-way streets, it shall be lawful to park parallel on the left side thereof
with the two left-hand wheels of the vehicle within one foot of the established curb line. (Ord.
No. 199 N.S., 9/58; Ord. No. 222 N.S., 11/61)
SEC. 11.57 ANGLE PARKING17
The City Council by resolution is hereby authorized to determine upon what streets
angle parking shall be permitted and to indicate such places by the painting of lines upon the
surface of the roadway to indicate the proper angle for parking; provided, that such lines shall
not be placed upon nor shall angle parking be permitted upon any street where such parking
would diminish the width of the roadway available for travel to less than twenty feet. (Ord. No.
199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.58 STANDING FOR MORE THAN TEN MINUTES DURING CERTAIN HOURS
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stand or allow the same to stand
while occupied by two or more persons for a period of more than ten minutes upon any street,
avenue or public place within the City between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. No.
199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.59 TEMPORARY, EMERGENCY, ETC. NO-PARKING SIGNS18
Whenever the chief of police shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is
likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for
other reasons, he shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or
posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited or restricted on
such streets as he shall direct during the time such emergency signs are in place.
17 For state law as to power of local authorities to permit angle parking, see Veh. C.A., §22502.
18 As to signs regulating parking generally, see §§11.37, 11.38 of this Code.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-20
Temporary "No Parking" signs may be issued and used in accordance with rules and
regulations therefor as adopted by the City Council. It shall be unlawful for any person to use
such signs, except in compliance with such rules and regulations.
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such
signs, except when such vehicles are provided with and displaying valid distinguishing markers
approved by the chief of police or when so authorized by any police officer. (Ord. No. 199 N.S.,
9/58)
SEC. 11.60 REPAIRING, GREASING, ETC., VEHICLES IN STREET
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed, to repair or
cause to be repaired or to grease or cause to be greased any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any
public street in the City; provided, however, that temporary repairs in case of an emergency may
be made upon a public street in the City. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.61 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, drive or leave any vehicle in, over, or
upon any private property without express or implied permission of the owner thereof, or the
person entitled to the possession thereof for the time being, or the authorized agent of either.
(Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58; Ord. No. 575 N.S., 5/96)
SEC. 11.62 PARKING TIME LIMITS-COUNCIL TO ESTABLISH BY RESOLUTION;
VIOLATIONS UNLAWFUL
The Council shall determine by resolution the location of all limited parking areas and
determine whether the limit shall be fifteen minutes, thirty minutes, one hour or two hour
parking and the chief of police shall mark with appropriate signs or curb markings the time limit
for parking applicable to the particular area.
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle within the City between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer
than the time established by the Council resolution. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.63 SAME-COUNCIL MAY WAIVE BY RESOLUTION
In its sound discretion and good cause appearing therefor, the Council, by resolution,
may waive the provisions of the preceding section and permit the parking of vehicles in fifteen
minute, thirty minute and one hour zones for extended periods of time. (Ord. No. 199 N.S.,
9/58)
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-21
SEC. 11.64 GREEN CURB MARKINGS19
Green curb markings shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer
than the time posted at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays
and holidays. The Council shall set such restricted times by Council resolution.
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such
legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58; Ord. No. 398 N.S.,
3/80)
SEC. 11.65 YELLOW CURB MARKINGS
Yellow curb markings shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other
than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading
of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, nor the loading or unloading of
materials more than twenty minutes. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.66 WHITE CURB MARKINGS
White curb markings shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose,
other than loading or unloading of passengers, which shall not exceed three minutes, except
when otherwise designated by appropriate signs. When authorized signs or curb markings are in
place, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park his vehicle in any
passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for
such time as is specified in this section. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
19 For state law as to curb markings to indicate parking regulations, see Veh. C.A. §21458.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-22
SEC. 11.67 SPECIAL PASSENGER LOADING ZONE
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle
in any special passenger loading zone, when approved permanent or portable signs are in place,
for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and
not to exceed three minutes.
Special passenger loading zones, as used herein, shall be those areas adjacent to the
curb, not more than sixty feet in length, located between two approved permanent or portable
signs in front of or adjacent to, and within the projected real property boundaries of any church,
theater, club or place of business or public gathering.
Such signs shall be provided and paid for by the church,theatere, club or place of
business or public gathering for which they are used and shall be approved by the chief of police.
The signs shall be located upon the sidewalk or pavement area within two feet of the curb, and
shall be used under such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the chief of police. (Ord.
No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.68 LOADING ZONES GENERALLY
The City Council may, by resolution, designate loading zones and passenger loading
zones at any place in any business district, or elsewhere in front of or adjacent to any place of
business or any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly, and the Council shall
direct the chief of police to mark such zones in an appropriate manner as provided in this article.
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park his vehicle in any loading zone for any purpose
other than loading or unloading passengers or materials for such time as is permitted in this
section.
Passenger vehicles may use a loading zone for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers, but may not load or unload materials, unless such passenger vehicles are used for
commercial purposes, which fact is plainly indicated by signs placed in the windows of such
vehicles, or by other appropriate markings. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.69 COACH ZONES20
The City Council may, by resolution, designate coach zones opposite curb space for
the loading and unloading of coaches and determine the location thereof, subject to the directives
and limitations set forth herein. The chief of police shall paint the curb red at places specified as
coach zones.
20 For state law as to local regulation of bus stands, see Veh. C.A., §21112.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-23
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle except a coach to stop, stand or
park such vehicle in a coach zone.
When stopping to load or unload passengers at places designated as coach zones, the
operator of the coach must stop or park the coach within the coach zone and in such manner that
the front wheel of the coach on the side nearest the curb is not more than three feet distant from
the curb; provided, however, that when stopping to load or unload passengers at coach zones
which are sixty feet or more in length, the operator of the coach must stop or park the coach
within the coach zone and in such manner that both wheels of such coach on the side nearest the
curb are not more than eighteen inches distant from the curb.
It shall be unlawful for any coach at any time to stop or be parked in any location other
than those locations designated by the City Council from time to time pursuant to this Section.
In addition to the provision of Section 11.20 of this Chapter, any regularly employed and
salaried officer of the City policy department may cause any unlawfully parked coach to be
towed away. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58; Ord. No. 464 N.S., 9/84)
SEC. 11.70 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES21 - AUTHORITY TO REMOVE
ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of the City may
remove or cause to be removed:
(a) Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for
seventy-two or more consecutive hours.
(b) Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council and signs are posted giving notice that such parking is prohibited
and violators' cars will be towed away.
(c) Any vehicle parked for eight or more hours in any area established by resolution
of the City Council as a no-parking area when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by
red paint upon the curb surface.
(d) Any vehicle parked upon any private property without express or implied
permission of the owner thereof or the person entitled to the possession thereof for the time
being or the authorized agent of either, with the exception of private or public parking lots.
In addition to any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of
the City, the owner of the private property or the person entitled to the possession thereof for the
time being or the authorized agent of either may remove or cause to be removed therefrom any
21 For state law as to local impounding ordinances, see Veh. C.A., §22653.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-24
vehicle parked on such private property which a regularly employed and salaried officer of the
police department of the City would be entitled to remove under subsection (d) of this section.
(Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58; Ord. No. 210 N.S., 2/59; Ord. No. 419 N.S., 9/81)
SEC. 11.71 SAME-STORAGE OF REMOVED VEHICLE
Any person referred to in the preceding section who removes any vehicle from any
private property in the City is hereby authorized to remove any such vehicle to any public garage
not more than four miles from the City. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.72 SAME-NOTICE TO OWNER OF VEHICLE REMOVED
Any person referred to in Section 11.70 who removes a vehicle from private property
shall give notice to the owner of the vehicle as provided in Section 585 of the Vehicle Code of
the State. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.73 SAME-LIEN OF GARAGE KEEPER WHERE REMOVED VEHICLE STORED
The keeper of any garage in which any vehicle is stored in accordance with the
provisions of this article shall have a lien thereon for his compensation for towage and for caring
for and keeping safe such vehicle, and may satisfy such lien upon compliance with and under the
conditions stated in Section 585 of the Vehicle Code of the State. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.74 WHEN DISABLED PERSONS ARE EXCEPTED FROM PROVISIONS OF
THIS ARTICLE
The provisions of this article regulating overtime parking shall not apply to any
vehicle owned and operated by a disabled person in any area limiting parking, subject to the
following requirements:
(a) The disabled person shall complete an application on a form furnished by the
police department. Upon approval of the application by the police department, the disabled
person will be issued one special vehicle identification windshield sticker and one personal
identification card.
(b) The disabled person shall have a valid driver's license and the personal
identification card in his immediate possession at all times when driving or parking a motor
vehicle and shall display his driver's license and identification card to any police officer upon
request.
(c) The disabled person shall display the special vehicle identification windshield
sticker in compliance with the provisions of Section 26708 of the state Vehicle Code.
(d) The disabled person shall operate the motor vehicle himself when expecting the
benefits herein stated.
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-25
(e) The disabled person will not be permitted to park a motor vehicle in any zone
where it is otherwise unlawful to park, nor to claim the benefits of this section while parked in a
fifteen minute parking zone.
Abuse of privileges, or noncompliance with any of the above mentioned requirements
by disabled persons, will constitute sufficient grounds for revocation by the chief of police of all
privileges herein granted.
"Disabled persons", as used in this section, shall mean any person who has completely
lost by paralysis the use of one or both feet or one or both legs, or who has had one or both feet
or one or both legs amputated. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.75 VEHICLES EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, ETC., REQUIRED TO STOP
The operator of any vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop
such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending
across any driveway. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 11.75-1 REMOVAL OF IGNITION KEY FROM UNATTENDED VEHICLE
No person shall leave a motor vehicle unattended on any street, alley or unattended
parking lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the ignition key
therefrom; provided, that any violation of the provisions of this section shall not mitigate the
offense of stealing such motor vehicle nor shall such violation be used to effect a recovery in any
civil action for theft of such motor vehicle, or the insurance thereon, or have any other bearing
on any civil action.
It is the intention of the Council in enacting this section to help prevent car theft and
related crimes by requiring all unattended vehicles to have the ignition keys removed and the
ignition locked. (Ord. No. 290 N.S., 2/70)
ARTICLE VI. PARADES
SEC. 11.76 INFORMATION SHEET REQUIRED; FILING; FEE; CONTENTS
Any person or group organizing, sponsoring, promoting, leading or directing a parade
within the boundaries of the City shall file with the city administrator no later than seven days
before such parade an information sheet, accompanied by a filing fee of fifty dollars, setting
forth the following: (1) the name or names of the persons or groups organizing, sponsoring,
promoting, leading or directing the parade; (2) the date, time of day and length of time of the
parade; (3) the route to be taken, including the streets to be traversed; (4) the number of persons
and vehicles estimated to take part in the parade. (Ord. No. 268 N.S., 12/66)
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-26
SEC. 11.77 TIME LIMITATION GENERALLY
No parade shall be held in the City between the hours of 7:30 to 9:30 a.m. or 4:00 to
6:30 p.m., except Saturday afternoons, Sundays and official City holidays. (Ord. No. 268 N.S.,
12/66)
SEC. 11.78 PERMITTED ON CERTAIN STREETS
No parade shall be allowed in the City except on the following streets: Bonita Avenue
between Magnolia Avenue and Oakland Avenue; Grand Avenue from City limit to City limit;
Highland Avenue between Moraga Avenue and Magnolia Avenue; Magnolia Avenue between
Highland Avenue and Bonita Avenue; Oakland Avenue between Highland Avenue and the
westerly City limit. (Ord. No. 268 N.S., 12/66)
SEC. 11.79 LIMITATION ON SPACE USED
No parade shall occupy more than the space between the center line and the curb on
one side of the street. (Ord. No. 268 N.S., 12/66)
ARTICLE VII. NEIGHBORHOOD PARKING DISTRICTS
SEC. 11.80 CREATION
By resolution the City Council shall create a parking district for the purpose of
regulating on-street parking in any area of the City described in a petition to the City Council
requesting creation of a parking district in the described area which is signed by the owners of
70% of the lots in the described area, if the City Council finds that:
(a) On-street parking in the described area is congested; and
(b) On-street parking congestion in the described area creates substantial
inconvenience for the residents of the proposed district; and
(c) On-street parking in the described area constitutes a safety hazard; and
(d) Use of existing off-street parking spaces is inadequate;
(e) Creating the parking district will not adversely affect the neighborhoods next to
the proposed parking district; and
(f) Creating the parking district will not adversely affect the general safety and
welfare of the residents of the City as a whole.
The City Council shall determine the exact boundaries of the parking district. (Ord. No. 516
Motor Vehicles & Traffic
11-27
N.S., 4/90)
SEC. 11.81 PARKING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
If a parking district is created under Section 11.80 of this Code, no car shall be parked on
any street in the district between the hours specified by the City Council except that the Police
Chief or his designee may issue on-street parking permits to residents living in the parking
district and their guests. (Ord. No. 516 N.S., 4/90, Ord. No. 618 N.S. 10/00)
SEC. 11.82 VIOLATIONS
A violation of any provision of this ordinance is deemed an infraction and is punishable
by a fine as may be established by the City Council from time to time in the City Parking Penalty
Schedule.(Ord. No. 516 N.S., 4/90, Ord. No. 618 N.S. 10/00)
SEC. 11.83 ARTUNA AVENUE PREFERENTIAL PARKING
The City Council shall adopt a preferential parking system for the Artuna Avenue
residents to mitigate traffic and parking related to creation of Dracena Quarry Park. (Ord. No.
566 N.S., 5/95)
SEC. 11.84 PERMIT PARKING IN FRONT OF PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS.
Within districts which have been previously designated by the City Council as "Parking
Impacted Districts," the Police Chief may issue at the discretion of the Police Chief a permit to a
Piedmont resident to park in front of that resident's private driveway; provided that under no
circumstances shall this authorize parking on a City sidewalk. (Ord. 632 N.S. 8/02)
Rev. 2/14/03
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-1
Chapter 12
OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS1
§12.1 Auction prohibited on Sunday or legal holiday
§12.2 Curfew-minor under eighteen not permitted in public places after 10:00 p.m.;
exception
§12.3 Same-liability of parent or guardian
§12.4 False calls for police protection
§12.5 Firearms, etc.-sales or gifts to minors; use or possession by minors; exceptions
§12.6 Intoxicated persons-prohibited from being in or about any vehicle
§12.7 Same-unlawful to appear in public place
§12.8 Noise declared nuisance
§12.9 Definitions
§12.10 Police services at parties, gatherings or events requiring a response
§12.11 Police service fee
§12.12 Exceptions
§12.13 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 569 N.S.
§12.14 Water-diverting flow of storm or surface water
§12.15 Numbering buildings
§12.16 Picketing
§12.17 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 266 N.S.
§12.18 Wild or vicious animals-keeping, etc., prohibited
§12.19 Same-running at large
§12.20 Same-animals causing noise, offensive odors, etc.
§12.21 Same-disposition of animals in violation of Sections 12.18 to 12.20
§12.22 CORPUS violations
§12.23 Prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages on public streets and sidewalks
§12.24 Discharge of firearms prohibited
ARTICLE II
REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§12.25 Definitions
§12.26 Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Places
§12.27 Prohibition of Smoking in Unenclosed Areas
§12.28 Reasonable Buffer Zone Required
§12.29 Penalties and Enforcement
1 For state law as to concealed weapons generally, see Pen. C. §§12000 to 12078.
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-2
SEC. 12.1 AUCTION PROHIBITED ON SUNDAY OR LEGAL HOLIDAY
No auction shall be held or conducted nor shall any item be offered for display in the
City on Sunday or any day designated as a legal holiday in the state. (Ord. No. 12 N.S., 5/34)
SEC. 12.2 CURFEW-MINOR UNDER EIGHTEEN NOT PERMITTED IN PUBLIC
PLACES AFTER 10:00 P.M.; EXCEPTION
Every person under the age of eighteen years who loiters in or about any public street or
other public place or any place open to the public in the City, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and the time of sunrise of the following day, when not accompanied by his parent, guardian or
other adult person having the legal care, custody or control of such person or spouse of such
person over twenty-one years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 167 N.S., 6/54)
SEC. 12.3 SAME-LIABILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN
Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any
person under the age of eighteen years who permits such person to violate any provision of the
preceding section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 167 N.S., 6/54)
12.3.1 Disorderly Assemblies or Congregations. It shall be unlawful for two or more
persons to congregate or assemble for the purpose of engaging in any type of activity or
disturbance that may result in harm to persons or property to make or endeavor or make any
disturbance on any public street or other public property. (Ord. No. 237 N.S., 4/63)
SEC. 12.4 FALSE CALLS FOR POLICE PROTECTION
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to report or cause to be reported to the
police department any false or fictitious request for protection or assistance, or any false or fictitious
information indicating that a crime has been or is about to be committed, or to knowingly
cause the police department to respond to any such false or fictitious report, or to request any
assistance or investigation in connection with or as a result of any such false or fictitious report
or false or fictitious information. (Ord. No. 135 N.S., 4/50)
SEC. 12.5 FIREARMS, ETC.2 -SALES OR GIFTS TO MINORS; USE OR POSSESSION
BY MINORS; EXCEPTIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give to any minor in the City, under the age
of eighteen years, or to allow any such minor to possess, use or discharge, or for any such minor
to use or possess, any rifle, gun, pistol, revolver, air rifle, B-B gun, slingshot or other similar
2 For state law as to firing of firearms, see Gov. C. §25840. As to discharge of firearms at
dwelling houses, etc., see Pen. C. §246. As to shooting firearms from or upon public roads
or highways, see Pen. C. §374c. As to discharge of firearms, see §12.24 of this Code.
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-3
instrument from or by means of which any bullet, shot or other missile of any kind may be projected;
provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession of
such firearms or other instruments by such minors in bona fide shooting galleries, gun clubs or
organizations and educational institutions authorized to give firearm instructions, while such
firearms or other instruments are being used as a part of such instructions, nor to the possession
of unloaded firearms, air rifles or other such instruments by any such minor as an employee of a
merchant, when such possession is in the usual course of his employment. (Ord. No. 82, N.S.,
6/37)
12.5.1 Fortune-Telling, Etc. for Fees, Salary or Any Other Compensation. It shall be
unlawful for any person to exhibit or conduct within the corporate limits of the City, for fees,
salary or any other compensation, the business, art or practice of astrology, palmistry,
phrenology, life reading, fortune-telling, cartomacy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing,
mediumship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic or necromancy. (Ord. No. 234 N.S., 12/62)
12.5.2 Insulting, Annoying, Etc., Remarks to or Molestation of Another in Public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make audible annoying or insulting remarks to or
about or to molest in any other manner whatever, any person in, near or about a public place.
(Ord. No. 237 N.S., 4/63)
SEC. 12.6 INTOXICATED PERSONS-PROHIBITED FROM BEING IN OR ABOUT
ANY VEHICLE
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotic drugs to be in or about any vehicle to which he has right of access or control while such
vehicle is in or upon any street or any other public place in the City, unless the vehicle is under
the immediate control or operation or a person not under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotic drugs. (Ord. No. 163 N.S., 10/53)
SEC. 12.7 SAME-UNLAWFUL TO APPEAR IN PUBLIC PLACE
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place, or place open to public
view in the City, in an intoxicated or drunken condition. (Ord. No. 162 N.S., 10/53)
SEC. 12.8 NOISE DECLARED NUISANCE
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, and in addition thereto, it is unlawful
for any person to willfully make or continue or cause to be made or continued or to allow any
animal to make or continue to make any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the
peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable
person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. Such noise is declared to be a nuisance.
12.8.1 Standards to Be Considered. The standards which shall be considered in
determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-4
(a) The sound level of the objectionable noise;
(b) The sound level of the ambient noise;
(c) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
(d) The nature and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates;
(e) The density of the inhabitation of the area from which the noise emanates;
(f) The time day or night the noise occurs;
(g) The duration of the noise and its tonal content;
(h) Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent or intermittent;
(i) Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial activity;
(j) The intensity of the noise;
(k) Whether the noise is natural or unnatural;
(l) Whether the noise is usual or unusual. (Ord. No. 512 N.S.,12/89)
12.8.2 Prohibited Noise. In addition to the prohibition described in paragraph 12.8.1,
the following noise is specifically prohibited:
(a) Construction and Demolition. Operating or causing the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition activities
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day, Sunday evening through
Saturday morning, and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Saturday
evening through Sunday morning.
(b) Gasoline-Powered Blower. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
gasoline-powered device used to blow leaves, dirt or other debris off sidewalks,
driveways, lawns or other surfaces within any area of the City except that
gasoline-powered leaf blowers may be used by public agencies on publiclyowned
or operated facilities. (Ord. No. 517 N.S., 3/90)
12.8.3 Exceptions
(a) Emergency Repairs. Emergency work conducted by public service utilities or
governmental agencies shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance;
provided that in the case of such emergency work, the public service utilities or
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-5
government agencies involved shall promptly contact the Piedmont Police
Department prior to or within 30 minutes after commencing such emergency
work, providing the Police Department with the exact location of the work, the
time anticipated to complete the work, the nature of the work to be performed,
and whether any assistance from the Police Department or other City services are
anticipated in connection with such emergency work.
(b) Other. The City Administrator may grant temporary written exceptions to the
Noise Ordinance upon the showing of good cause by the applicant. (Ord. No. 512
N.S., 12/89)
12.8.4 Violations. Violation of any provision of the Noise Ordinance shall be an
infraction. The City Council shall set the fine for violations from time to time by resolution.
(Ord. No. 512 N.S., 12/89)
SEC. 12.9 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of Sections 12.10, 12.11 and 12.12, the following definitions shall
apply:
(a) Party, Gathering, or Event. “Party, gathering or event” means a group of persons
who have assembled or assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity.
(b) Police Services. “Police services” means the law enforcement and rime
prevention services provided by the City Police Department and include the
salaries of the police officers for the amount of time actuallyspent in responding
to or in remaining at the party, gathering or event, the actual cost of any medical
treatment to injured officers, and the cost of repairing any damaged City
equipment or property.
(c) Person Responsible for Event. “Person responsible for event” means the person
who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the party,
gathering or event takes place. If the person in charge of the premises and/or the
person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that
minor will jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for police services
pursuant to Sections 12.10, 12.11 an 12.12 of the Code; where they or either of
them knew or should have known that such party, gathering or event would take
place. (Ord. 608 N.S. 9/99, previous section repealed by Ord. No. 517 N.S., 3/90)
SEC. 12.10 POLICE SERVICES AT PARTIES, GATHERING OR EVENTS REQUIRING
A RESPONSE
When a party, gathering or event occurs on public or private property and a police officer
at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare,
the person or persons responsible for the event shall be held liable for the cost of providing
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-6
police services by the police. (Ord. 608 N.S. 9/99, previous section repealed by Ord. 517 N.S.
3/90)
SEC. 12.11 POLICE SERVICES FEE.
The police services fee shall include the cost of personnel and equipment, but shall not
exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) for a single incident; provided however that the City
does not hereby waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs exceeding One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000) through other legal remedies. The amount of such fees shall be deemed a debt
to the City of the person responsible for the event. Any person owing such fees shall be liable in
an action brought in the name of the City for recovery of such fees, including reasonable
attorney’s fees. (Ord. 608 N.S. 9/99, previous section repealed by Ord. 517 N.S., 3/90)
SEC. 12.12 EXCEPTIONS
An exception to the provisions of Section 12.10 and/or Section 12.11 hereof will apply to
a person who make all reasonable good faith efforts to prevent the activities or situations
described in Section 12.10 and/or Section 12.11, such as calling the Piedmont Police Department
in timely fashion for assistance. (Ord. 608. N.S. 9/99, previous section repealed by Ord. 569
N.S., 5/97)
SEC. 12.13 REPEALED (Ord. No. 569 N.S., 5/97)
SEC. 12.14 WATER-DIVERTING OF STORM OR SURFACE WATER3
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any premises in the City
to divert, direct or drain storm or surface water, by means of the use of a ditch, conduit, trough,
pipe or subdrain, to empty into or upon any portion of that area between the property line of such
premises and the street curb immediately adjacent to the property line of such premises. (Ord.
No. 95 N.S., 5/41)
SEC. 12.15 NUMBERING BUILDINGS
The owners and occupants of each house in the City shall install and maintain the street
number thereof, either on such house or on some other structure or a plaque located between the
house and the street. Such number shall be located and maintained so that it will be clearly
visible from the street in front of such house at all times and shall be in contrast with the color of
the background upon which it appears. A number painted or affixed to the curb, although not
illegal, shall not meet the requirements of this section. (Ord. No. 215 N.S., 10/60)
SEC. 12.16 PICKETING
12.16.1 Picketing Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to picket in front of or about
3 In connection with this section, see '18.6.
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-7
the residence or dwelling of any individual in the City of Piedmont. A separate offense shall
occur for each day of picketing.
12.16.2 Picketing Defined. "Picketing" is defined as posting one or more persons for a
demonstration or protest which is focused on and taking place in front of or about a particular
residence or dwelling, without invitation from the resident or residents.
12.16.3 Violation of a Misdemeanor. Violation of this prohibition against picketing is
a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment for
each offense. (Ord. No. 509, N.S., 3/89)
SEC. 12.17 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 266 N.S.
SEC. 12.18 WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS4-KEEPING, ETC., PROHIBITED
No person shall have, keep, maintain or have in his possession or under his control,
within the City, any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard, wolf, ape,
cheetah or chimpanzee, or any poisonous reptile or serpent, or any wild animal or reptile
commonly considered dangerous, or any wild animal or reptile of wild or vicious or dangerous
propensities. (Ord. No. 262 N.S., 3/66; Ord. No. 263 N.S. 6/66)
SEC. 12.19 SAME-RUNNING AT LARGE
No person owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any animal known
by such person to be vicious or dangerous, or commonly so known, shall permit or allow the
same to run at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court, park or other public place, or
upon any private property, or on or within the premises of such person or organization in such
manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises.
Domesticated dogs are specifically excluded from this section. (Ord. No. 263 N.S., 6/66)
SEC. 12.20 SAME-ANIMALS CAUSING NOISE, OFFENSIVE ODORS, ETC.
No person shall have, keep, possess, maintain or control within the City any animal not
mentioned in Sections 12.18 and 12.19 in such a manner as to cause or permit the making of
excessive noise or offensive odors, damage to property, or a clear or present danger to the public
health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. No. 263 N.S., 6/66)
SEC. 12.21 SAME-DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS IN VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 12.18 to
12.20
Any animal whose presence in the City is in violation of Sections 12.18, 12.19, and 12.20
may be taken into custody by a police officer or any other agency or agent authorized by the
4 As to animals generally, see Chapter 4 of this Code.
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-8
police department or the City. Any such animal taken into custody may be disposed of by the
City by such means as are reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. No. 263 N.S. 6/66)
SEC. 12.22 CORPUS VIOLATIONS
Any unauthorized person who willfully and maliciously obtains personal data from the
Criminal Oriented Records Production Unified System (CORPUS) is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Any person who willfully and maliciously provides or has provided personal data from
the Criminal Oriented Records Production Unified System (CORPUS) to any unauthorized
person is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 327 N.S., 4/75)
SEC. 12.23 PROHIBITING POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON THE
PUBLIC STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
No person shall drink or have in his possession an open container of any alcoholic
beverage (1) on any public street, sidewalk or other public way; (2) within fifty (50) feet of any
public way while on private property open to public view without the express permission of the
owner, his agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof. This ordinance shall be enforced by
the issuance of citations by law officers, and fines for the violation of this ordinance shall be as
follows:
First offense $25.00
Second offense $40.00
Third offense or more $50.00
Bail for violations shall be $25.00. Exemptions to the provisions of this ordinance may be
provided by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. No. 386 N.S., 6/79)
SEC. 12.24 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS-PROHIBITED
No person shall discharge or fire any firearm within the City of Piedmont, except as
otherwise provided herein. For purposes of this Section 12.24, "firearm" is defined as a gun,
pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, BB gun, air gun, pellet gun, or any other weapon of a similar
nature designed to discharge a projectile propelled by the expansion of a gas or a spring.
a) Exceptions. The provisions of Section 12.24 shall not apply to the following:
1. To police officers, sheriffs, constables, marshals or other police officers,
or any person summoned by any such officers to assist in making arrests
or preserving the peace, or persons who are members of the armed
services of the United States, or in the National Guard, while such persons
are acting in the lawful discharge of their duties.
2. To persons using firearms in the lawful defense of self, third persons, or
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-9
the user's property.
3. To persons discharging or firing such firearms or causing them to be
discharged or fired at a firing, shooting or target range authorized,
established or maintained by a governmental entity with the consent of the
operator and under supervision of a person qualified to be in charge of
such range. (Ord. No. 402, N.S. 7/80)
(b) Violation a misdemeanor. Violation of this Section 12.24 is a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each
offense, or such maximum fine or such maximum term of imprisonment as may
be established from time to time by the State legislature for a misdemeanor
offense. (Ord. No. 578 N.S., 9/96)
ARTICLE II
REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SEC. 12.25 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article shall have the meanings defined
in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
(a) “Business” means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
association, or other entity formed for profit-making or non-profit purposes that is
open to and accessible to the general public, not including home occupations as
defined and regulated under Section 17B of the Piedmont Municipal Code.
(b) “Common Area” means any Enclosed Area of Multiple Dwellings that residents
are entitled to enter or use, including, for example, halls, lobbies and courtyards,
elevators and stairs, community rooms and playgrounds, gym facilities and
swimming pools, parking garages, shared restrooms, shared laundry rooms,
shared cooking areas, and shared eating areas.
(c) “Dwelling Unit” means independent living quarters as defined in Chapter 17 of
the Piedmont Municipal Code.
(d) “Electronic Smoking Device” means an electronic and/or battery-operated device,
the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled
dose of nicotine or other substances. “Electronic Smoking Device” includes any
such electronic smoking device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or
sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an
electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, vapor cigarette or any other product name
or descriptor. “Electronic smoking device” does not include any product that has
been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-10
tobacco cessation product and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease.
(e) “Employee” means any Person who is employed or retained as an independent
contractor by any Employer or Nonprofit Entity in consideration for direct or
indirect monetary wages or profit, or any Person who volunteers his or her
services for an Employer or Nonprofit Entity.
(f) “Employer” means any Business or Nonprofit Entity that retains the service of
one or more Employees.
(g) “Enclosed Area” means any covered or partially covered area having more than
fifty (50) percent of its perimeter walled or otherwise closed to the outside (for
example, a covered porch with more than two walls) irrespective of whether said
overhead covering, walls or other vertical boundaries include vents or other
openings.
(h) “Multiple Dwelling” means a residential structure containing more than one
dwelling unit as defined in Chapter 17 of the Piedmont Municipal Code. Multiple
Dwelling does not include a single-family home or a single-family home with a
detached or attached in-law or second unit.
(i) “Nonprofit Entity” means any entity that meets the requirements of California
Corporations Code section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated
association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic,
educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are
committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to
private gain. A government agency is not a Nonprofit Entity within the meaning
of this article.
(j) “Outdoor Dining Area” means an unenclosed area that is open to the general
public, or closed to the public for a private function, where food and/or beverages
are offered, served, or consumed, regardless of whether compensation is offered
or given in exchange. Outdoor dining areas do not include any unenclosed dining
area at a private residence.
(k) “Person” means any natural person.
(l) “Place of Employment” means any area under the legal or de facto control of an
Employer that an Employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the
normal course of the operations, regardless of the hours of operation, and includes
a private residence licensed as family day care home under California law, but
does not otherwise include single-family properties. Place of Employment
includes schools, preschools and day care centers.
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-11
(m) “Public Place” means any place, publicly owned, with the exception of streets,
sidewalks or rights of way, which is open to the general public regardless of any
fee or age requirement.
(n) “Reasonable Distance” means a distance of twenty (20) feet in any direction from
an area in which Smoking is prohibited.
(o) “Recreational Area” means an area that is owned, controlled or used by the City
of Piedmont and is open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless
of any fee or age requirement. The term “Recreational Area” includes but is not
limited to parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, walking paths, gardens,
hiking trails, bike paths, swimming pools, and skateboard parks.
(p) “School Site Buffer Area” means the public rights-of-way adjacent to any
property used as a school for the K-12 education of minors from the property line
of the school to the nearest curb.
(q) “Service Area” means the reasonable distance area of any publicly or privately
owned area that is designed to be used or is regularly used by one or more
Persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service or to make a transaction,
whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange of money. The
term “Service Area” includes but is not limited to areas including or adjacent to
information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or
shelters, casual carpool line, or mobile vendor lines.
(r) “Single Family Dwelling” or “Single Family Residence” means a residential
structure containing one dwelling unit as defined in Chapter 17 of the Piedmont
Municipal Code. Single Family Dwelling includes a single-family home with an
approved detached or attached in-law or second unit.
(s) “Single Family Property” means a residential lot containing a Single Family
Dwelling as defined above.
(t) “Smoke” means the gases, or particles, or vapors released into the air as a result
of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual
purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation
of the byproducts, except when the combusting material contains no tobacco or
nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example,
smoke from incense. The term “Smoke” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco
smoke and marijuana smoke.
(u) “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product
intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. “Smoking” also includes
the use of an electronic smoking device which creates a vapor or aerosol, in any
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-12
manner or in any form.
(v) “Tobacco Product” means:
(1) Any product containing, made or derived from tobacco or contains
nicotine from any source that is intended for human consumption,
whether smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed,
or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to cigarettes,
cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus; and
(2) Any electronic device that delivers nicotine and other substances to the
person inhaling from the device, including but not limited to an electronic
cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah;
(3) Notwithstanding any provision of subsections (a) and (b) to the contrary,
“tobacco product” includes any component, part or accessory of a tobacco
product, whether or not sold separately. “Tobacco product” does not
include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
(w) “Unenclosed Area” means any area that is not an Enclosed Area. (Ord. 715 N.S.,
12/14)
SEC. 12.26 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PLACES
(a) Smoking is prohibited in the Enclosed Areas of the following places within the
City of Piedmont, except places where Smoking is already prohibited by state or
federal law, in which case those laws apply:
(1) Places of Employment;
(2) Public Places, except for outdoor unenclosed areas at the Piedmont
Community Hall that are used for private purposes under a rental or lease
agreement with the City, provided that the area is more than 20 feet from
any entry to the Community Hall; and
(3) Common Areas of Multiple Dwellings
(b) Any places exempted by the California smokefree workplace law (Labor Code
section 6404.5(d)) except as provided below.
(1) Single Family Dwellings and Single Family Properties;
(2) Smoking at theatrical production sites is not prohibited by this subsection
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-13
if Smoking is an integral part of the story and the use of a fake, prop, or
special effect cannot reasonably convey the idea of Smoking in an
effective way to a reasonable member of the anticipated audience. (Ord.
715 N.S., 12/14)
SEC. 12.27 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN UNENCLOSED AREAS
(a) Smoking is prohibited in the Unenclosed Areas of the following places within the
City of Piedmont, except places where Smoking is already prohibited by state or
federal law, in which case those laws apply:
(1) Recreational Areas, except for outdoor unenclosed areas that are used for
private purposes under a rental or lease agreement with the City;
(2) Outdoor Dining Areas;
(3) Places of Employment;
(4) Common Areas of Multiple Dwellings, provided that a Person or Business
with legal control over a Common Area may designate a portion of the
Unenclosed Area of the Common Area as a designated Smoking area if
the area meets all of the following criteria:
a. the area must be located a Reasonable Distance from any Enclosed
Area where Smoking is prohibited by this article or other law; by
binding agreement relating to the ownership, occupancy, or use of
real property; or by designation of a Person or Business with legal
control over the property. In the case of a nonsmoking area created
by agreement or designation, this provision does not apply unless
the Person or Business designating the Smoking area has actual
knowledge of, or has been given notice of, the agreement or
designation. A Person or Business with legal control over a
designated Smoking area may be obliged to modify, relocate or
eliminate that as laws change, as binding agreements are created,
and as nonsmoking areas on neighboring property are established.
b. the area must not include, and must be a Reasonable Distance
from, Unenclosed Areas primarily used by children and
Unenclosed Areas with improvements that facilitate physical
activity including, for example, playgrounds, tennis courts,
swimming pools, school campuses, and sandboxes;
c. the area must be completely within an Unenclosed Area; and
d. the area must not overlap with any Enclosed or Unenclosed Area
Offenses-Miscellaneous
12-14
in which Smoking is otherwise prohibited by this article or other
provisions of this Code, state law, or federal law; and
(5) Other Public Places, when being used for a public event, including but not
limited to a farmers’ market, parade, craft fair, festival, or any other event
open to the general public, provided that Smoking is permitted on streets
and sidewalks used only as pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfares;
(6) Service Areas;
(7) School Site Buffer Areas.
(b) Nothing in this article prohibits any Person, Business, Employer, or Nonprofit
Entity with legal control over any property from prohibiting Smoking on any part
of such property, even if Smoking is not otherwise prohibited in that area. (Ord.
715 N.S., 12/14)
SEC. 12.28 REASONABLE SMOKING DISTANCE REQUIRED
(a) Except as otherwise exempted or excepted under this Article, smoking in all
Unenclosed Areas of public places shall be prohibited within a Reasonable
Distance from any doorway, window, or vent into an Enclosed Area in which
Smoking is prohibited, except while the Person Smoking is actively passing on
the way to another destination and provided Smoke does not enter any Enclosed
Area in which Smoking is prohibited.
(b) Smoking in Unenclosed Areas shall be prohibited within a Reasonable Distance
from any Unenclosed Areas in which Smoking is prohibited under Sec. 12.3 of
this article, except while the Person Smoking is actively passing on the way to
another destination and provided Smoke does not enter any Unenclosed Area in
which Smoking is prohibited.
(c) The prohibitions in subdivisions (a) and (b) shall not apply to Unenclosed Areas
of private residential properties that are not Multi-Unit Residences. (Ord. 715
N.S., 12/14)
SEC. 12.29 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
Violations of Sections 12.26 through 12.28 of this Article shall be an infraction. The City
Council shall set the fine for violations from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 715 N.S., 12/14)
Rev. 2014-12-03
Surplus Property
12B -1
Chapter 12B
SURPLUS PROPERTY
'12B.1 Definitions, purpose
'12B.2 Determination that property is surplus
'12B.3 Reallocation when feasible
'12B.4 Disposal recommendation
'12B.5 Finance Director to fix time and manner of sale
'12B.6 Notice of sale
'12B.7 Manner of sale
'12B.8 Sale as scrap or salvage, donation, destruction
'12B.9 Immediate disposal
SEC. 12B.1 DEFINITIONS, PURPOSE
As used in this Chapter, the following words have the meanings given below:
(1) Property" means personal property other than lost, stolen, confiscated, or
abandoned property which is the subject of Chapter 12A, and motor vehicles and stray animals.
(2) Surplus" when applied to property means property which is serviceable and
valuable for uses other than scrap or salvage but is deemed to be either unfit or uneconomical for
City use.
(3) Salvage" or "scrap" means materials of scrap metal, wood, paper or other materials
which are neither used nor useful for the purpose for which they were originally designed or
used. (Ord. No. 426, N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.2 DETERMINATION THAT PROPERTY IS SURPLUS
Whenever any department head of the City of Piedmont shall determine that any
property under his jurisdiction is surplus and that there is no present or prospective reasonable
use to which his department may put said property, he shall report that fact to the City
Administrator. The report shall contain a description of the property, its condition, and the
quality of such items available, and shall state the location where it may be viewed, and shall give
the names and addresses of any prospective purchasers known to the department head. (Ord.
Surplus Property
12B -2
No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.3 REALLOCATION WHEN FEASIBLE
The City Administrator shall evaluate the surplus property for possible current or future
use within the City. If he finds no reasonable use for the property, he shall inform each of the
department heads that the property is available. Each of these department heads shall notify the
City Administrator if he can use the property in his department, or, if not, recommend disposal
to the City Administrator. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.4 DISPOSAL RECOMMENDATION
If there is no known reasonable use of the property for City purposes as determined by
the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall notify the Finance Director in writing to
dispose of the property in a manner authorized by this Chapter which is deemed appropriate by
the Finance Director. A copy of this written disposal recommendations, which shall list all
property to be disposed of, shall be sent to members of the City Council in every case except
when immediate disposal under Section 12.B.9 of this Chapter is authorized. Any member of the
Council may request that a particular item or items of property be reviewed by the Council at
their next meeting by giving written notice thereof to the City Administrator within seven (7)
days after the written disposal recommendation has been distributed. No disposal action shall be
taken until such seven (7) day period has expired. If a Council member requests review, the
matter shall be scheduled for review on the next Council agenda following at least six (6) days
after the written review request is received, and no disposal action shall take place on any item
being reviewed until authorized by the Council. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.5 FINANCE DIRECTOR TO FIX TIME AND MANNER OF SALE
When possible, surplus property shall be accumulated at a central location until enough
surplus property has accumulated to warrant a sale. The Finance Director shall fix a date for the
sale and determine the method of sale as provided below. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.6 NOTICE OF SALE
The Finance Director shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City not less than ten (10) days before such sale, a notice either setting forth a description of
each article to be sold, or referring to a list describing such articles posted on the City Hall
bulletin board, together with the time, date and place of the sale. The Finance Director may also
publicize the sale in any other manner which the Finance Director deems best suited to the nature
and potential value of the property being sold. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
Surplus Property
12B -3
SEC. 12B.7 MANNER OF SALE
Surplus property shall be sold at public auction or by sealed bid except in those cases
where the Finance Director determines that such property is needed for public use by another
public agency or is valuable for trading in. In those cases, the property may be sold or
transferred to the public agency or traded in at an amount determined by the Finance Director to
be equal to that which would be obtained through a sealed bid or public auction sale. In the event
of public auction or sealed bid sale, all sales shall be in cash. All proceeds received from the sale
shall be delivered to the Finance Director for deposit at the discretion of the Finance Director in
the General Fund or in that fund the proceeds of which were used to purchase the property
originally. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.8 SALE AS SCRAP OR SALVAGE, DONATION, DESTRUCTION
The authorization for sale of surplus property pursuant to Section 12B.7 above shall not
preclude disposal of surplus property as scrap or salvage when such property appears to the
Finance Director to have negligible value. Items of surplus property may be sold as scrap or
salvage or donated when the property cannot be sold through the preceding procedures.
Property which cannot be sold as scrap or salvage or donated shall be destroyed or disposed of
as the City Administrator sees fit. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.9 IMMEDIATE DISPOSAL
Compliance with '12B.1-12B.8 shall not be required in the case of property which might
result in the injury to the health or safety of the public or for which storage is unavailable or
uneconomical. The City Administrator shall dispose of such property in whatever manner he
deems appropriate in his discretion. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
Surplus Property
12B -1
Chapter 12B
SURPLUS PROPERTY
'12B.1 Definitions, purpose
'12B.2 Determination that property is surplus
'12B.3 Reallocation when feasible
'12B.4 Disposal recommendation
'12B.5 Finance Director to fix time and manner of sale
'12B.6 Notice of sale
'12B.7 Manner of sale
'12B.8 Sale as scrap or salvage, donation, destruction
'12B.9 Immediate disposal
SEC. 12B.1 DEFINITIONS, PURPOSE
As used in this Chapter, the following words have the meanings given below:
(1) Property" means personal property other than lost, stolen, confiscated, or
abandoned property which is the subject of Chapter 12A, and motor vehicles and stray animals.
(2) Surplus" when applied to property means property which is serviceable and
valuable for uses other than scrap or salvage but is deemed to be either unfit or uneconomical for
City use.
(3) Salvage" or "scrap" means materials of scrap metal, wood, paper or other materials
which are neither used nor useful for the purpose for which they were originally designed or
used. (Ord. No. 426, N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.2 DETERMINATION THAT PROPERTY IS SURPLUS
Whenever any department head of the City of Piedmont shall determine that any
property under his jurisdiction is surplus and that there is no present or prospective reasonable
use to which his department may put said property, he shall report that fact to the City
Administrator. The report shall contain a description of the property, its condition, and the
quality of such items available, and shall state the location where it may be viewed, and shall give
the names and addresses of any prospective purchasers known to the department head. (Ord.
Surplus Property
12B -2
No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.3 REALLOCATION WHEN FEASIBLE
The City Administrator shall evaluate the surplus property for possible current or future
use within the City. If he finds no reasonable use for the property, he shall inform each of the
department heads that the property is available. Each of these department heads shall notify the
City Administrator if he can use the property in his department, or, if not, recommend disposal
to the City Administrator. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.4 DISPOSAL RECOMMENDATION
If there is no known reasonable use of the property for City purposes as determined by
the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall notify the Finance Director in writing to
dispose of the property in a manner authorized by this Chapter which is deemed appropriate by
the Finance Director. A copy of this written disposal recommendations, which shall list all
property to be disposed of, shall be sent to members of the City Council in every case except
when immediate disposal under Section 12.B.9 of this Chapter is authorized. Any member of the
Council may request that a particular item or items of property be reviewed by the Council at
their next meeting by giving written notice thereof to the City Administrator within seven (7)
days after the written disposal recommendation has been distributed. No disposal action shall be
taken until such seven (7) day period has expired. If a Council member requests review, the
matter shall be scheduled for review on the next Council agenda following at least six (6) days
after the written review request is received, and no disposal action shall take place on any item
being reviewed until authorized by the Council. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.5 FINANCE DIRECTOR TO FIX TIME AND MANNER OF SALE
When possible, surplus property shall be accumulated at a central location until enough
surplus property has accumulated to warrant a sale. The Finance Director shall fix a date for the
sale and determine the method of sale as provided below. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.6 NOTICE OF SALE
The Finance Director shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City not less than ten (10) days before such sale, a notice either setting forth a description of
each article to be sold, or referring to a list describing such articles posted on the City Hall
bulletin board, together with the time, date and place of the sale. The Finance Director may also
publicize the sale in any other manner which the Finance Director deems best suited to the nature
and potential value of the property being sold. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
Surplus Property
12B -3
SEC. 12B.7 MANNER OF SALE
Surplus property shall be sold at public auction or by sealed bid except in those cases
where the Finance Director determines that such property is needed for public use by another
public agency or is valuable for trading in. In those cases, the property may be sold or
transferred to the public agency or traded in at an amount determined by the Finance Director to
be equal to that which would be obtained through a sealed bid or public auction sale. In the event
of public auction or sealed bid sale, all sales shall be in cash. All proceeds received from the sale
shall be delivered to the Finance Director for deposit at the discretion of the Finance Director in
the General Fund or in that fund the proceeds of which were used to purchase the property
originally. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.8 SALE AS SCRAP OR SALVAGE, DONATION, DESTRUCTION
The authorization for sale of surplus property pursuant to Section 12B.7 above shall not
preclude disposal of surplus property as scrap or salvage when such property appears to the
Finance Director to have negligible value. Items of surplus property may be sold as scrap or
salvage or donated when the property cannot be sold through the preceding procedures.
Property which cannot be sold as scrap or salvage or donated shall be destroyed or disposed of
as the City Administrator sees fit. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
SEC. 12B.9 IMMEDIATE DISPOSAL
Compliance with '12B.1-12B.8 shall not be required in the case of property which might
result in the injury to the health or safety of the public or for which storage is unavailable or
uneconomical. The City Administrator shall dispose of such property in whatever manner he
deems appropriate in his discretion. (Ord. No. 426 N.S., '2)
Regulating the Sale of Firearms & Ammunition
Chapter 12C
REGULATING THE SALE OF FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION
§12C.1 Police permit required
§12C.2 Application
§12C.3 Investigation by chief of police
§12C.4 Conditions of approval
§12C.5 Requirement of secured facility
§12C.6 Liability insurance
§12C.7 Issuance of police permit - duration
§12C.8 Grounds for permit denial
§12C.9 Grounds for permit revocation
§12C.10 Hearing for permit denial or revocation
§12C.11 Nonassignability
§12C.12 Compliance by existing dealers
§12C.13 Zoning compliance
SEC. 12C.1 POLICE PERMIT REQUIRED
12C.1.1 Except as provided in Penal Code § 12070(b), as it may be amended from
time to time, it is unlawful for a person to engage in the activity of "firearm sales" as that term is
defined under Section 12C.1.3 hereafter without a police permit as required by this Chapter.
12C.1.2 The requirement for a police permit is in addition to the requirement under
Section 12C.13 of the City Code for a conditional use permit for firearm sales activity. No
person may engage in firearm sales activity without a conditional use permit from the City
Council and a police permit.
12C.1.3 "Firearm sales" means the sale, transfer, lease, offer or advertising for sale
or lease of a firearm, which includes a gun, pistol, revolver, rifle or any device designed to be
used as a weapon from which is expelled through a barrel a projectile by the force of any
explosion or other form of combustion.
SEC. 12C.2 APPLICATION
12C.2.1 An applicant for a permit or renewal of a permit under this Chapter shall
file with the Chief of Police an application in writing, signed under penalty of perjury, on a form
prescribed by the City. The applicant shall provide all relevant information requested to
demonstrate compliance with this Chapter including:
(a) The name, age and address of the applicant;
(b) The address of the proposed location for which the permit is required, together
with the business name, if any;
12C -1
Regulating the Sale of Firearms & Ammunition
(c) Proof of a possessory interest in the property at which the proposed business will
be conducted, in the form of ownership, lease, license or other entitlement to operate at such
location and the written consent of the owner of record of the real property;
(d) A floor plan of the proposed business which illustrates the applicant's compliance
with security provisions of Section 12C.5 hereafter.
(e) Proof of the issuance of a conditional use permit at the proposed location required
under Section 12C.13 of the City Code.
(f) Proof of compliance with all federal and state licensing laws;
(g) Information relating to licenses or permits relating to other weapons sought by the
applicant from other jurisdictions, including, but not limited to, date of application and whether
each application resulted in issuance of a license;
(h) Information relating to every revocation of a license or permit relating to
firearms, including, but not limited to, date and circumstances of the revocation;
(i) Applicant's agreement to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its
officers, agents and employees from and against all claims, losses, costs, damages and liabilities
of any kind, including attorney fees, arising in any manner out of the applicant's negligence or
intentional or willful misconduct;
(j) Certification of satisfaction of insurance requirements under Section 12C.6,
hereof;
(k) All convictions of the applicant for any of the offenses listed in Section 12C.8(5),
hereof;
(l) The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for administering
this Chapter as established from time to time by City Council resolution.
SEC 12C.3 INVESTIGATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE
The Police Chief shall conduct an appropriate investigation of the applicant to determine
for the protection of the public safety whether the permit may be issued. The Police Chief may
require an applicant, or any officer, agent or employee thereof, to provide fingerprints, a recent
photograph, a signed authorization for the release of pertinent records, a complete personal
history set forth on a questionnaire provided by the Police Chief, and any other additional
information which the Police Chief considers necessary to complete the investigation.
SEC 12C.4 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
In addition to other requirements and conditions of this Chapter, a police permit is
12C -2
Regulating the Sale of Firearms & Ammunition
subject to the following conditions, the breach of any of which is sufficient cause for revocation
of the permit by the Chief of Police:
12C.4.1 The business shall be carried on only in the building located at the street
address shown on the permit. This requirement, however, does not prohibit the permittee from
participating in a gun show or event which is authorized by federal and state law upon
compliance with federal and state law;
12C.4.2 The police permit, or a certified copy of it, shall be displayed on the
premises and at gun shows where it can be easily seen;
12C.4.3 The applicant shall not permit any person under 18 years of age to enter or
remain within the premises without being accompanied by the parent or other adult legally
responsible for the minor child where the firearms sales activity is the primary business
performed at the site;
12C.4.4 The permittee shall not deliver a firearm to a purchaser earlier than is
allowed by applicable state and federal law;
12C.4.5 The permittee shall not deliver a firearm to another purchaser, lessee or
other transferee unless the firearm is unloaded and securely wrapped or unloaded in a locked
container;
12C.4.6 The permittee shall not deliver a firearm to a purchaser, lessee or other
transferee under the age of 18 years, or a firearm capable of being concealed upon the person to
another person under the age of 21 years. Clear evidence of the identity and age of the purchaser
shall be required before delivery of a firearm to a purchaser, lessee or other transferee. Evidence
of identity may include, but is not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a state
identification card, an armed forces identification card, an employee identification card
containing the bearer's signature and photograph, or similar documentation which provides the
permittee or seller reasonable assurance of the identity and age of the purchaser;
12C.4.7 The permittee shall not sell, lease or otherwise transfer a firearm to a
person whom the permittee or seller has reason to believe is within any of the classes prohibited
by Penal Code, Sections 12021 or 12021.1 or Welfare and Institutions Code Section 8100 or
8103;
12C.4.8 No firearm or imitation of one or placard advertising its sale or other
transfer shall be displayed in any part of the premises where it can readily be seen from the
outside;
12C.4.9 REVOKED BY ORD. 633 N.S. 11/4/02
12C.4.10 The permittee shall properly and promptly process firearms transactions as
required by Penal Code, Section 12082;
12C.4.11 The permittee shall keep a register of sales as required by Penal Code,
12C -3
Regulating the Sale of Firearms & Ammunition
Sections 12073 and 12077;
12C.4.12 The permittee shall post conspicuously within the licensed premises all
charges and fees required by Penal Code, Section 12071(b)(11) and the following warning in
block letters not less than one inch in height:
"IF YOU LEAVE A LOADED FIREARM WHERE A CHILD
OBTAINS AND IMPROPERLY USES IT, YOU MAY BE
FINED OR SENT TO PRISON."
12C.4.13 No firearm capable of being concealed on the person shall be delivered to
a purchaser or transferee, unless that person presents to the permittee or seller a current basic
firearm safety certificate, unless otherwise exempted by state law;
12C.4.14 The permittee shall offer to provide to the purchaser or transferee of a
firearm a copy of the pamphlet described in Penal Code, Section 12080 and may add the cost of
the pamphlet, if any, to the sales price of the firearm;
12C.4.15 The permittee shall report the loss or theft of a firearm that is merchandise
of the permittee, a firearm that the permittee takes possession of pursuant to Penal Code, Section
12082, or a firearm kept at the permittee's place of business within 48 hours of discovery to the
Police Department.
SEC. 12C.5 REQUIREMENT OF SECURED FACILITY
12C.5.1 In addition to the conditions of approval stated in Section 12C.4, the
business location as shown on the police permit shall be a secured facility meeting all of the
following specifications:
(a) Every perimeter doorway shall include one of the following:
(i) A windowless steel security door, equipped with both a dead bolt and a
doorknob lock, or
(ii) A windowed metal door that is equipped with both a dead bolt and a
doorknob lock. If the window has an opening of five inches or more
measured in any direction, the window shall be covered with steel bars of
at least one-half inch diameter or metal grating of at least nine gauge
affixed to the exterior or interior of the door;
(b) Every perimeter doorway shall also be provided with an exterior metal grate that
is padlocked and affixed to the permittee's premises independent of the door and the door frame;
(c) Every window covered with steel bars;
(d) Heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and service openings are secured with steel
12C -4
Regulating the Sale of Firearms & Ammunition
bars, metal grading and an alarm system;
(e) Any metal grate may not have a space larger than six inches wide measured in
any direction;
(f) Each metal screen may not have a space larger than three inches wide measured
in any direction;
(g) All steel bars shall be no further than six inches apart.
12C.5.2 Upon written request by the permittee, The Police Chief may approve
alternative security measures which he or she considers will provide equivalent or superior
security to the premises as the measures required under subsection (1) of this Section 12C.5.
12C.5.3 Every firearm that is kept in the permitted place of business shall be stored
using one of the following methods:
(a) The firearm shall be secured with a hardened steel rod or cable of at least oneeighth
inch in diameter through the trigger guard of the firearm. The steel rod or cable shall be
secured with a hardened steel lock that has a shackle. The lock and shackle shall be protected or
shielded from the use of a bolt cutter and the rod or cable shall be anchored in a manner that
prevents the removal of the firearm from the premises;
(b) The firearm shall be stored in a locked fireproof safe or vault in the permittee's
business premises; or
(c) All firearms shall be stored on the premises out of the reach of customers in
secure, locked facilities approved by the Chief of Police by which access to firearms is
controlled by the permittee or seller to the exclusion of all others.
12C.5.4 All ammunition for use in firearms that is kept in the permitted place of
business shall be securely stored in a manner that shall avoid thefts, as well as damage caused by
explosion or discharge of ammunition, including explosion or discharge caused by fire at the
place of business, as approved by the Police Chief.
12C.5.5 All exterior construction or improvements as set forth in Sec. 12C.5.1
above shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.20 of the City Code relating to design
review.
SEC. 12C.6 LIABILITY INSURANCE
12C.6.1 No police permit shall be issued or reissued unless there is in effect a
policy of insurance in a form approved by the City and executed by an insurance company
approved by the City, whereby the applicant is insured against liability for damage to property
and for injury to or death of any person as a result of the sale, lease or transfer or offering for
sale, lease or transfer of a firearm. The minimum liability limits shall not be less than
12C -5
Regulating the Sale of Firearms & Ammunition
$1,000,000 for each incident of damage to property or incident of injury or death to a person.
12C.6.2 The policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that the
policy shall not be canceled until notice in writing has been given to the City Administrator at
least 30 days prior to the time the cancellation becomes effective.
12C.6.3 Upon expiration of a policy of insurance and if no additional insurance is
obtained, the permit is considered canceled without further notice.
SEC. 12C.7 ISSUANCE OF POLICE PERMIT - DURATION
12C.7.1 The police department may grant a police permit to the applicant if it finds
that the applicant complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws including, but not
limited to, the state Penal Code, City building code, fire code and zoning and planning codes.
12C.7.2 A police permit expires one year after the date of issuance. A permit may
be renewed for additional one-year periods upon the permittee's submission of an application for
renewal, accompanied by a nonrefundable renewal fee established by City Council resolution.
The renewal application and the renewal fee must be received by the police department no later
than 45 days before the expiration of the current permit.
12C.7.3 A decision regarding issuance or renewal may be appealed in the manner
provided for in Section 12C.10 here of .l
SEC. 12C.8 GROUNDS FOR PERMIT DENIAL
The Police Chief shall deny the issuance or renewal of a police permit when one or more
of the following conditions exist:
12C.8.1 The applicant is under 21 years of age;
12C.8.2 The applicant is not licensed as required by federal, state and local law;
12C.8.3 The applicant has had a firearms permit or license previously revoked or
denied for good cause within the immediately preceding two years;
12C.8.4 The applicant has made a false or misleading statement of a material fact
or omission of a material fact in the application for a police permit. If a permit is denied on this
ground, the applicant is prohibited from reapplying for a permit for a period of two years;
12C.8.5 The applicant has been convicted of:
(a) An offense which disqualifies the applicant from possessing a firearm
under federal, state and local law, including, but not limited to, the offenses listed
in Penal Code, Section 12021,
12C -6
Regulating the Sale of Firearms & Ammunition
(b) An offense relating to the manufacture, sale, possession, use or
registration of a firearm or dangerous or deadly weapon,
(c) An offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of
another,
(d) An offense involving theft, fraud, dishonesty or deceit,
(e) An offense involving the manufacture, sale, possession or use of a
controlled substance as defined by the state Health and Safety Code, as it now
reads or may hereafter be amended to read;
12C.8.6 The applicant is within a class of persons defined in the Welfare and
Institutions Code, Sections 8100 or 8103;
12C.8.7 The applicant is currently, or has been within the past two years, an
unlawful user of a controlled substance as defined by the Health and Safety Code as that
definition now reads or may hereafter be amended to read;
12C.8.8 The operation of the business as proposed would not comply with federal,
state and local law.
SEC. 12C.9 GROUNDS FOR PERMIT REVOCATION
In addition to the violation of any other provisions contained in this Chapter,
circumstances constituting grounds for denial of a police permit also constitute grounds for
revocation.
SEC. 12C.10 HEARING FOR PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION
12C.10.1 A person whose application for a permit is denied or revoked by the Chief
of Police has the right to a hearing before the Chief of Police before final denial or revocation.
12C.10.2 Within ten days of mailing written notice of intent to deny the application
or revoke the permit, the applicant may appeal by requesting a hearing before the Police Chief.
The request must be made in writing, setting forth the specific grounds for appeal. If the
applicant submits a timely request for an appeal, the Chief of Police shall set a time and place for
the hearing within 30 days.
12C.10.3 The decision of the Chief of Police shall be made in writing within ten
(10) days of the hearing. An applicant may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to the City
Council by filing a written appeal with the Piedmont City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the
date a copy of the written decision of the Chief of Police is deposited in the United States Mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the last address provided by the applicant, together with a written
notice of the last day to file such appeal. The appeal shall state the specific grounds for the
appeal.
12C -7
Regulating the Sale of Firearms & Ammunition
12C -8
(a) The appeal shall be scheduled before the City Council within thirty (30) days
after its receipt by the City Clerk, and the City Clerk shall mail written notice of the hearing date
to the applicant at applicant's last known address at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing.
(b) The City Council shall at the hearing consider the decision of the Chief of Police
and all pertinent records and documents, including those submitted by the applicant and all other
interested parties, and shall consider testimony of the applicant other interested parties.
(c) Upon request of the applicant or upon its own motion, the City Council may
continue the hearing for no more than forty-five (45) days.
(d) Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall act upon the appeal. It
may sustain or overrule the decision of the Chief of Police, making such findings of fact as the
City Council deems appropriate.
SEC. 12C.11 NONASSIGNABILITY
A police permit issued under this Chapter is not assignable. An attempt to assign a police
permit makes the permit void.
SEC. 12C.12 COMPLIANCE BY EXISTING DEALERS
A person engaging in firearm sales activity on the effective date of this Chapter or any
amendment to it shall, within 60 days after the effective date, comply with this Chapter and any
amendment to it, including the requirement for a conditional use permit under Section 12C.13 of
the City Code.
SEC. 12C.13 ZONING COMPLIANCE
Firearm sales as set forth in Chapter 12C shall be permitted in Zone D as a conditional
use pursuant to Section 17.8.3 of the City Code and shall not be permitted in any other zone
within the City. A conditional use permit pursuant to Section 17.24 of the City Code shall be
obtained before commencing firearm sales within the City. (Ord. No. 580 N.S., 10/96)
2/14/03
Peddlers & Solicitors
13 -1
Chapter 13
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
'13.1 Definitions
'13.1.1 Charitable
'13.1.2 Peddle
'13.1.3 Peddler
'13.1.4 Solicit
'13.1.5 Solicitor
'13.2 Permit required
'13.3 Exemptions
'13.4 Issuance of permit
'13.5 No warranty
'13.6 Assignment prohibited
'13.7 Display of permit
'13.8 Ringing bells or knocking on doors of posted private premises prohibited
'13.9 Violations
SEC. 13.1 DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
SEC. 13.1.1: Charitable: "Charitable" means for the benefit of underprivileged or
economically and socially disadvantaged persons.
SEC. 13.1.2: Peddle. "Peddle" means to offer for sale and to sell goods, services, or
both to residents without a prior invitation at any place in the city other than a fixed place of
business.
SEC. 13.1.3: Peddler. "Peddler" means a person who peddles.
SEC. 13.1.4: Solicit. "Solicit" means to request (1) a resident's attention for an
uninvited message or (2) a donation for a specified purpose or cause.
SEC. 13.1.5: Solicitor. "Solicitor" means one who solicits. (Ord. No. 521 N.S., 9/90)
Peddlers & Solicitors
13 -2
SEC. 13.2 PERMIT REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, or attempt to peddle or solicit
within the City without first procuring a written permit from the Piedmont Police Department as
provided in this Chapter, except as specified in Section 13.3. (Ord. No. 521 N.S., 9/90)
SEC. 13.3 EXEMPTIONS. The following peddlers and solicitors shall not be required to
obtain a permit as provided in Section 13.2.
(a) Persons selling goods or services, or both, the proceeds of which are used for
charitable, educational, philosophical, political, religious, or other ideological purposes;
(b) Persons soliciting funds for charitable, educational, political, philosophical,
religious or other ideological purposes;
(c) Persons who are both selling goods or services and soliciting funds as described in
subsections (a) and (b) above;
(d) Persons who are conveying charitable, educational, political, philosophical,
religious or other ideological messages but not selling goods or services or soliciting funds.
(e) Salesmen or agents for wholesale businesses who are soliciting orders from and
selling to retail dealers in Piedmont.
(Ord. No. 521 N.S., 9/90)
SEC. 13.4 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
The Chief of Police or his delegate shall issue the permit required by Section 13.2 upon
receiving information which clearly establishes (1) the identity of the individual; (2) the existence
of the company or other organization whose products or services are being peddled or for which
solicitations are being made; and (3) the fact that the individual is authorized by the company or
organization to peddle or solicit in Piedmont. The permit shall be valid for one year from the
date issued. (Ord. No. 521 N.S., 9/90)
SEC. 13.5 NO WARRANTY
A permit issued under this chapter serves only to verify the three facts set forth in
Section 13.3 and shall not endorse or otherwise address the merits of any product, service, or
organization soliciting donations. (Ord. No. 521 N.S., 9/90)
SEC. 13.6 ASSIGNMENT PROHIBITED
A permit holder shall not assign or transfer any permit issued under this chapter and may
Peddlers & Solicitors
13 -3
not authorize any person not named in the permit to peddle or solicit. (Ord. No. 332 N.S. ' 3;
Ord. No. 521 N.S., 9/90)
SEC. 13.7 DISPLAY OF PERMIT
Any person holding a permit under this chapter shall display it upon request. (Ord. No.
521 N.S., 9/90)
SEC. 13.8 RINGING BELLS OR KNOCKING ON DOORS OF POSTED PRIVATE
PREMISES PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or person pretending to be a peddler or
solicitor to ring the bell or knock at the door of any residence or dwelling where a sign bearing the
words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning is painted or affixed so as to
be reasonably exposed to public view. This prohibition shall apply to all peddlers and solicitors,
including those exempt from the permit requirements of Section 13.2. (Ord. No. 332 N.S. '6;
Ord. No. 521 N.S., 9/90)
SEC. 13.9 VIOLATIONS
Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes an infraction. Each act in
violation of this ordinance constitutes a new and separate offense. The fines for offenses
hereunder shall be set from time to time by City Council Resolution. (Ord. No. 521 N.S., 9/90)
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-1
Chapter 15
MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION
15.1 Purpose
15.2 Definitions
15.3 Permit Required
15.4 Exemptions from Chapter Provisions
15.5 Application Form
15.6 Time for filing Applications
15.7 Fees
15.8 Regulations
15.9 Determination by City Administrator
15.10 Appeal to the City Council
15.11 Public Facilities
15.12 Clean Up
15.13 Traffic Control
15.14 Special Restrictions
15.15 Insurance and Indemnity
15.16 Suspension
15.17 Revocation
15.18 Violation as a Nuisance
SEC. 15.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide rules and regulation governing the issuance
of permits for filming, videotaping, photography or any related activity on location within
the City, to assure that such activity is consistent with considerations of the public health,
safety, and general welfare and the protection of property. The requirements provided in
this Chapter shall be separate and in addition to those provisions of this Code regarding
business regulation and licensing. Any and all fees provided in this Chapter are intended to
cover the cost of investigation and processing permits for filming, as specified herein, and
shall be in addition to all other applicable licenses and/or permits provided in this code.
SEC. 15.2 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be
construed as hereinafter set out, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meeting
was intended:
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-2
A. "Charitable purposes" means filming, videotaping for a motion picture, television
production or photography conducted by an organization in which no individual either directly or
indirectly receives a profit from the production, marketing or showing of the films, tapes or
photos.
B. City" means the City of Piedmont, a municipal corporation formed and operating
pursuant to the laws of the State of California.
C. "City Clerk" means the city clerk of the City.
D. "City Council" means the city council of the City.
E. "City Administrator" means the city administrator of the City, or his or her designee.
F. "Department of Public Works" means the Department of Public Works of the City.
G. "Director of Public Works" means the Director of City's Department of Public Works, or
his or her designee.
H. "Film" or "filming" includes, but is not limited to, feature motion pictures, videotapes,
television, motion pictures, commercials and photography.
I. "Film Coordinator" shall be a person in the Department of Public Works of the City, who
shall handle basic coordination of permit applications.
J. "News purposes," as specified in this chapter means filming or videotaping for television
news broadcasting by reporters, photographers or camera persons in the employ of a newspaper,
news service or similar entity, of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences
which are in the news and of general public interest. The filming or videotaping of such shall be
for regularly scheduled news programs (but not magazine or documentary programs) and special
news programs which are not preplanned and are broadcast within twenty-four hours after the
event.
K. "Permittee" means any individual, firm, corporation or group or combination acting as a
unit to whom or which a film permit is granted by the City under the provisions of this chapter.
L. "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, association or group or combination
acting as a unit.
M. "Production" means the activity of making a film or video or taking photos for commercial
or noncommercial purposes on property owned by the City or on private property within the
jurisdiction of the City.
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-3
N. APhotography@ means still photography.
SEC. 15.3 PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or activity of (1) filming; (2)
videotaping; (3) producing motion pictures on motion picture film, electronic videotape for
public exhibition motion pictures, or television or (4) photography at any place within the City,
without a film permit from the City. Exemptions to the foregoing are the business or activity of
filming at or in an established motion picture or television or photography studio or entirely
within an enclosed structure or building which is used for that purpose at least seven (7) days
during any continuous thirty (30) day period, and those exemptions set forth in Section 15.4
hereafter. Any person interested in filming within the City shall complete in full a film permit
application as stated in this Chapter and provide the City all the information requested in Section
15.5 of this chapter."
SEC. 15.4 EXEMPTION FROM CHAPTER PROVISIONS.
Provisions of this Chapter 15 shall not apply to:
A. The filming or videotaping of motion pictures solely for private or family use;
B. The filming or videotaping of motion pictures for use in a criminal investigation, civil
proceeding or emergencies such as fires, floods or police actions;
C. The filming or videotaping of motion pictures for news purposes (but not magazine or
documentary programs);
D. Education, government and public access and local origination programs for cable
television systems franchised within the City;
E. The filming or videotaping of motion pictures by the City itself (e.g., videotaping of
sewer lines and promotional filming)
F. Photography solely for private or family use, including by commercial photographers;
G. Photography for use in a criminal investigation, civil proceeding or emergencies such as
fires, floods or police actions;
H. Photography for news purposes (but not magazine or documentary programs);
I. Photography by the City itself (e.g., videotaping of sewer lines and promotional filming);
and
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-4
J. Any other activity deemed to be in the public interest by the City Administrator.
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-5
SEC. 15.5 APPLICATION FORMS
A. The Department of Public Works shall furnish an application form for film permits
which, following processing by the Department of Public Works, shall be forwarded to the City
Administrator. Such application form shall require the following information:
1. Name, permanent street address and telephone number of applicant;
2. If the applicant is a corporation, the current name, principal address and telephone
number of the applicant; provided that if such address is different from the current
address for the corporation on file with the California Secretary of State, applicant
shall also provide such additional address;
3. If the filming or videotaping for motion picture or television production is
conducted by a nonprofit organization which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code or Section 23701 of the California Revenue and
Taxation Code as a charitable organization, and no person, directly or indirectly,
receives a profit from the marketing or production of the film or tape or from
showing the film, tapes or photos, the applicant must state this on the application
form, and must attach reasonable proof thereof;
4. Name, address and telephone number of the person in charge of the location and
responsible for applicant's and applicant's employees' conduct;
5. The name, address and twenty-four hour telephone number of at least two
persons to be contacted in the event of emergency situations which might alter the
conditions of the film permit; this should include at least one of such addresses,
which shall be within twenty-five (25) miles of City, to which notice, including
emergency notices, can be physically served.
6. Name of film/project;
7. Location(s), date(s), time(s) and activities of the proposed filming or taping. If
the proposed filming or taping involves the use of private property, the full name
and address of the property owner where the filming/taping is to take place and a
signed affidavit from the property owner granting permission for the proposed
use of the property in question shall be provided.
8. Approximate number of individuals in cast and crew;
9. List of types and number of vehicles and other equipment;
10. As applicable, a statement that overnight parking and locations are needed;
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-6
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-7
11. Requests for special assistance at the location, including but not limited to street
closure, traffic control and emergency services;
12. Special conditions or requests by the applicant;
13. Such further information as may be determined from time to time by resolution of
the City Council;
14. Dated signature of applicant;
15. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by two principal
officers of the corporation.
B. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, any applicant who or which will engage in
any activity which requires compliance with any federal, state or local regulations, including
additional license or permits, shall present evidence of satisfactory compliance with such
regulations.
SEC. 15.6 TIME FOR FILING APPLICATIONS.
A. Applications shall be presented to the Department of Public Works at least five (5)
business days in advance of the desired date of neighbor notification. The Film Coordinator will
review the permit application along with a draft of the neighbor notification with the City
Administrator. Once the application has been determined complete, the applicant will be given
consent to proceed with the notification. The applicant is required to notify all adjacent
property owners within 300 feet of the project at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the event.
B. The time for application processing shall be extended during those periods when the City
is required to wait for the issuance of permits by other agencies and/or public entities for which
applicant has applied or is required to apply. In addition, the Director of Public Works may
shorten the ten (10) day time period for notification of neighbors, if in the Director's discretion, it
is determined that notice to the City and its residents will still be adequate."
SEC. 15.7 FEES
A. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation
fee payable to the City, which amount shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City
Council; provided, however, that no fee shall be required of applicants filming or videotaping for
motion picture or television production for charitable purposes, as defined in Section 15.5.A.3 of
this chapter.
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-8
B. In the event that weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee require that the date(s) or time(s) of the proposed filming or taping need to be altered,
no additional application and investigation fee shall be required because of such alteration of the
date(s) or time(s) so long as the Department of Public Works is given at least one (1) business
day notice of the alteration; but an additional fee will be charged if minor changes, additions,
deletions and extensions to the original film permit are requested which are not beyond the
control of the permittee. The additional fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
City Council. A minor change, addition, deletion or extension to the original film permit request
must be filed with the Department of Public Works. Only one such request permit will be
allowed.
C. If the City Administrator determines that any potential danger to the public's health,
safety or general welfare or property would be eliminated by the presence of police or fire
protection at the site of the filming or videotaping for motion picture or television production,
the City Administrator may grant the film permit upon condition that the permittee pay in
advance to the City the costs of such police or fire protection as may be required.
D. For film permits which necessitate the City to provide services to the permittee in
addition to police or fire protection, service charges shall be imposed. Such charges will be
determined by the applicable servicing City department(s) and shall not exceed the actual cost
incurred by the City in providing such services. Such service charges shall include, but shall not
be limited to, charges for labor, supervision, overhead, administration and the use of any and all
City equipment, supplies, etc. Additional charges may be imposed to cover the cost of
extraordinary film permit investigation and/or staff costs, if the City Administrator determines
this is necessary.@
SEC. 15.8 DETERMINATION BY CITY ADMINISTRATOR
A. The City Administrator is hereby designated to be the City's decision maker for purposes
of granting of the film permit.
B. Before granting any film permit pursuant to this chapter, the City Administrator shall
determine that such filming or videotaping for motion picture or television production will not
unreasonably interfere with the public health, safety and general welfare or unreasonably
endanger any property. In making the determination, the City Administrator shall take into
consideration the noise, traffic hazards, fire hazards and other environmental problems, including
health and safety problems, which are likely to be caused by such activities. In granting the
permit, the City Administrator may further impose any reasonable conditions as are necessary to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare or property.
SEC. 15.9 REGULATIONS
The City Council may from time to time establish regulations for film permits which shall
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-9
be in addition to any other requirements of this Chapter.
SEC. 15.10 APPEAL TO THE CITY COUNCIL
A. Any applicant aggrieved by any decision of the City Administrator with respect to a film
permit may appeal such decision to the City Council by filing a written request within ten days
following notice of such decision.
B. A written request for such appeal shall be filed with the Department of Public Works and
all such requests shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The date of the decision in question;
3. The reasons for the appeal; and
4. The grounds relied upon for relief.
C. The appeal requests shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable appeal fee in an amount to
be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
D. Upon receipt of the appeal request, the Department of Public Works will request the
City Clerk to, and the City Clerk shall, set the matter for hearing at a regular meeting of the City
Council no later than thirty (30) days following the date the appeal was filed. Notice of the time
and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, by certified mail, no later than ten (10)
days prior to the date set for hearing. The notice may also designate certain records that the
applicant is required to produce at the time of the hearing.
E. At the hearing as prescribed by this section, the applicant and the City may submit any
and all evidence as applicant believes to be relevant. The City Council may require the
presentation of additional evidence from either the applicant or the City, or from both, and may
continue the hearing from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional
evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may, by resolution with findings,
approve, refer or modify the decision of the City Administrator, and any such decision of the
City Council shall be final.
SEC. 15.11 PUBLIC FACILITIES
Use of any public facility within the City may require an additional rental or use
agreement, which may require rental payments, security deposits, and similar monetary
requirements, all of which shall be separate from and in addition to any other fees or monetary
payments required in this Chapter.
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-10
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-11
SEC. 15.12 CLEAN UP
A permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion. The area shall be cleaned of
trash and debris upon completion and before leaving the site(s). A security deposit to assure that
a permittee removes all trash and debris from filming site(s) may be required. This requirement
and the amount thereof shall be determined by the City Administrator.
SEC.. 15.13 TRAFFIC
A. For filming that would impair traffic flow, an applicant shall use City law enforcement
personnel.
B. If required for traffic safety or as a condition of the film permit, an applicant shall furnish
and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the
Manual of Traffic Controls, State of California, Department of Transportation. All appropriate
safety precautions shall be taken.
C. All interruptions of normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic must be authorized on the
permit. Police officers assigned to on-site supervision may further restrict operations based on
safety concerns. Traffic shall not be detoured without prior approval by the City.
D. Unless authorized by the City, camera cars shall be driven in the direction of traffic and
shall observe all traffic laws.
E. Any emergency roadwork or construction by state or local government agencies and/or
private contractors under permit or contract to the City shall have priority over filming activities.
SEC. 15.14 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS
For the convenience of the general public, all activity by a permittee between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. may be restricted. As a condition of film permit approval, all surrounding
residents and/or businesses within a three-hundred-foot radius of the filming activity may be
required to be notified of date(s) and time(s) in which late evening and early morning filming is to
take place.
SEC. 15.15 INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY
A. It shall be a condition of the issuance and continued validity of any film permit granted
pursuant to this chapter that the permittee first obtain, pay for, and maintain a policy of general
liability insurance approved as to form by the City Attorney which shall insure the City, its
officers and employees against any liability, or claims of liability, brought or made by or on
behalf of any person for personal injury or property damage caused by or arising out of any act
or omission of the permittee, his agents or employees, including any officers or employees of the
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-12
City, or caused by or arising out of the condition of any City-owned or controlled property,
whether real or personal, and occurring during the film permit period and as a result of the
activities for which such film permit was issued. The amount of coverage to be provided by such
policy shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The permittee
may satisfy the requirement imposed by this section through the presentation of a certificate of
insurance, for at least the required amount of coverage, which indicates that, by endorsement
thereof, the City, its officers and employees have been added as additional insureds. Such
certificates shall additionally provide that the required insurance will not be modified, changed or
terminated unless prior written notice thereof has been transmitted to the City Administrator.
B. A bond/cash deposit may also be required for purposes of repairing any damage and
restoring the City's facilities to their original condition. The amount shall be determined from
time to time by resolution of the City Council. In the event of such damage, the City shall
provide written notice to the permittee specifying the damage to be repaired and/or City facilities
to be restored, which repair or restoral shall be accomplished by permittee within seven (7) days
of receipt of the notice, or if it is impossible to complete such repairs or restoral within such
seven (7) day period, then as soon as they can be completed, but in no case longer than thirty
(30) days after the date of receipt of such notice. If, after providing permittee with such written
notice, the requested repairs and/or restoration of City facilities have not been completed as
required herein, the City may draw upon the bond/cash deposit to effect the repairs and/or
restoration of the City facilities. In the event of damage requiring emergency repairs and/or
restoration of City facilities by the City, the permittee shall be required to reimburse the City in
full for all costs incurred within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice from City.
C. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any film permit granted pursuant to this chapter
that the permittee shall agree to defend and to hold the City, its officers and employees harmless
from any and all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the
issuance of such film permit, and permittee shall execute a hold harmless and indemnity
agreement in a form to be determined by the City Attorney.
SEC.. 15.16 SUSPENSION
Any film permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be subject to immediate
suspension if it is found necessary for the protection of public health, safety or general welfare.
Such suspension shall only be instituted upon the determination of the City Administrator that
immediate protective action is necessary. In the event of such a suspension, the City
Administrator shall within twenty-four (24) hours after the suspension: (1) cause to be served
upon the permittee a written statement containing the grounds for suspension and a notice of
hearing to show cause before the City Administrator as to why the film permit should not be
suspended pending revocation hearings; and (2) cause to be served upon the permittee a notice of
revocation hearing before the City Council as provided in Section 15.17 of this chapter. The
hearing before the City Administrator shall be held not later than five (5) days following the
service of the notice to the permittee.
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-13
Motion Picture & Television Production
15-14
SEC. 15.17 REVOCATION
A. Any film permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may b
revoked after a public hearing before the City Council. A film permit may be revoked under the
following circumstances:
1. Where it has bene determined that the permittee has violated or has failed to
comply with any of the terms or conditions of the film permit;
2. Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or has failed to
comply with any of the ordinances, resolutions or applicable regulations of the
City;
3. Where it has been determined that the film permit has been granted pursuant to
false or fraudulent information contained in the film permit application;
4. Where it has subsequently been determined that the filming activity will fail to
meet the criteria enumerated in this chapter for granting a film permit; or
5. Where it has been determined that the preservation of the public health, safety
AND general welfare demand revocation of the film permit.
B. A notice of the revocation shall be mailed to the permittee, by certified mail, stating the
grounds for the revocation and providing a date within thirty (30) days of the mailing of such
notice for a public hearing before the City Council. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing,
the City Council may, by resolution with findings, revoke or modify the film permit and the
decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive as to all matters in controversy.
SEC. 15.18 VIOLATION AS A NUISANCE
Any filming, videotaping or related activities not conducted pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be and are hereby declared to be an unlawful action and a public nuisance. The
City may commence an action at law or in equity in the name of the City in any court of
competent jurisdiction against the permittee to ensure compliance with the terms and provisions
of this chapter. All remedies prescribed herein will be cumulative and the use of any one (1) or
more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter.
Planning & Land Use
17-1
Chapter 17
PLANNING AND LAND USE
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.02 Title; Intent; City Charter
17.04 Applicability and interpretation
17.06 General requirements
17.08 Establishment of zones; Zoning map; Interpretation
ARTICLE 2. ZONING DISTRICTS: USES AND REGULATIONS
17.20 Zone A: Single family residential
17.22 Zone B: Public facilities
17.24 Zone C: Multi-family residential
17.26 Zone D: Commercial and mixed-use commercial/residential
17.28 Zone E: Single family residential estate
ARTICLE 3. SPECIAL REGULATIONS
17.30 Parking
17.32 Fences; Walls; Retaining walls
17.34 Landscaping
17.36 Signs
17.38 Accessory dwelling units
17.40 Residential rentals
17.42 (not used)
17.44 Home occupations
17.46 Wireless communication facilities
17.48 Cannabis cultivation and facilities
17.50 Non-conforming uses and structures
ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATION
17.60 General provisions
17.62 Notice requirements
17.64 Hearings; Review; Term of approval; Conditions
17.66 Design review
17.68 Conditional use permits
17.70 Variances
17.72 Zoning amendments
17.74 Development agreements
17.76 Reasonable accommodation
17.78 Appeals; Calls for review
17.80 Enforcement
ARTICLE 5. DEFINITIONS; MEASUREMENTS
17.90 Definitions & Measurements
Planning & Land Use
17-2
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Divisions
17.02. Title; Intent; City Charter
17.04 Applicability and interpretation
17.06 General requirements
17.08 Establishment of zones; Zoning map
DIVISION 17.02 TITLE; INTENT; CITY CHARTER
Sections:
17.02.010 Title; City Charter
17.02.010 Title; Intent; City Charter.
A. Title. This chapter 17, Planning and Land Use, is also known as the zoning ordinance.
B. Intent. The City of Piedmont consists primarily of unique single-family residences set
among mature trees and other vegetation. The residents wish to:
1. preserve the architectural heritage and beauty of the city's homes, the mature vegetation,
the tranquility and privacy that now exist, and significant views;
2. reduce on-street parking and traffic in the neighborhood streets and facilitate pedestrian
and bicycle activity;
3. avoid overcrowding and its detrimental effects on city schools and other services and
facilities;
4. preserve the city's historical heritage;
5. preserve the existing stock of small homes and otherwise allow for a variety of housing
types for all income levels, including single-family and multi-family dwellings;
6. ensure excellence of architectural design, and compliance with the Piedmont Design
Guidelines;
7. allow retail, office, and service commercial uses that primarily serve city residents; and
8. promote property improvements without sacrificing the goals already mentioned.
These zoning regulations are designed to implement these purposes.
C. City Charter. The city's zoning ordinance is also subject to the City Charter, particularly
Section 9.01, General Plan, Section 9.02, Zoning System, and Section 9.04, General Laws
Applicable. Those sections read as follows:
Section 9.01 General Plan. The City Council shall adopt, and may from time to time,
modify a general plan setting forth policies to govern the development of the City. Such
plan may cover the entire City and all of its functions and services or may consist of a
Planning & Land Use
17-3
combination of plans governing specific functions and services or specific geographic areas
which together cover the entire City and all of its functions and services. The plan shall also
serve as a guide to Council action concerning such City planning matters as land use,
development regulations and capital improvements.
Section 9.02 Zoning system. The City of Piedmont is primarily a residential city, and the
City Council shall have the power to establish a zoning system within the City as may in its
judgment be most beneficial. The Council may classify and reclassify the zones established,
but no existing zones shall be reduced or enlarged with respect to size or area, and no zones
shall be reclassified without submitting the question to a vote at a general or special election.
No zone shall be reduced or enlarged and no zones reclassified unless a majority of the
voters voting upon the same shall vote in favor thereof; provided that any property which is
zoned for uses other than or in addition to a single-family dwelling maybe voluntarily
rezoned by the owners thereof filing a written document executed by all of the owners
thereof under penalty of perjury stating that the only use on such property shall be a singlefamily
dwelling, and such rezoning shall not require a vote of the electors as set forth above.
Section 9.04 General laws applicable. All general laws of the State applicable to
municipal corporations, now or hereafter enacted, and which are not in conflict with the
provisions of this Charter or with ordinances hereafter enacted, shall be applicable to the
City. The City Council may adopt and enforce ordinances that, in relation to municipal
affairs, shall control as against the general laws of the State.
In this subsection C, Section 9.02, the prohibition not to reduce, enlarge, or reclassify a zone
without a vote is understood to mean the city may not change the zone boundaries, or change
(reclassify) a property from one zone to another.
Planning & Land Use
17-4
DIVISION 17.04 APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION
Sections:
17.04.010 Applicability to property
17.04.020 Applicability to streets and rights-of-way
17.04.030 Compliance with regulations
17.04.040 Public nuisance
17.04.050 Conflict with other regulations
17.04.060 Relation to prior ordinance
17.04.070 Extension of time for holidays and weekends
17.04.080 Rules for construction of language
17.04.090 Application during local emergency
17.04.100 Severability
17.04.010 Applicability to property.
Zoning regulations apply to all land within the city, including land owned by the city and other
local, state, or federal agencies to the extent allowed by law.
17.04.020 Applicability to streets and rights-of-way.
Public streets, utility and other rights-of-way are in the same zoning district as contiguous
property. Where contiguous properties are classified in different zoning districts, the centerline
of the street or right-of-way will be the zoning district boundary, unless otherwise depicted on
the zoning map.
17.04.030 Compliance with regulations.
No land may be used, and no structure may be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered,
demolished or moved in any zoning district except in accordance with this chapter.
17.04.040 Public nuisance.
Neither the provisions of this chapter nor the approval of any permit authorized by this chapter
authorize the maintenance of a public nuisance. A violation of a provision of this division is a
public nuisance. (See section 17.80.010B.)
17.04.050 Conflict with other regulations.
Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this chapter and any other city code, chapter,
resolution, guideline, or regulation, the more restrictive provision will control unless otherwise
specified in this chapter.
17.04.060 Relation to prior ordinance.
The provisions of this chapter supersede all prior zoning ordinances of the city.
17.04.070 Extension of time for holidays and weekends.
If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, the time for performing an act is extended to the next
working day. A holiday is a day on which city offices are closed.
Planning & Land Use
17-5
17.04.080 Rules for construction of language.
A. A reference to a public official in the city is to that person who performs the function
referred to and includes a designated deputy of the official.
B. References to days are to calendar days unless otherwise indicated.
C. Section headings do not govern, limit, modify or affect the scope, meaning or intent of a
section.
D. The words property, activities and facilities include any part of them.
E. References to federal, state, or city codes include those codes as they may be amended.
17.04.090 Application during local emergency.
The city council, or its authorized designee, may authorize a deviation from this chapter during a
local emergency declared and ratified under the municipal code in accordance with the
California Emergency Services Act (Gov’t. Code § 8550 et seq.).
17.04.100 Severability.
The chapters, articles, divisions, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable. If a court declares any to be unconstitutional, invalid or
unenforceable, that determination will not affect the remaining provisions.
Planning & Land Use
17-6
DIVISION 17.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
17.06.010 General
17.06.020 Dual city lots
17.06.030 Building permits to conform
17.06.040 Subdivision to conform
17.06.050 Private construction on city or public utility property
17.06.010 General.
On-site improvements not covered by this chapter are subject to the requirements of chapter 5
and section 5.2, the California Building Code.
17.06.020 Dual city lots.
If an applicant seeks city approval for improvements on a lot that falls within both Piedmont and
Oakland boundaries, the city will consider the entire lot area in evaluating floor area ratio,
landscape, structure coverage and setbacks.
17.06.030 Building permits to conform.
The Chief Building Official will not issue a building permit for the construction, alteration, or
establishment of an improvement or use within the city contrary to this chapter. Each application
for a building permit shall state on it the purpose for which the proposed improvement is
intended.
17.06.040 Subdivision to conform.
No lot may be created that does not conform to this chapter and chapter 19, Subdivisions.
17.06.050 Private construction on city or public utility property.
A. Zone A regulations apply. The Zone A regulations and standards apply to a private
residential structure, or fence over four feet high, which is located on or over city property, a city
easement, or a public utility easement.
B. Encroachment permit required. No building permit will be issued for construction by a
person other than the city or a public utility on or over city property or a city easement unless an
encroachment permit has first been obtained from the Director of Public Works. An
encroachment permit will not be issued until required design review and variance approvals have
been given, and the appeal period has lapsed.
C. Public utility improvements. No public utility may construct an improvement on or over
city property or a city easement unless prior written permission has been obtained from the
Director of Public Works.
D. Public utility easement. The city will not grant a permit or approval under this chapter if the
improvement is to be constructed on or over a public utility easement of which the city has actual
Planning & Land Use
17-7
knowledge, unless the applicant provides written evidence of the prior consent of the public
utility owning the easement.
Planning & Land Use
17-8
DIVISION 17.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES; ZONING MAP;
INTERPRETATION
Sections:
17.08.010 Establishment of zones.
17.08.020 Zoning map.
17.08.030 Rules for interpretation of text and zoning map
17.08.010 Establishment of zones.
The zoning system of the City consists of two parts: (1) the City Charter, which contains the
zoning policy and requirements for voter approval of zone classification changes; and (2) this
chapter 17 of the City Code.
The City is divided into five zones as follows:
Zone A Single family residential zone
Zone B Public facilities zone
Zone C Multi-family residential zone
Zone D Commercial and mixed-use commercial/residential zone
Zone E Single family residential estate zone
Within each zone, certain uses of land and buildings are allowed as permitted or conditional
uses, and certain other uses of land and buildings are restricted or prohibited. If a use is not
permitted or conditionally permitted, it is not allowed. Other regulations may apply.
17.08.020 Zoning map.
The zones referred to in section 17.08.010 above are established and described on the City's
Zoning Map. The City Clerk maintains the official copy of the zoning map.
17.08.030 Rules for interpretation of text and zoning map.
A. Zoning regulations. Where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of a provision of
this chapter or its application to a specific site, the Director determines the intent of the
provision. The Director's decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission under division
17.78.
B. Zoning map. Where uncertainty exists regarding the boundary of a zoning district, the
following rules apply:
1. District boundaries shown as approximately following the property line of a lot shall be
construed to follow the property line.
2. District boundaries shown as approximately following the right-of-way line of a street
or other identifiable boundary line, are construed to follow the right-of-way or property
boundary line.
Planning & Land Use
17-9
3. If any uncertainty remains as to the location of a district boundary or other feature
shown on the zoning map, the location is determined by the Director, subject to appeal to the
Planning Commission under division 17.78.
C. Record of interpretation. The Director will keep a public record of interpretations made
under this section.
Planning & Land Use
17-10
ARTICLE 2. ZONING DISTRICTS: USES AND REGULATIONS
Divisions
17.20 Zone A: Single family residential
17.22 Zone B: Public facilities
17.24 Zone C: Multi-family residential
17.26 Zone D: Commercial and mixed-use
17.28 Zone E: Estate residential
DIVISION 17.20 ZONE A: SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
Sections:
17.20.010 Intent
17.20.020 Permitted uses
17.20.030 Conditional uses
17.20.040 Regulations
17.20.010 Intent.
Zone A is established for single-family residential use. The intent is to:
? Preserve, protect and enhance Piedmont's residential character, protecting the quiet,
family atmosphere of neighborhoods.
? Protect residents from the harmful effects of excessive noise, light deprivation, intrusions
on privacy, overcrowding, excessive traffic, insufficient parking, blockage of significant
views, and other adverse environmental impacts.
? Maintain openness and areas of vegetation between residences to enhance a healthy
environment.
? Achieve design compatibility between additions, remodeling and other new construction
by establishing development standards.
? Minimize the out-of-scale appearance of large homes, parking areas, and other
development relative to the lot size and to other homes in a neighborhood.
17.20.020 Permitted uses.
The following are permitted uses in Zone A:
A. Single-family residence together with accessory structures and associated uses, located on the
same lot.
Planning & Land Use
17-11
B. Rented room, subject to section 17.40.020, or short-term rental, subject to a short-term rental
permit under section 17.40.030.
C. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to division 17.38.
D. Small or large family day care home in accordance with California Health and Safety Code
sections 1597.43 - 1597.47. (Ord. 742 N.S., 05/2017)
17.20.030 Conditional uses.
The following are allowed as conditional uses in Zone A:
A. Religious assembly.
B. Private school, or day care facility associated with a religious assembly use. A pre-existing
school not having a use permit may continue as a non-conforming use as long as the use is
not expanded.
C. Reservoir.
D. Wireless communication facility, subject to a wireless communication facility permit (rather
than a use permit) under division 17.46.
17.20.040 Regulations.
In Zone A:
Zone A requirements
Lot area Minimum 8,000 square feet.
Frontage, on public or
private street
Minimum 60 feet.
Lot coverage;
Landscaping
Maximum 40% by primary and accessory structures. (A site feature
is not calculated in the lot coverage if (1) the feature is not more than
7 feet height and (2) the total of all site features is 400 square feet or
less.)
Minimum 30% landscaping.
Structure height Maximum 35 feet.
Street yard setback Minimum 20 feet for primary or accessory structure.
No minimum setback for a site feature, but a site feature may require
a design review permit under division 17.66.
Planning & Land Use
17-12
Zone A requirements (continued)
Side yard and
rear yard setback
Minimum 5 feet for a primary or accessory structure, but 20 feet in a
street-facing yard.
However, an accessory structure may be located anywhere within the
side and rear setback areas except that it: (a) must be located within
35 feet of the rear lot line; (b) must be located at least 5 feet from a
habitable structure on an abutting property, and, for a corner lot, at
least 5 feet from a side lot line of an abutting property to the rear; (c)
may not exceed 15 feet in height; and (d) may not be habitable.
A site feature proposed within these distances may require a design
review permit under division 17.66.
Floor area ratio*
55% of the lot area if the parcel is 5,000 square feet or less.
50% of the lot area if the parcel is 5,001 square feet to 10,000 square
feet.
45% of the lot area if the parcel is more than 10,000 square feet.
* In order to encourage development within the existing building envelope instead of building
outwards or upwards, the floor area ratio standard is not applied to finishing an area into habitable
space if: (1) there is no expansion of the exterior building envelope; and (2) the owner has not
obtained a final inspection within the prior three years on a building permit issued for an expansion
of the building envelope. (Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
Planning & Land Use
17-13
DIVISION 17.22 ZONE B: PUBLIC FACILITIES
Sections:
17.22.010 Intent
17.22.020 Permitted uses
17.22.030 Conditional uses
17.22.040 Regulations
17.22.010 Intent.
Zone B is established to regulate and control development of public facilities that are compatible
with the character of surrounding uses.
17.22.020 Permitted uses.
The following are permitted uses in Zone B:
A. A single-family residence, accessory structures, and associated uses as listed in section
17.20.020 (for Zone A).
B. City building, used by a governmental entity or other nonprofit entity.
C. Public school.
D. Parks, including recreational uses and facilities.
E. Cemetery, public utility.
F. Emergency shelter, supportive housing or transitional housing, as defined in Health and
Safety Code sections 50801(e), 50675.14(b) and 50675.2(h), respectively.
17.22.030 Conditional uses.
The following are allowed as conditional uses in Zone B:
A. City building used by a for-profit commercial entity.
B. Wireless communication facility, subject to a wireless communication facility permit (rather
than a use permit) under division 17.46.
17.22.040 Regulations.
A. Certain city projects are subject to:
1. the green building requirements of chapter 5, article 4, section 5.35 and following; and
2. the bay-friendly landscaping requirements of chapter 3, section 3.30 and following.
Planning & Land Use
17-14
B. In Zone B, for residential use:
Lot area; frontage;
coverage; height; front,
rear and side yards; floor
area ratio.
All as set forth for Zone A. See section 17.20.040.
Planning & Land Use
17-15
DIVISION 17.24 ZONE C: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
Sections:
17.24.010 Intent
17.24.020 Permitted uses
17.24.030 Conditional uses
17.24.040 Regulations
17.24.010 Intent.
Zone C is established to regulate and control residential development, including some multifamily
dwellings, in harmony with the character of the neighborhood.
17.24.020 Permitted uses.
The following are permitted uses in Zone C:
A. A single-family residence, accessory structures, and associated uses as listed in section
17.20.020 (for Zone A).
B. A multi-family dwelling at a minimum density of one dwelling unit per each 3,600 square
feet of lot area (12 units/acre), and not exceeding one dwelling unit per each 2,000 square
feet of lot area (21 units/acre).
The Planning Commission will grant a density bonus for affordable housing in accordance
with Government Code section 65915. A multi-family residential project that incorporates
affordable units is also eligible for a 20% reduction in planning application fees.
17.24.030 Conditional uses.
The following are allowed as conditional uses in Zone C:
A. Wireless communication facility, subject to a wireless communication facility permit (rather
than a use permit) under division 17.46.
Planning & Land Use
17-16
17.24.040 Regulations.
A. In Zone C, for multi-family residential use:
Zone C requirements
Lot area Minimum 10,000 square feet
Frontage, on public or
private street
Minimum 90 feet
Lot coverage;
Landscaping
Maximum 50% of the total by primary and accessory structures.
Minimum 30% landscaping, or 20% by landscaping for a project in
which at least 20% of the units are affordable, as defined by the
California Department of Housing and Community Development.
Zone C requirements (continued)
Structure height Maximum 35 feet.
Street yard setback Minimum 20 feet for primary or accessory structure.
Site feature of any height may require a design review permit under
division 17.66.
Side yard and
rear yard setback
Minimum 5 feet for primary or accessory structure, but 20 feet in a
street-facing yard.
However, an accessory structure may be located anywhere within the
side and rear setback areas except that it: (a) must be located within
35 feet of the rear lot line; (b) must be located at least 5 feet from a
habitable structure on an abutting property, and, for a corner lot, at
least 5 feet from a side lot line of an abutting property to the rear; (c)
may not exceed 15 feet in height; and (d) may not be habitable.
A site feature proposed within these distances may require a design
review permit under division 17.66.
Floor area ratio Maximum 55% of the lot area if the parcel is 5,000 square feet or
less.
Maximum 50% of the lot area if the parcel is 5,001 square feet to
10,000 square feet.
Maximum 45% of the lot area if the parcel is more than 10,000
square feet.
B. In Zone C, for single-family residential use:
Lot area; frontage;
coverage; height; front,
rear and side yards; floor
area ratio.
All as set forth for Zone A. See section 17.20.040.
Planning & Land Use
17-17
DIVISION 17.26 ZONE D: COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE
Sections:
17.26.010 Intent
17.26.020 Permitted uses
17.26.030 Conditional uses
17.26.040 Prohibited uses
17.26.050 Regulations
17.26.010 Intent.
Zone D is established to regulate and control commercial and mixed-use commercial/residential
development, where pedestrian-oriented commercial development will serve city residents,
consistent and in harmony with the character of the neighborhood and adjacent residential areas.
17.26.020 Permitted uses.
The following are permitted uses in Zone D:
A. A single-family residence, accessory structures, and associated uses as listed in section
17.20.020 (for Zone A).
17.26.030 Conditional uses.
The following are allowed as conditional uses in Zone D:
A. Religious assembly.
B. Private school, or day care facility associated with a religious assembly use. A pre-existing
school not having a use permit may continue as a non-conforming use as long as the use is
not expanded. .
C. Small or large family day care home in accordance with California Health and Safety Code
sections 1597.43 - 1597.47.
D. Retail, office, and service commercial uses of a type that will primarily serve city residents.
Commercial uses that will primarily serve city residents are those uses residents would be
expected to use on a regular basis, and not uses that would be expected to draw the major
portion of their clientele from outside the city.
A structural change or change in actual existing use in a commercial building requires a new
conditional use permit. Change in actual existing use means the addition, withdrawal, or
other modification of:
1. the type or quality of service or product being marketed;
2. the time or place of delivery of the service or product;
3. the manner or method of delivery of the service or product; or
4. the number of personnel on the site, where the addition, withdrawal, or other
modification changes the facts upon which a conditional use permit was based.
Planning & Land Use
17-18
E. Mixed-use commercial/residential development. Mixed-use commercial and residential
developments must have both:
1. ground floor retail, office, or service commercial uses to primarily serve city
residents. Ground floor residential use is not permitted, except for an entry to the upper
floor(s); and
2. multi-family residences above the ground floor of not more than 20 units per net
acre. When affordable housing is provided, the Planning Commission will grant a
density bonus in accordance with Government Code section 65915.
F. Wireless communication facility, subject to a wireless communication facility permit (rather
than a use permit) under division 17.46.
17.26.040 Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited uses in Zone D: manufacturing, wholesaling, distributing, or
industrial use; motor vehicle sales or service, except minor servicing; hotel or motel; fast food
restaurant; drive-through establishment.
17.26.050 Regulations.
A. In Zone D, for each conditional use:
Zone D requirements
Civic Center Subarea 1 Grand Avenue Subarea 2
Lot area No minimum area, but an existing
lot may not be subdivided into
smaller lots.
No minimum area, but an existing lot
may not be subdivided into smaller
lots.
Frontage, on public
or private street
No minimum requirement. No minimum requirement.
Lot coverage;
Landscaping
No maximum.
No minimum.
No Maximum.
Minimum 10% landscaping.
Structure height Maximum 40 feet, and 3 stories.
Maximum 35 feet, and 3 stories.
For a building site adjacent to a single
family residence:
? within 10 feet of the abutting lot
line: maximum 25 feet measured
from adjacent grade; and
? daylight plane starting at 25 feet
above grade and a distance of 10
feet from the abutting property
line.
Street yard setback No minimum setback.
Along Wildwood, Sunnyside and
Linda Avenues: 10 feet minimum
from lot line.
Planning & Land Use
17-19
Along Grand Avenue: 15 feet
minimum from curb or 3 feet from lot
line, whichever is greater.
Side yard and
rear yard setback
No minimum setbacks, but if side
or rear yard abuts a single-family
residence, the minimum side and
rear yard setback is 5 feet from
that abutting lot line.
Side Yard: no minimum setbacks,
except minimum 5 feet from lot line
abutting a single-family residence.
Rear Yard: 5 feet minimum.
Floor to ceiling
height for ground
floor
15 feet minimum
12 feet minimum
1 The Civic Center Subarea consists of the Zone D parcels bounded by: Highland Way on the north,
Highland Avenue on the south; and Highland Avenue on the east, Vista Avenue on the south, and
Piedmont Unified School District properties on the north and west.
2 The Grand Avenue Subarea consists of the Zone D parcels bounded by: Wildwood Avenue to the
southeast, Grand Avenue on the west, Zone A parcels on the north and east; and City boundary on
the south, Grand Avenue on the east, Linda Avenue on the north, and Zone A properties to the west.
B. In Zone D, for single-family residential use:
Lot area; frontage;
coverage; height; front,
rear and side yards; floor
area ratio.
All as set forth for Zone A. See section 17.20.040.
Planning & Land Use
17-20
DIVISION 17.28 ZONE E: ESTATE RESIDENTIAL
Sections:
17.28.010 Intent
17.28.020 Permitted uses
17.28.030 Conditional uses
17.28.040 Regulations
17.28.010 Intent.
Zone E is established for estate residential homes, which tend to be larger lots. The other
purposes set forth for Zone A also apply to Zone E.
17.28.020 Permitted uses:
The following are permitted uses in Zone E: a single-family residence, accessory structures and
associated uses as listed in section 17.02.010 (for Zone A).
17.28.030 Conditional uses.
The following are allowed as conditional uses in Zone E:
A. Wireless communication facility, subject to a wireless communication facility permit (rather
than a use permit) under division 17.46.
17.28.040 Regulations.
In Zone E:
Zone E requirements
Lot area Minimum 20,000 square feet.
Frontage, on public or
private street
Minimum 120 feet.
Lot coverage;
landscaping
Maximum 40% by primary and accessory structures. (A site feature
is not calculated in the lot coverage if (1) the feature is not more than
7 feet height and (2) the total of all site features is 400 square feet or
less.)
Minimum 40% landscaping.
Structure height Maximum 35 feet.
Street yard setback Minimum 20 feet for primary and accessory structure.
No minimum setback for a site feature, but a site feature may require
a design review permit, under division 17.66.
Planning & Land Use
17-21
Zone E requirements (continued)
Side yard and
rear yard setback
Minimum 20 feet for primary or accessory structure.
However, an accessory structure may be located anywhere within the
side and rear setback areas except that it: (a) must be located within
35 feet of the rear lot line; (b) must be located at least 5 feet from a
habitable structure on an abutting property, and, for a corner lot, at
least 5 feet from a side lot line of an abutting property to the rear; (c)
may not exceed 15 feet in height; and (d) may not be habitable.
These distance requirements for an accessory structure also apply to
a garage or carport attached to a primary structure.
No minimum setback for a site feature, but a site feature may require
a design review permit under division 17.66.
Floor area ratio* 55% of the lot area if the parcel is 5,000 square feet or less.
50% of the lot area if the parcel is 5,001 square feet to 10,000 square
feet.
45% of the lot area if the parcel is more than 10,000 square feet.
* In order to encourage development within the existing building envelope instead of building
outwards or upwards, the floor area ratio standard is not applied to finishing an area into habitable
space if: (1) there is no expansion of the exterior building envelope; and (2) the owner has not
obtained a final inspection within the prior three years on a building permit issued for an expansion
of the building envelope. (Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
Planning & Land Use
17-22
ARTICLE 3. SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Divisions:
17.30 Parking
17.32 Fences; Trash enclosures; Corner obstructions
17.34 Landscaping
17.36 Signs
17.38 Accessory dwelling units
17.40 Residential Rentals
17.42 (Not used)
17.44 Home occupations
17.46 Wireless communications
17.48 Cannabis cultivation and facilities
17.50 Non-conforming uses and structures
DIVISION 17.30 PARKING
Sections:
17.30.010 Single family residential use (All zones)
17.30.020 Multi-family residential use (Zone C)
17.30.030 Commercial use (Zone D)
17.30.040 Location of parking spaces
17.30.050 Size and specifications
17.30.060 No reduction of existing parking
17.30.070 Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
17.30.010 Single family residential use. (All zones)
A. Applicability. This section 17.30.010 applies to the following single family residential uses
in any zone:
1. new development; and
2. existing development (which may be nonconforming under division 17.50) when an
applicant seeks a building permit or land use approval for an improvement or change
that will affect the need for parking. Either an increase in the number of bedrooms, as
defined, or an increase in the intensity of use will affect the need for parking. Existing
street width and existing demand for on-street parking are factors in considering the
intensity of use.
Planning & Land Use
17-23
B. Regulations.
1. General.
Dwelling unit Minimum number of offstreet,
covered, non-tandem
parking spaces
Accessory dwelling unit (chapter 17.38) 0*
Dwelling unit 700 square feet or less 1
Dwelling unit greater than 700 square feet:
1-4 bedrooms
5-6 bedrooms
7 or more bedrooms
2
3
4
* Under Government Code section 65852.2, the city may not require parking for an accessory dwelling unit located within
1/2 mile of public transit, and all Piedmont properties are within 1/2 mile.
2. Parking spaces may not be located within a 20-foot street setback, except for certain
accessory dwelling units under section 17.38.060 B.5.a.
3. An applicant may increase the primary dwelling unit up to four bedrooms without
adding additional parking, as long as:
a. no existing parking space is eliminated if it creates a nonconformance;
b. the required number of parking spaces are provided, even if uncovered or tandem;
c. the parking spaces are not within the required 20 foot street setback; and
d. section B.4 below does not apply.
4. When considering an application, the city may strictly apply the parking regulations
under subsection B.1 above if the proposed construction will have an undue adverse impact
on neighborhood vehicular congestion. A determination of undue adverse impact must be
based on evidence considering one or more of the following factors: existing street width;
existing on-street parking conditions; lack of sidewalks; and street slope and curvature.
17.30.020 Multi-family residential use. (Zone C).
This section applies to each multi-family residential use.
Minimum number of off-street,
covered, non-tandem parking spaces
Dwelling unit 700 square feet or less 1
Dwelling unit greater than 700 square feet 1.5
Planning & Land Use
17-24
17.30.030 Commercial use and mixed-use residential/commercial. (Zone D).
A. Residential uses in mixed use commercial/residential:
Dwelling Unit Size Minimum number of off-street,
covered, non-tandem parking spaces
Studio or 1 bedroom 1
2 bedrooms 1.5
3 or more bedrooms 2
B. Commercial uses:
Use Type Minimum number of off-street, covered, non-tandem
parking spaces per floor area
First 1,500 square feet In excess of 1,500 square feet
Eating places and similar, highintensity
on premise customer uses
Each 500 square feet: 11 Each 250 square feet: 11
Retail stores, offices, and other
low-intensity uses
Each 750 square feet: 11 Each 350 square feet: 11
1Or as required by conditional use permit
17.30.040 Location of parking spaces.
Parking for a permitted use in any zone must be located: (1) on the same lot as the permitted use;
(2) not within the street setback; and (3) not between the street-facing facade of a building and
the lot line in Zone D. Parking for a conditional use in any zone will be provided as required by
the conditional use permit authorizing the use.
17.30.050 Size and specifications.
Except as otherwise provided, a parking space required by this section must have unrestricted
access to a public street with a grade not more than 20%. In Zone A, one of every three required
parking spaces may be for a compact car, and in Zones C and D, one of every four required
parking spaces may be for a compact car.
The minimum parking space dimensions are:
8-1/2 feet x 18 feet, or
7-1/2 feet x 15 feet for compact car.
A minimum 1-foot clearance must be provided between the length side of a parking space and
the nearest wall or similar obstruction. (Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
17.30.060 No reduction of existing parking.
No person may alter, eliminate, or restrict access to an existing parking space unless the Planning
Director first determines that the space is (1) unusable, (2) is to be restored or replaced with a
parking space which meets the requirements of this division 17.30, or (3) is permitted with a
variance approved by the Planning Commission or City Council. For purposes of making this
determination, the term unusable means that the parking space is not large enough to contain a
compact-sized automobile or that the driveway to the parking space is so steep, narrow or
Planning & Land Use
17-25
otherwise configured that it precludes safe passage of the vehicle, and that enlargement to permit
safe passage would result in severe economic hardship.
No garage or other off-street parking may be altered for a use other than parking, unless
otherwise allowed under this chapter.
17.30.070 Compliance with American with Disabilities Act (ADA).
The Chief Building Official may adjust the parking requirements in zones B, C or D without a
conditional use permit or design review permit, to meet the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
Planning & Land Use
17-26
DIVISION 17.32 FENCES; TRASH ENCLOSURES; CORNER OBSTRUCTIONS
Sections:
17.32.010 Fence, wall, retaining wall, hedge, terracing
17.32.020 Trash enclosure
17.32.030 Corner obstructions
17.32.010 Fence, wall, retaining wall, terracing.
A fence, wall, retaining wall, or terracing is subject to these height limit and design review
permit requirements:
Height, measured from exiting or proposed grade; Design
review permit requirement
Retaining wall, with or without
guardrail
Maximum 30 inches. (No design review permit required.)
If more than 30 inches, requires a design review permit under
division 17.66.
Fence, wall, or a combination
of either with a retaining wall
within 24 inches
Within street setback Requires a design review permit under division 17.66 for any
height.
Other areas If 6 feet or less: exempt from design review permit.
If more than 6 feet high, requires a design review permit, under
division 17.66.
If more than 8 feet high, requires a design review permit, under
division 17.66, with notification requirements of division 17.62.
Trash enclosure (See general requirements in subsection B.1, below.)
Within street setback No building permit or design review permit required if the
enclosure complies with section 17.32.020, subsections A and B
below. Otherwise requires design review permit under division
17.66.
Other areas No building permit or design review permit required if the
enclosure complies with section 17.32.020 B below.
Terracing Design review is not required if a series of one or more retaining
walls and fences, at least 24 inches apart, on a single slope is
designed so that no single wall or fence exceeds the height limits in
this subsection.
(Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
17.32.020 Trash enclosure.
A. General requirement. A trash enclosure must be:
1. a solid fence, wall, or combination of fence and retaining wall at least four feet in height
and up to six feet in height; or
2. an open fence up to six feet in height in combination with dense, evergreen landscaping
at least four feet in height at maturity and up to any height; or
Planning & Land Use
17-27
3. dense, evergreen landscaping at least four feet in height at maturity and up to any
height.
B. Standards. A design review permit is not required, but a trash enclosure within a street
setback will be reviewed at the planning counter for compliance with this chapter and the
Piedmont Design Guidelines (Trash Enclosures). The enclosure must be:
1. located as far away from the street as possible;
2. as small as is necessary to enclose the carts;
3. as low in height as necessary to adequately screen the carts; and
4. designed in compliance with the Piedmont Design Guidelines,.
17.32.030 Corner obstructions.
No fence, wall, retaining wall, hedge, or vegetation may be erected or grown in the front or street
side yard of a corner lot to a height of more than three feet within the sight distance zone, a
triangular area formed by measuring 30 feet along the front and side lot lines along the right-ofway
from their “extended” intersection and connecting these two points, or as otherwise may be
approved by the Planning Commission.
Planning & Land Use
17-28
DIVISION 17.34 LANDSCAPING.
Section:
17.34.010 Intent
17.34.020 Landscape plans
17.34.030 Decision
17.34.040 Requirements
17.34.050 Completion
17.34.060 Maintenance
17.34.010 Intent.
The regulations in this division are intended to maintain and enhance the city's residential
character, preserve the architectural heritage, protect the city's natural beauty and visual
character, improve property values, and prevent blighted areas.
17.34.020 Landscape plans.
A. When required.
1. An applicant must include landscape plans in an application for a conditional use
permit, design review permit, or variance for a new residence or other building.
2. The Planning Director, Planning Commission or City Council may request that an
applicant prepare landscape plans with an application for a building permit, conditional use
permit, design review permit, wireless communications facility, or variance for
improvements which substantially disturb the site.
B. Application fee. The fee for approval of a landscape plan is included in the fee for the
accompanying application as provided in section 17.60.040.
C. Contents. Plans must clearly set forth the areas and types of existing and proposed
landscaping, and their relation to the structure(s) requiring the approval or permit. Landscaping
must conform to Piedmont Design Guidelines as well as any state regulations, including the
California Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (23 Cal. Code of Regulations Division 2,
Chapter 2.7).
17.34.030 Decision.
The decision-making body for the accompanying application will take action on the landscape
plan, at the same time and in the same manner as that required for the underlying application.
That body may modify the design and attach conditions as appropriate to assure compliance with
this division. The conditions may include installation of an irrigation system.
The applicant may appeal a decision on the landscape plan under division 17.78, Appeals.
Planning & Land Use
17-29
17.34.040 Requirements.
The minimum dimensions and areas for landscaping are set forth in the regulations for each
zoning district.
A residential property owner must landscape all required street setback areas, except for areas
paved for ingress and egress. This requirement does not apply to a mixed use.
17.34.050 Completion.
The applicant must complete the landscaping to the satisfaction of the Planning Director and/or
Chief Building Official. The city may require a cash deposit or letter of credit to assure
completion. If required, the city will release the financial security in increments proportionate to
the progress of landscape completion. The city may withhold final approval of a project until
landscaping is completed.
17.34.060 Maintenance.
All landscaped areas required here or as a condition of approval must be planted with living
materials, and if mulch is used it must be made from organic material. The landscaped area must
be maintained in a healthy and attractive state, with irrigation, weeding, and replacement as
needed. The decision-maker may, as a condition of approval of any landscaping, require
execution of a contract for the maintenance of the landscaping.
Planning & Land Use
17-30
DIVISION 17.36 SIGNS.
Sections:
17.36.010 Applicability; Definition
17.36.020 Purpose
17.36.030 Public property
17.36.040 Private property
17.36.050 Substitution of message
17.36.060 Nonconforming signs
17.36.070 Enforcement
17.36.010 Applicability; Definitions
A. Applicability. This division applies to any sign located on real property and visible to the
public. This division does not apply to :
1. a sign held or otherwise mounted on a person;,
2. a sign posted on the interior of a building or structure (except windows visible to the
public);
3. a sign posted on property owned by the Piedmont Unified School District; or
4. any sign mandated, regulated, or expressly permitted by law including the City Code,
permits issued by other public agencies, the California Building Code, and the
California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
No variance is authorized under this division.
B. Definitions. In this division:
Campaign sign means a sign that is designed to influence the passage or defeat of any
measure on a ballot or to influence voters with respect to the nomination, election, defeat, or
removal of a candidate from public office at any national, state, or local election.
Commercial message means a message by a speaker likely to be engaged in commerce
targeting an audience of actual or potential customers where the content of the message is
commercial in character.
Commercial sign means any sign containing a commercial message.
Director of Public Works means the Director or his or her designee.
Noncommercial message means any message except for a commercial message.
Noncommercial sign means a sign that does not contain a commercial message.
Nonresidential parcel means all parcels except for residential parcels.
Residential parcel means a parcel of real property containing a single-family residence,
accessory structure or associated use, or a multi-family residential project.
Planning & Land Use
17-31
Sign means one or more visual figures, including but not limited to words, letters and
numbers, other writings, designs, pictures and illustrations, or any combination of those,
which are erected, placed on, fixed to, painted or represented on or above a building or
structure, window, sidewalk, street or other way, on the ground or any part of a building or
structure, or in any other manner so as to be visible to the public. Sign includes, but is not
limited to, a banner, handbill, pennant, insignia, bulletin board, ground sign, billboard,
poster, mural, electronic advertising and information device, illuminated sign, and marquee.
Temporary freestanding sign means any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric,
cardboard, wallboard, wood or other light materials, with or without frames, supported by
one or more upright poles or rock, block, A-frame, or masonry base in or upon the ground
and not attached to a building.
17.36.020 Purpose
The purposes and intent of this division is to:
A. regulate signs located on all real property in the City over which the City has zoning and
land use regulatory power.
B. maintain and enhance the City’s appearance by regulating the design, character, location,
number, type, quality of materials, size, illumination, and maintenance of signs.
C. serve the City’s interests in maintaining and enhancing its visual appeal for residents,
tourists, and other visitors by preventing the degradation of visual quality which can result from
excessive and poorly designed, located, or maintained signage.
D. generally limit commercial signs to on-site locations in order to protect the aesthetic
environment from the visual clutter associated with the unrestricted proliferation of signs, while
providing channels of communication to the public.
E. limit the size and number of signs to levels that reasonably allow for the identification of a
residential, public, or commercial location and the nature of any such commercial business.
F. encourage signs that are appropriate for the property on which they are located and
consistent with the permitted uses of that property.
G. minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property,
including sidewalks, streets, roads, and highways.
H. protect the investments in property and lifestyle quality made by persons who choose to live,
work, or do business in the City.
I. protect and improve pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety by balancing the need for signs
that facilitate the safe and smooth flow of traffic (e.g., directional signs and on-site signs)
without an excess of signage which may distract drivers or overload their capacity to quickly
receive information.
Planning & Land Use
17-32
J. reduce hazardous situations, confusion and visual clutter caused by the proliferation,
placement, illumination, animation and excessive height, area, and bulk of signs which compete
for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
K. regulate signs in a manner so as to not physically interfere with or obstruct the vision of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
L. avoid unnecessary and time consuming approval requirements for certain minor or
temporary signs that do not require review for compliance with the City’s building and electrical
codes, while limiting the size and number of such signs so as to minimize visual clutter.
M. respect and protect the right of free speech by sign display, particularly the important role
that campaign signs play in the political process, while reasonably regulating the structural,
locational, and other noncommunicative aspects of signs, generally for the public health, safety,
welfare and specifically to serve the public interests in community aesthetics and traffic and
pedestrian safety.
N. enable the fair, consistent, and efficient enforcement of the sign regulations of the City.
O. regulate signs in a constitutional manner, which is content neutral as to Noncommercial
signs and viewpoint neutral as to commercial signs. All administrative interpretations and
discretion are to be exercised in light of this policy and consistent with the purposes and intent
stated in this section.
P. recognize that properties owned by the Piedmont Unified School District serve many
functions, including as places of learning, athletic venues, and community centers, and reserve
for the Piedmont Unified School District the discretion to regulate the posting of signs on its
properties in a manner that balances the need to maintain safe and aesthetically attractive
facilities with the need to create environments that promote learning and foster civic
engagement.
17.36.030 Public Property
A. Prohibition. Except as permitted under section (B) below, no person may display a sign
on public property or within the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, a street,
sidewalk, flight of stairs, pathway, lane, or alley. No person may paint, mark, or write on, or
post or otherwise affix a sign to or on a street lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake, or
guardrail, public utility structure or poll, wire system, street sign, traffic sign, traffic signal, wall,
fence, or other structure located on public property or within the public right-of-way.
B. Exceptions.
1. City Buildings and Facilities. The Director of Public Works may approve the
installation of a sign by the City on City-owned buildings and facilities located on Cityowned
property and within the public rights-of-way provided the sign conforms to the
Piedmont Design Guidelines.
Planning & Land Use
17-33
2. Sidewalks. A temporary freestanding sign no larger than four square feet on a side
(excluding the frame) may be placed on a City sidewalk or curbside planting strip on
Saturdays and Sundays between 12 p.m. and 5 p.m., as long as the sign does not impede
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise constitute a safety hazard.
3. Piedmont Park and Veterans’ Memorial Building. A group or individual hosting a
permitted event in Piedmont Park or at the Veterans’ Memorial Building may place up to
two temporary freestanding signs no larger than four square feet on a side (excluding the
frame) in Piedmont Park, on the adjacent curbside strips, or on the exterior of the Veterans’
Memorial Building during the permitted event and for a period not to exceed 2 hours before
the start of the permitted event and 2 hours after the conclusion of the permitted event, as
long as the sign does not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise constitute a
safety hazard.
4. Other public property. The Director of Public Works may issue a sign permit to display
a sign in the following locations:
a. Across Magnolia Avenue at the intersection of Highland Avenue and Magnolia
Avenue.
b. On the fence outside of the Piedmont Corporation Yard.
c. On backstops or fences within or surrounding Coaches Field, Beach Playfield,
Hampton Field, Vista Street tennis courts, the City pool, and other City-owned
recreation facilities.
It is the City’s intent that these locations constitute a non-public forum to promote community
events benefiting residents and provide residents with information on non-partisan or
noncommercial matters of general community interest. Signs in these locations will serve to
notify citizens and visitors of upcoming events that are (i) City-sponsored, (ii) City cosponsored,
(iii) sponsored by any other local governmental or educational entity, (iv) sponsored
by a local non-profit, or (v) sponsored by a local business. Signs in these locations must conform
to the Piedmont Design Guidelines and the stated purpose of this division.
17.36.040 Private property
A. Generally
1. Consent required. The consent of the property owner or the person in control of the
property is required before placing any sign on private property.
2. Campaign signs. This division shall not limit the right of owners or occupants of
private property to post campaign signs on their property. Campaign signs placed on
residential parcels shall comply with the same size, height, location, and lighting restrictions
applicable to noncommercial signs placed on residential parcels. Campaign signs placed on
nonresidential parcels shall comply with the same size, height, location, and lighting
restrictions applicable to noncommercial signs placed on nonresidential parcels. Any person
who posts a campaign sign on private property shall remove the campaign sign within ten
days after the day of the election to which it pertains.
Planning & Land Use
17-34
3. Real estate signs. This division shall not limit the right of property owners or their
agents to place real estate signs on their property pursuant to Civil Code § 713.
B. Residential parcels. No person may display a sign on a residential parcel (including
contiguous property held by the same owner), unless the sign conforms to the following
requirements:
1. Temporary freestanding noncommercial signs.
Number Maximum of 2
Size Maximum of 4 square feet per sign
Height Maximum (including frame) is 4 feet
Location Street yard of a residential parcel, but not in the public
right of way
Lighting No illumination
2. Noncommercial window signs.
Number Maximum of 2
Size Maximum of 4 square feet per sign
Location Street yard-facing windows
3. Noncommercial entryway signs.
Number Maximum of 2
Size Maximum of 1 square foot per sign
Location Attached to the front door, front gate to the parcel, front
porch, or entryway to the residence
Lighting No illumination
4. Multifamily developments. Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) above, the
resident(s) of each unit of a multifamily development may display two noncommercial
signs, not to exceed a total of four square feet in area per sign, in the windows of that unit.
If the unit in a multifamily development includes a patio, deck, balcony, or other outdoor
space in the exclusive possession of the resident(s) of that unit, the resident(s) may display
up to two temporary freestanding noncommercial signs that satisfy the size, height, and
lighting requirements of subsection (B)(1) of this section in that outdoor space. If the unit in
a multifamily development includes a front gate to the unit, front porch, or entryway to the
unit that is in the exclusive possession of the resident(s) of that unit, the resident(s) may
display up to two noncommercial signs that satisfy the requirements of subsection (B)(3) of
this section.
C. Private, Nonresidential Parcels. No person may display a sign on a nonresidential parcel,
unless the sign conforms to the following requirements:
Planning & Land Use
17-35
1. Signs Permitted as a Matter of Right.
a. Temporary freestanding signs. One commercial or noncommercial temporary
freestanding sign is permitted for each private nonresidential parcel that has frontage
within forty feet of the curb line of a publicly-maintained street. The sign may be placed
on private property, or within the first eighteen inches of any public property that is
directly in front of the individual private nonresidential parcel. The sign may not exceed
four square feet per side (excluding frame). A minimum passage way width of fortyeight
inches must be maintained along the sidewalk in front of such sidewalk display
sign. No temporary freestanding sign may be illuminated or placed outside a business
during non-business hours.
b. Window signs. For each window on all private nonresidential parcels, commercial
or noncommercial signs may cover a maximum of 25 percent of the total window area.
2. Design review.
a. General. Each sign other than a sign permitted as a matter of right requires a
design review permit by the Planning Commission.
b. Application; Planning Commission review; Standards for approval. An applicant
shall submit an application for sign design review permit and the Planning Commission
shall hold a hearing on the application in accordance with the application, notice and
hearing requirements and procedures set forth in section 17.66.050. The decision of the
Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the
appeal procedures of division 17.78. The hearing body will not approve the design of
signage on a private nonresidential parcel unless the sign conforms to the purpose of
this division, as stated in section 17.36.020, and meets the following standards:
i. Approval of the sign design review permit will not result in more than one sign
per applicant for each building façade;
ii. Each sign shall be simple in design. Graphic depictions related to the
nonresidential use are appropriate;
iii. Each sign shall be compatible in design, color and scale to the front of the
building, adjoining structures and general surroundings;
iv. The sign shall be oriented toward the pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
v. The sign shall be constructed of sturdy materials; and
vi. The design of the sign is consistent with the City’s General Plan and Piedmont
Design Guidelines.
Planning & Land Use
17-36
D. Mixed use developments. No person may display a sign on a mixed use development
parcel, unless the sign conforms to the following requirements:
1. A sign displayed by owners and occupants of nonresidential portions of a mixed use
development must comply with section 17.36.040(C).
2. Signs displayed by owners and occupants of residential portions of a mixed use
development must comply with section 17.36.040(B). (Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
17.36.050 Substitution of message
A noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for all or part of the commercial or
noncommercial message on any approved sign allowed under this division. No special or
additional approval from the City is required to substitute a noncommercial message for any
other message on an allowable sign provided the sign design is already approved or exempt from
the approval requirements of this division and no design, structural, or electrical changes are
being made.
17.36.060 Nonconforming signs
A permanently-located sign lawfully existing on November 3, 2010 is permitted without
conforming to this division, except that if the sign is altered, relocated, partially demolished, or
reconstructed, this division applies. Normal repairs and maintenance which do not change the
location or appearance of the sign are permitted without requiring conformity.
17.36.070 Enforcement
A. Illegal sign. An illegal sign is a sign in violation of this division and constitutes a public
nuisance.
B. Summary abatement. Upon the determination of the Director of Public Works that a sign
placed on public property or within the right-of-way is unsafe or in violation of this division, the
City may immediately remove and store the illegal sign without prior notice. The City shall
immediately provide written notice of the removal to the owner and/or person responsible for
placing the sign on public property or within the right-of-way, if known to the City. If the sign
remains unclaimed for a period of fifteen days after removal, it will be deemed unclaimed
personal property and may be disposed of by the City in accordance with applicable law. In the
case of an unsafe or illegal sign removed by the City, the costs of such removal and storage will
be borne by the owner and/or person responsible for placing the sign on public property or within
the right-of-way, and may be collected by the City in the same manner as it collects any other
debt or obligation. No sign that has been removed and stored by the City may be released until
the costs of removal and storage have been paid. The determination by the Director of Public
Works made under this subsection (B) and the costs of removal and storage of the sign may be
appealed in accordance with Section 17.78 of the City code.
Planning & Land Use
17-37
DIVISION 17.38 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
Sections
17.38.010 Purpose and intent
17.38.020 Definitions
17.38.030 Legal accessory dwelling units; Non-conforming accessory dwelling units;
Requirements for rented accessory dwelling units; Units that are not legal
accessory dwelling units.
17.38.040 Permit requirement
17.38.050 Permit application and review procedures
17.38.060 Zoning regulations; Development standards
17.38.070 Variance or exception
17.38.010 Purpose and intent.
The State Legislature has declared that accessory dwelling units are a valuable form of housing
in California. Accessory dwelling units provide housing for family members, students, the
elderly, in-home health care providers, the disabled, and others, at below market prices, and
within existing neighborhoods. Homeowners who create accessory dwelling units benefit from
added income, and an increased sense of security. (Gov't. Code § 65852.150.)
The city has a long history of various types of accessory dwelling units. By enacting this division
17.38, the City Council intends to:
A. Establish the requirements for accessory dwelling units in the city, consistent with California
Government Code section 65852.2;
B. Encourage the use of existing accessory dwelling units and the construction of new
accessory dwelling units, consistent with this Division;
C. Help achieve the goals and policies of the General Plan Housing Element by encouraging a
mix of housing types affordable to all economic segments of the community; and
D. Clarify the requirements for the various kinds of accessory dwelling units in the city.
17.38.020 Definitions.
In this division 17.38, the following definitions apply, in addition to the definitions set forth in
division 17.90:
Accessory dwelling unit means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit that
provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It includes
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel
as a primary unit. It may include (1) an efficiency unit, as defined in Health and Safety Code
section 17958.1 and (2) a manufactured home as defined in Health and Safety Code section
18007. (Formerly called second dwelling unit. See section 17.38.030 for types of accessory
dwelling units and permits.)
Planning & Land Use
17-38
Affordable housing definitions:
Affordable Rent Level means that the accessory dwelling unit household’s monthly cost
of rent, plus the cost of electricity, gas, water and sewer service, and garbage collection
(“utilities”) is 30% or less than the upper limit of the annual gross household income,
divided by 12, for a specified income category and household size as last published by
the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). The City
shall determine maximum affordable rent levels for rent-restricted accessory dwelling
units following the annual publication of the State Income Limits by HCD. In
determining rent levels, the household size for rent-restricted accessory dwelling units
shall be: studio, 1 person; one-bedroom, 2 persons; two-bedroom, 3 persons; and, threebedroom,
4 persons. The cost of utilities for the accessory dwelling unit shall be
included in the affordable rent level. For rent-restricted accessory dwelling units where
utilities are separately metered and billed, and where the accessory dwelling unit
household is responsible for the costs of that household’s use of utilities, the maximum
rent shall be set at 90% of the affordable rent level. (California Health and Safety Code
section 50053)
Affordable unit means a dwelling unit for sale or rent that meets the California State
Department of Housing and Community Development standards of income eligibility
and affordable rent levels for Alameda County. (Health and Safety Code sections
50052.5(h) and 50053.)
Gross Household Income means the total monies earned or received by all occupants of
an accessory dwelling unit age 18 and over, including: wages and all types of
compensation, before any payroll deductions; spousal and child support; social security,
retirement, disability, insurance, and other types of periodic payments; unemployment
compensation and other payments in-lieu of earnings; welfare and other public
assistance; interest, dividends and other payments generated from any real or personal
property; net business income; and, any other type of payment determined to qualify as
income by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and as
published in HUD’s Housing Choice Voucher Program Guidebook. The annual gross
household income is calculated by multiplying the monthly amounts earned or received
at the time of certification by 12 and adjusting for anticipated payments and changes in
amounts over the next 12 months.
Household means those persons who collectively occupy a housing unit. A household
shall include any child or dependent, as defined Internal Revenue Code section 152,
who is under the age of 18 or who is under the age of 24 and is a full-time student.
Household Size means the number of persons in a household.
Household, Extremely Low Income means a household with an annual gross household
income of 30% or less than the Alameda County median annual gross household
Planning & Land Use
17-39
income for that household size as last published by HCD. (Health and Safety Code
section 50079.5.)
Household, Low Income means a household with an annual gross household income
between 50% and 80% of the Alameda County median annual gross household income
for that household size as last published by HCD. (Health and Safety Code section
50079.5.)
Household, Moderate Income means a household with an annual gross household
income between 80% and 120% of the Alameda County median annual gross household
income for that household size as last published by HCD. (Health and Safety Code
section 50093)
Household, Very Low Income means a household with an annual gross household
income between 30% and 50% of the Alameda County median annual gross household
income for that household size as last published by HCD. (Health and Safety Code
section 50079.5.)
Primary unit means a principal, permitted single-family dwelling.
Accessory dwelling unit means an attached or detached dwelling unit that provides complete
and independent living facilities for one or more persons functioning as a single family. It
includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing and sanitation
on the same parcel as a primary unit. A accessory dwelling unit is an accessory use to a
primary unit, and has a separate, exterior entrance. (See section 17.38.030 for types of
accessory dwelling units.)
17.38.030 Legal accessory dwelling units; Non-conforming accessory dwelling units;
Requirements for rented accessory dwelling units; Units that are not legal accessory
dwelling units.
A. Legal accessory dwelling units.
The following are kinds of legal accessory dwelling units and permits. Each may be used and
rented (subject to the business tax for rental property):
1. Accessory dwelling unit permit. An accessory dwelling unit permitted under an
accessory dwelling unit permit is a legally existing accessory dwelling unit. (This includes
an accessory dwelling unit approved subject to a variance and an accessory dwelling unit
approved subject to exceptions and rent-restrictions, both under section 17.38.070.) If the
unit is rent-restricted, then a tenant must be qualified by income level under the permit
conditions of approval and the terms of the recorded declaration.
2. Second unit permit. A second unit permit issued before December 31, 2016 is a legal
accessory dwelling unit.
Planning & Land Use
17-40
3. Conditional use permit second unit. Between January 19, 1994 and July 1, 2003, second
units were approved by conditional use permit. A second unit permitted under a conditional
use permit during that period of time is a legal accessory dwelling unit.
4. Exempt accessory dwelling unit. If an accessory dwelling unit was established before
1930, and the City has confirmed the exempt status in writing, the accessory dwelling unit is
a legally existing accessory dwelling unit.
5. Temporary use permit second unit. A temporary use permit second unit approved by the
City between May 6, 1987 and July 1, 2003, under former Chapter 17D, is a legal accessory
dwelling unit (and the temporary nature now recognized as permanent).
B. Non-conforming accessory dwelling units. A legal, non-conforming unit may not be
modified or expanded except in compliance with division 17.50, Nonconforming buildings and
uses.
C. Requirements for legal accessory dwelling units that are rented. If an accessory dwelling
unit is rented to a tenant, these additional requirements apply:
1. Business tax. An accessory dwelling unit that is rented is subject to an annual business
tax for rental property, under City Code chapter 10.
2. Rent restrictions. An accessory dwelling unit that has rent restrictions under the
conditions of approval and recorded declaration(s) must be rented in accordance with those
limitations. (See section 17.38.070C.)
D. Units which are not legal accessory dwelling units. The following types of units are not legal
accessory dwelling units. They may not be used for independent living as an independent
dwelling unit or rented apart from the primary unit. The owner of one of these units, may apply
to the city for an accessory dwelling unit permit under section 17.38.040.
1. An unintended accessory dwelling unit. An unintended accessory dwelling unit means a
living space which meets the definition of an accessory dwelling unit, but which is not
approved for habitation as an independent dwelling. An unintended accessory dwelling unit
may include a guest cottage, pool house, or rent-free unit for an au pair, domestic employee
or family member.
2. Unapproved exempt accessory dwelling unit. A living unit which might qualify as an
exempt accessory dwelling unit under section 17.38.030.A.4 above, for which the owner has
not obtained City approval.
3. Rented room. A rented room(s), permitted under division 17.40, is not a legal accessory
dwelling unit.
4. Other. Any other living unit that is not a primary unit and not an accessory dwelling
unit under subsection 17.38.030A, above.
Planning & Land Use
17-41
17.38.040 Permit requirement.
A. Accessory dwelling unit permit. An accessory dwelling unit permit is required for a new
accessory dwelling unit approved after January 1, 2017.
B. Building permit. A building permit (or other verification of compliance by building official)
is required for a new accessory dwelling unit.
17.38.050 Permit application and review procedures.
A. Application.
1. Application. An owner may apply for an accessory dwelling unit permit (or other city
approval) by submitting a complete application to the Director on a form provided by the
city. If the accessory dwelling unit requires new exterior construction, the applicant must
also submit a separate application for a design review permit (under division 17.66) and, if
necessary, a variance.
2. Application fee. The owner shall pay an application fee in the amount established by
City Council resolution.
B. Reviewing body; Public hearing. The Director will review each application ministerially to
determine if the development standards in section 17.38.060 are met, and will within 120 days of
a completed application approve, deny, or refer the application to the Planning Commission.
1. Director. The Director will approve the application without notice or public hearing if:
a. the application does not require an exception;
b. any separate related application for a design review permit (with or without a
variance) is approved; and
c. the proposed accessory dwelling unit meets all of the development standards in
section 17.38.060.
2. Planning Commission. The following require a noticed public hearing before the
Planning Commission, consistent with divisions 17.62 and 17.64:
a. If the application requires an exception, the Planning Commission may only
approve the application if it meets the requirements of section 17.38.070. If approved, the
accessory dwelling unit will be rent-restricted for 10 years. (See section 17.38.070C.)
b. If the proposed accessory dwelling unit was established before 1930 it may be an
exempt accessory dwelling unit. The property owner may apply for approval of the
accessory dwelling unit based on sufficient evidence (such as inspection by City staff to
verify pre-1930 improvements, rental records, City or County records, written or verbal
testimony). An exempt accessory dwelling unit is not subject to the development
standards in section 17.38.060. (See section 17.38.030A.4.)
Planning & Land Use
17-42
C. Decision and conditions. The reviewing body (either the Director or the Planning
Commission) shall render its decision in writing and shall state the reasons for approval or
denial. The Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions of approval.
D. Appeal. A decision of the Director or the Planning Commission may be appealed within ten
days, in accordance with division 17.78. However, for an accessory dwelling unit permit without
an exception, the notice of the appeal shall only be given to the owner and appellant, and the
grounds for appeal are limited to whether or not the application meets the development standards
in section 17.38.060, or a condition of approval.
17.38.060 Zoning regulations; Development standards.
A. Zoning regulations; Design Guidelines. If a proposed accessory dwelling unit requires new
exterior construction, the applicant must submit a separate application for a design review permit
and must comply with the zoning regulations for the district in which is it located. (See divisions
17.20 through 17.28.) The applicant may apply for a variance to these zoning regulations.
The design of the structure(s) housing the proposed accessory dwelling unit must meet the design
criteria in the Piedmont Design Guidelines. As provided in section 17.66.030B, an accessory
dwelling unit application that proposes only interior remodeling of an existing building and does
not propose to change the exterior form of the building is exempt from the design review permit
requirement.
B. Development standards. An accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all of the following
development standards, unless the City grants an exception (to unit size or floor area ratio) under
section 17.38.070.
1. Size. An attached accessory dwelling unit may not exceed 50% of the existing living
area up to a maximum of 800 square feet, subject to the zoning regulations (including floor
area ratio). A detached accessory dwelling unit may not exceed 800 square feet, subject to
the zoning regulations (including floor area ratio). The applicant may seek an exception
under section 17.38.070 C.1.
2. Access. The accessory dwelling unit must have independent, exterior access.
3. Owner occupancy. Except for an exempt accessory dwelling unit, the owner of an
accessory dwelling unit must occupy either the primary unit or the accessory dwelling unit,
if both units are used for habitation. The owner must record with the County Recorder a
declaration of restrictions, in a form provided by the city.
4. Limit of one accessory dwelling unit. There may be no more than one accessory
dwelling unit on a parcel. No subdivision of land is authorized that would result in an
accessory dwelling unit being located on a separate parcel, unless each parcel meets all of
the zoning requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
Planning & Land Use
17-43
5. Limitations on city's approval. Under Government Code section 65852.2, the following
limitations apply to any city approval:
a. Parking. When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in
conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit or converted to an
accessory dwelling unit, any required replacement parking spaces may be located in any
configuration on the lot. (Gov't. Code §65852.2 (a)(1)(D)(xi).)
b. Setbacks. No setback is required for an existing garage that is converted to an
accessory dwelling unit. If an accessory dwelling unit is constructed above an existing
garage, the minimum setback is five feet from the side and rear lot line. (Gov't. Code
§65852.2 (a)(1)(D)(7).)
c. Fire sprinklers. Fire sprinklers shall only be required in accessory dwelling units if
fire sprinklers are also required for the primary residence. (Gov't. Code §65852.2 (e).)
d. Passageway. No passageway will be required. (Gov't. Code §65852.2
(a)(1)(D)(6).) (Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
17.38.070 Variance or exception.
The city may approve a variance, exception, or both, to the development standards.
A. Variance. The Planning Commission may approve a variance to a zoning regulation based
on the required variance procedures and findings in division 17.70, under a separate application.
B. Exception to floor area ratio for new primary residence and accessory dwelling unit. If a
property owner proposes a new primary residence and an accessory dwelling unit, the Planning
Commission may approve a floor area ratio exemption without rent restriction as follows: the
square footage of the accessory dwelling unit will not count toward the total floor area ratio for
the property up to 800 square feet or 10% of the lot size, whichever is less.
C. Exception: unit size. The Planning Commission may approve an exception to the unit size
requirement for the accessory dwelling unit. The decision will be based on the requirements and
findings of this section. If an exception is granted, the accessory dwelling unit will be subject to
all the terms of section 17.38.070.C.2 below, including rent-restrictions.
1. Exception to unit size. The Planning Commission may approve an accessory dwelling
unit permit with an exception to the maximum unit size of 800 square feet (under section
17.38.060 B.1) up to a maximum unit size of 1,200 square feet, as follows:
IF THE LOT SIZE:
THE ACCESSORY DWELLING
UNIT MAY BE:
UNIT UP TO 1000
SQ. FT.
UNIT UP TO 1,200
SQ. FT.
is less than the
minimum for the
zoning district:
only located within an
existing building, without
expansion of the existing
building envelope.
rent restriction
for low income
housing applies
rent restriction for
very low income
housing applies
Planning & Land Use
17-44
equals or exceeds
the minimum for
the zoning district:
within existing building, an
expansion, or a detached
building
rent restriction
for low income
housing applies
rent restriction for
very low income
housing applies
The Planning Commission may approve an accessory dwelling unit permit with an
exception to the unit size only if it makes the following findings:
a. The proposed accessory dwelling unit will not create a significant adverse impact
on any adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood.
b. The lot and the arrangement of existing and proposed physical improvements on
the lot can accommodate the proposed accessory dwelling unit size without adversely
affecting the views, privacy, or access to light and air of neighboring properties.
2. Accessory dwelling unit permit with a unit size or parking exception: Additional
requirements. If an accessory dwelling unit permit with an exception is approved, it is
subject to the following additional requirements.
a. Rent restriction.
i. Declaration of rent restrictions. The accessory dwelling unit permit with an
exception shall have a condition describing the type of rent restriction applicable to
the property. The rent-restriction shall be recorded in the county recorder's office,
as a declaration of rent restrictions (in a form provided by the city), and will remain
in effect for ten years. The ten-year period of rent restriction begins either: (a) on
the date of recordation or date of final building inspection, whichever is later; or (b)
according to the terms of the conditions of approval or a recorded declaration.
If, after ten years, the termination of the recorded declaration is not automatic (by
its terms), the city will record a document terminating the declaration of rent
restrictions, upon the written request of the property owner.
ii. Affordable rent certification. An owner who has executed a declaration must
submit to the city an accessory dwelling unit affordable rent certification: (i) on an
annual basis, by each December 31 and as part of the annual city business license
application and renewal; and (ii) upon any change in occupancy of the accessory
dwelling unit. The accessory dwelling unit affordable rent certification must be on
a form provided by the city and must specify whether or not the accessory dwelling
unit is being occupied; the rent charged; the utilities that are included in the cost of
rent; the household size of the accessory dwelling unit; the names and ages of the
accessory dwelling unit occupants; the gross household income of the accessory
dwelling unit household; and other information as determined appropriate by the
city.
Planning & Land Use
17-45
b. Single household. An accessory dwelling unit permit with an exception is designed
for an accessory dwelling unit that is in a dwelling or portion of a dwelling designed
for, or occupied exclusively by, persons living as one household.
Planning & Land Use
17-46
DIVISION 17.40 RESIDENTIAL RENTALS
Sections
17.40.010 Purpose and intent
17.40.020 Rented room
17.40.030 Short-term rental
17.40.040 Business license tax
17.40.050 Enforcement
17.40.010 Purpose and intent.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this division is to establish regulations governing the rental of
residential property within the city.
B. Intent. By enacting this division 17.40, the city council intends to:
1. Provide a community benefit by allowing alternative forms of lodging, allowing
residents to participate in the sharing economy, and allowing residents an opportunity for
additional source of income.
2. Allow the renting of homes, apartments, or rooms for periods of 30 days or more.
3. Allow short term renting of single-family dwelling units and rooms in single-family
dwelling units for less than 30 consecutive days, while still preserving the single-family
character of neighborhoods, and preventing short-term rental activities from becoming a
nuisance or a threat to public health, safety or welfare;
4. Establish standards and a permit requirement for short-term rentals; and
5. Prohibit the short-term rental of accessory dwelling units and multi-family dwelling
units to preserve them for long-term housing. (Ord. 742 N.S., 05/2018)
17.40.020 Rented room.
A. Applicability. This section 17.40.020 applies to the rental of a room or rooms in a residential
property for a period of 30 consecutive days or longer.
B. Definitions. In this section:
Rented room means the renting of a room or any combination of rooms within an existing
single-family or multi-family dwelling unit that meets all of the following requirements:
1. one or more rooms, including at least one bedroom, is rented to a lessee under a
rental agreement, not for the entire dwelling;
2. the rental period is a minimum of 30 consecutive days;
Planning & Land Use
17-47
3. the tenant has the common use of the primary kitchen facilities, with no temporary
or permanent cooking facilities in the rented room(s); and
4. either shared or separate bathroom.
C. General. The owner of a single-family dwelling unit in any zoning district is permitted to
rent a rented room in such dwelling unit to a limit of one lessee. With the written consent of the
property owner, a tenant has the same right. This provision does not authorize an owner or tenant
to operate a boarding house or otherwise rent or sublease more than one rented room per
dwelling unit.
D. Safety. The property owner is responsible for assuring that the rented rooms meet building
codes. The property owner must either (at the owner's discretion):
1. Request that the city inspect the property to assure that the primary residence and the
rented rooms meet building codes, consist of legally existing rooms eligible for use as a
bedroom and habitable spaces. The property owner shall pay a nominal inspection fee in the
amount established by city council resolution; or
2. Submit to the city a signed safety declaration in a form prepared by the city, to be kept
in the property file at the city. (Ord. 742 N.S., 05/2018)
17.40.030 Short-term rental.
A. Applicability. This section 17.40.030 applies to short term rentals of less than 30
consecutive days. The short-term rental must be located in a single-family dwelling unit that is
the primary residence of the property owner or long-term tenant. It may not be located in an
accessory dwelling unit (permitted or unintended) or multi-family dwelling. The short-term
rental may be hosted or non-hosted.
B. Definitions. In this section:
Advertising platform means any online site that provides a means for the host to advertise or
otherwise offer for rent a short-term rental.
Host or hosted means the primary occupant of the dwelling is present during the short-term
rental. Non-hosted means the primary occupant is not present during the short-term rental.
Operate means the operation of a short-term rental, and includes the acts of establishing,
maintaining, or listing for rent a short-term rental with an advertising platform.
Primary Occupant means an occupant who is either the owner of the dwelling or a longterm
tenant in the dwelling with a month-to-month lease or lease of a longer duration.
Short-term rental means the use of a dwelling unit, or portion of it, for a rental of less than
30 consecutive days.
Planning & Land Use
17-48
C. Short-Term Rental Permit; Permit Issuance. No person may operate a short-term rental
without first obtaining a short-term rental permit. A short-term rental permit may be approved by
the Director, provided that the Director determines the applicant has met the following
requirements:
1. Application. The applicant must complete an application on a form provided by the city,
accompanied by a fee established by city council resolution.
2. Property owner consent. If the applicant is a tenant, he or she must demonstrate written
approval of the property owner to allow short-term rentals.
3. Insurance. The applicant must provide evidence of, and maintain, general liability
insurance of at least $1,000,000 during the term of the short-term rental permit that covers
the applicant’s short-term rental operations.
4. Contact information. The applicant must provide current contact information to the city,
and information regarding the advertising platform(s) to be used.
5. Safety. The dwelling or rooms serving as a short-term rental must have a smoke
detector, carbon monoxide detector, fire extinguisher, and adequate egress, all as determined
by the chief building official. The applicant must either (at the applicant’s discretion):
a. Request that the city inspect the property to assure that the primary residence and the
rented rooms meet building codes, consist of legally existing rooms eligible for use as a
bedroom and habitable spaces. The property owner shall pay a nominal inspection fee in
the amount established by city council resolution; or
b. Submit to the city a signed safety declaration in a form prepared by the Director, to be
kept in the property file at the city.
D. Appeals. Any interested party may appeal any decision by the Director to approve or deny a
short-term rental permit pursuant to division 17.78 of the Piedmont Municipal Code. No permit
shall be deemed issued or effective until the appeal period set forth in division 17.78 has expired.
E. Permit Term and Renewal. A short-term rental permit is valid until December 31 of the year
it is issued, unless suspended or revoked. The permittee may renew the permit annually, by
submitting a renewal application and fee before the expiration of the permit.
F. Operating standards. A short-term rental is allowed only if it conforms to these standards:
1. Permit. The short-term rental is operated under a short-term rental permit issued by the
city in accordance with Section 17.40.030.
2. 2-night minimum. The short-term rental must be rented for a minimum of two
consecutive nights.
Planning & Land Use
17-49
3. 60 days maximum. The short-term rental may not be rented more than 60 days in a
calendar year.
4. No Events. The short-term rental may be used for dwelling, sleeping or lodging purposes,
but may not be rented for any other commercial purpose, including temporary events or
gatherings.
5. Guest Safety. The short-term rental permittee must provide the following materials
electronically to any guests before arrival and make available printed materials on-site for
the guest with the following information:
a. A diagram of exits, fire extinguisher locations, and fire and police contact numbers;
b. The short-term rental permittee’s contact information;
c. The city’s noise regulations (sections 12.8 – 12.12);
d. The city’s smoking ordinance (chapter 12, article II);
e. The city’s garbage and recycling guidelines (available on the city’s website, or a print
copy of the residential services guide: recycling, organics and garbage).
6. Current Information. The short-term rental permittee shall, during the term of the
permit, promptly inform the Director regarding any changes regarding information provided
in the application, including contact information and information regarding advertising
platforms used by the permittee to advertise the short-term rental. (Ord. 742 N.S., 05/2018)
17.40.040 Business license tax.
A person renting a room or operating a short-term rental is considered to have rental property
and must pay an annual business license tax under City Code chapter 10. (Ord. 742 N.S.,
05/2018)
17.40.050 Enforcement.
The city may enforce this division by any means permitted by law, including but not limited to
those set forth in chapter 1 (General Provisions), article 2 (Code Enforcement) of this code, or
under division 17.80, Enforcement. The city council may establish fines by resolution. (Ord. 742
N.S., 05/2018)
Planning & Land Use
17-50
DIVISION 17.42 (NOT USED)
Planning & Land Use
17-51
DIVISION 17.44 HOME OCCUPATION
Sections
17.44.010 Definitions
17.44.020 Home occupation permit required
17.44.030 Restrictions
17.44.010 Definitions.
In this division:
Cottage food operation has the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code section 113758.
Home occupation means an occupation conducted at a residence. It does not include a
residential rental under division 17.40.
17.44.020 Home occupation permit required.
A. Purpose; Presumption. The following regulations apply to home occupations. Restrictions
upon home occupations are an accommodation between the values fostered by the preservation
of neighborhoods for residential living, and the liberty to conduct private, nonintrusive economic
activity in one’s home.
The existence of any of the following create a presumption that there is a home occupation for
which a permit is required:
1. Services conducted for pay on the premises;
2. The maintenance on the premises of an inventory of materials used as commercial
products or in producing a commercial product;
3. The regular advertising of the residential address; or
4. A residential address is designated as the business location on the business license
application (see chapter 10); or
B. Application and fee. A resident wishing to conduct a home occupation must submit an
application to the City Clerk on the form provided, together with the non-refundable fee
established by City Council resolution. The applicant must also submit a rendering of the house
floor plan showing which room will be used for the home occupation. (The drawing must be
accurate in its representation, but need not be an architectural rendering.)
C. Notice. The applicant must notify adjacent residents of the intent to obtain a home
occupation permit and conduct a business, in a form prescribed by the City Clerk. The
notification will include the applicant's name, the address, and description of the business. If the
adjacent residents acknowledge receiving this information and sign the form, the notification is
Planning & Land Use
17-52
complete. If any adjacent resident does not sign the notification form, the city will mail notice to
that resident and advise the resident of the 15-day period during which comments may be
directed to the City Clerk.
D. Review and decision. After the notification period under subsection C, the City Clerk will
review the application and any comments received, and determine whether the home occupation
permit should be granted. The decision will be based on whether the application complies, and is
likely to continue complying, with the restrictions under section 17.44.030 below. The city will
notify the applicant in writing of the decision. The decision of the City Clerk may be appealed to
the City Council by filing an appeal form with the City Administrator within 10 days of the
decision.
E. Validity. Once approved, a home occupation permit is valid as long as there is no change in
the location or nature of the business, and it is not revoked for violation of a condition of
approval or requirement of this under division 17.80, Enforcement.
F. Business license tax. Each person operating an approved home occupation must also have a
current city business license. (See City Code chapter 10.) The failure to maintain a business
license for six months or more is grounds for revocation of the home occupation permit.
17.44.030 Restrictions.
A home occupation must comply with these restrictions.
1. No employee. Other than residents (or persons who are primarily employed on the
premises such as a housekeeper), no other employee may be involved in the home
occupation. However, a cottage food operations business may employ not more than one
part-time or full-time non-household member as an employee.
2. No traffic. The occupational use may not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
parking beyond that normal to the neighborhood. No business invitee is permitted to visit the
premises, except that a cottage food operation may engage in direct sales.
3. No merchandise. The occupation may not involve the delivery or storage of resale
merchandise on the premises.
4. No outdoor storage. There may not be any outdoor storage of materials or supplies in
connection with the home occupation.
5. No sign; no other indication. There may not be any sign on the premises used in
connection with the home occupation. The home occupation must be conducted so that there
is no external indication of a non-residential use, either by use of color, materials or
construction, lighting, signs, sounds or noises, vibrations, or any other indicator.
6. One room only. No more than one room in the residence or any structure on the
premises may be used in connection with the home occupation (except for telephone or
computer uses). A garage may not be used for the home occupation. A cottage food
Planning & Land Use
17-53
operation is restricted to the registered or permitted area of the home provided for by
Alameda County Environmental Health.
7. No advertising using address. There may be no advertising, notices, publications or
other written or oral means used to connect the occupation with the premises, and in
particular there may be no use of the address in any way connected with the occupation.
This restriction does not prohibit: (a) the use of business cards, stationery or invoices with
the address of the premises; or (b) the normal advertising or the posting of signs related to
the rental or sale of the property, as otherwise permitted by this code.
8. Prohibited occupations. The following occupations or businesses are not permitted,
including the use of the telephone number of the premises for business purposes: automobile
mechanic or garage; retail general merchandise; sale or storage of scrap metals, salvaged
materials, or garbage (other than garbage normally associated with a residence); sale,
production or marketing of pornographic publications, films, or products; massage business;
manufacture of products requiring heavy machinery.
9. Compliance with terms of home occupation permit. The permit holder must comply
with the terms of the permit, may not change or increase the use beyond what was stated in
the permit application, and may not operate the business in a way that adversely affects the
residential character of the neighborhood.
10. Cottage food operations (CFO) must meet the following additional requirements:
a. A CFO is restricted to the primary kitchen of the premises as defined in section
17.90.010. (See Kitchen, primary.)
b. A CFO must comply with the restrictions on gross annual sales as set forth in
Health & Safety Code section 113758.
c. A CFO must obtain and maintain a registration and/or operating permit from
Alameda County Environmental Health. A copy of the registration/permit must be
furnished to the City Clerk within 15 days of issuance.
d. Cottage food operations may not conduct sales in an attached garage, detached
accessory structure or outside of the dwelling.
e. If direct sales are proposed at the site of the cottage food operation, no third party
or customer is permitted to dine at the cottage food operation.
Planning & Land Use
17-54
DIVISION 17.46 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Sections:
17.46.010 Purpose
17.46.020 Definitions
17.46.030 Applicability; Exemptions
17.46.040 Location; City site agreement
17.46.050 Permit; Application.
17.46.060 Independent Technical Review
17.46.070 Standards
17.46.080 Hearings; Findings
17.46.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to provide a comprehensive set of standards for the development
and installation of wireless communication facilities. The regulations are designed to protect and
promote public safety and community welfare, property values, and the character and aesthetic
quality of the city, while at the same time not unduly restricting the development of wireless
communication facilities, and not unreasonably discriminating among wireless communication
service providers of functionally equivalent services, including retail and other commercial
providers of wireless communication services. This division applies to applications for approval
of the installation of new or modified wireless communication facilities, including applications
previously received by the city but not yet approved, disapproved or conditionally approved by a
final city decision.
17.46.020 Definitions. In this division:
Antenna means a device for transmitting and receiving radiofrequency signals. Antenna includes
panel antennas, reflecting discs, microwave dishes, whip antennas, directions and non-directional
antennas consisting of one or more elements, multiple antenna configurations, or other similar
devices and configurations. The height of the antenna includes all array structures. Antenna
includes a Distributed Antenna System (DAS), which is a network of spatially separated antenna
sites connected to a common source that provides wireless service within a geographic area or
structure.
Base station means all equipment and apparatus, excluding antennas, that are components of the
WCF, including any antenna support system regular and backup power supply, other associated
electronics, electronic receiving and relay equipment, enclosed equipment, electrical meters, and
the necessary housing and foundations.
Camouflaged means designed to mask or blend with the surrounding environment in such a
manner to render it generally unnoticeable to the casual observer. By way of example, a wireless
communication facility may be camouflaged in a faux tree, faux bush, flagpole, or otherwise
designed in a manner to be compatible with the appurtenant architecture, building, or natural
surroundings.
Planning & Land Use
17-55
Collocation means the location of two or more wireless communication facilities on a single
support structure.
Concealed means not observable. By way of example, a wireless communication facility will be
considered concealed if it is contained within new or existing architectural details of a building,
e.g., real or faux clock or bell tower, or on the roof of a building and concealed by parapets or
screenwalls, or concealed by any other means, so long as the wireless communications facility
does not substantially compromise the aesthetics of the building, and the new concealment
element has been approved under a wireless communication facility permit.
Equipment cabinet means a cabinet or structure used to house equipment associated with a
wireless communication facility.
FCC means Federal Communications Commission.
Monopole means a single free-standing pole, post, or similar structure, used to support
equipment associated with a wireless communication facility.
Public right-of-way means a public highway, street, alley, sidewalk, or parkway that is subject to
Public Utilities Code section 7901.
Related equipment means equipment ancillary to the transmission and reception of voice and
data via radio frequencies. Related equipment may include, but is not limited to, cable, conduit
and connectors.
Service provider means an authorized provider of wireless communication services.
Tower means a structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting wireless
communication facilities, including a monopole. This does not include a structure that was
installed to replace or collocate upon an existing power pole, light standard, energy transmission
tower, or building.
Wireless communication facility means an unstaffed facility, generally consisting of antennas
(including a Distributed Antenna System), an equipment cabinet or structure, and related
equipment that receives and/or transmits radio frequency signals.
17.46.030 Applicability; Exemptions.
A. Applicability. This division 17.46 applies to all wireless communication facilities, except
those exempted in subsection B below (though other permit requirements may apply).
B. Exemptions. The following facilities are exempt from this division:
1. Wireless communication facility for which a federal or state statute or regulation
exempts the facility from the imposition of the permit requirements of this division but
only to the extent of such exemption.
Planning & Land Use
17-56
2. Satellite dish antenna, less than one meter in diameter for receiving radio or
television stations by the property owners, occupants or guests.
3. City-owned or operated communication facilities.
4. Communication equipment located completely inside a structure, not visible from
the outside, whose purpose is solely to provide wireless communications within the same
structure, including Wi-Fi hotspots and access points, with no alteration to the exterior of
the structure.
17.46.040 Location; City site agreement.
A. Priority for location.
1. Preference for Zone B, publicly-owned property, and public right of way sites. In
order of preference, wireless communication facilities should be located (i) on publiclyowned
property outside of the public right of way, in Zone B within the city (ii) on
publicly-owned facilities in any other zone outside of the public right of way, or
(iii) public rights-of-way.
2. Alternative locations. Any location for a wireless site outside of Zone B, not on
publicly-owned property, or not with a public right of way will be considered according
to the following priority:
a. The applicant must first attempt to locate a site in Zone D, the commercial
zone, that is not used for residential purposes.
b. If it is infeasible to locate in Zone D, the applicant must attempt to locate at a
non-residential property in Zone A, C or E.
3. General. In all cases, the preference, in order, is to locate on or in an existing
structure which the wireless communication facility can be concealed; or to collocate on
an existing wireless communication facility; or to locate on a new structure that can be
incorporated in an inconspicuous or compatible manner with the surrounding area.
B. City site agreement.
1. Consideration by staff. If the applicant wishes to locate on city-owned property or
facilities, the applicant must discuss its desired location(s) with staff (Public Works
Director and Planning Director, as appropriate) before the submittal of an application. If
the location appears to be generally feasible, city staff will negotiate the principal terms
for a proposed site agreement with the applicant, spelling out in detail the specific
facilities to be located on city property or facilities, the term of the agreement, the
compensation to be provided the city, and other terms.
Planning & Land Use
17-57
2. Consideration by City Council. When the principal terms for a proposed agreement
have been prepared and approved by city staff, staff will scheduled the matter for hearing
before the City Council. The City Council will consider the proposed agreement as part
of an ordinance, required by City Charter Section 2.11(6). The City Council may defer
its final decision regarding the agreement until after the wireless communication facility
permit is approved.
3. Limited nature of consent. The city’s consent as property owner to process a
wireless communication facility permit is not be deemed city consent to lease or license
the property.
C. No wireless communication facilities on residential property. Wireless communication
facilities shall not be installed on property which is used for residential purposes, irrespective of
the zoning district in which such residential property is located.
17.46.050 Permit; Application.
A. Permit. A wireless communication facility permit is a type of conditional use permit
specifically for wireless communication facilities and is required for each facility. If the wireless
communication facility permit is approved, the owner or operator must also obtain a building
permit before beginning construction.
B. Application.
1. All applications. An application for a wireless communication facility permit must
include:
a. a complete application on a form provided by the city, setting forth information
for the applicant to submit;
b. evidence of a significant gap in coverage or capacity which the application
seeks to address; and
c. applicable fees and/or deposits, including a deposit for independent technical
review under section 17.46.060 below. If the application is to collocate a wireless
communication facility at an existing wireless communication facility location, or
to modify an existing wireless communication facility, the application shall
address the applicability, if any, of federal or state laws governing such
applications.
2. Application for location on city property. An applicant for a wireless
communication facility proposed to be located on city property or in a public right-ofway
must submit additional items, as set forth on the supplemental application form
provided by the city, setting forth supplemental information for the applicant to submit.
Planning & Land Use
17-58
17.46.060 Independent Technical Review
The Director is authorized in his or her discretion to retain an independent technical consultant to
review materials submitted by the applicant and to provide an analysis of issues including but not
limited to: whether the wireless communication facility meets the applicable radio frequency
emission regulations; whether a significant gap in coverage or capacity exists and whether the
proposed facilities are the least intrusive means of doing so; whether there are alternative sites
and the feasibility of those sites; whether there are ways to mitigate aesthetic impacts; and any
other specific technical issues designated by the Director. The applicant must pay the
consultant's costs, and must increase the deposit to cover the anticipated amount as the Director
may deem necessary from time-to-time.
17.46.070 Standards.
A. Development Standards. The following development standards apply.
1. Collocation. New wireless communication facilities must be collocated with
existing facilities and with other planned new facilities whenever feasible. A new
wireless tower must be designed and constructed to accommodate future collocation(s)
unless the city determines that collocation would be infeasible because of physical or
design issues specific to the site.
2. Height limits; Screening. No wireless communication facility may exceed 35 feet
in height, measured from the ground to the highest point of the wireless communication
facility, unless the zoning district in which the wireless communication facility is located
expressly provides a higher height limit. Ground mounted wireless communication
equipment, base station, antenna, pole, or tower must be the minimum functional height,
unless a variance is granted. Roof mounted equipment and antennas must be located to
minimize visibility.
3. Visual impact. Wireless communication facilities must be designed to minimize
visual impacts. When feasible, the facilities must be concealed or camouflaged. The
facilities must have a non-reflective finish and be painted or otherwise treated to
minimize visibility and the obstruction of views.
The facilities may not bear signs , other than certification, warning, emergency contacts,
or other signage required by law or expressly required by the city.
4. Public health, peace and safety. A wireless communication facility may not
adversely affect the public health, peace and safety.
5. Public right-of-way. A wireless communication facility located in the public rightof-
way may not cause: (i) physical or visual obstruction, or safety hazard, to pedestrians,
cyclists, or motorists; or (ii) inconvenience to the public's use of the right-of-way.
Equipment, walls, and landscaping located above grade must be at least 18 inches from
the front of the curb and not interfere with the public’s use of the right-of-way.
Planning & Land Use
17-59
6. Compliance with laws. Each wireless communication facility must comply with
federal and state statutes governing local agencies’ land use authority regarding the siting
of wireless communication facilities, including without limitation 47 USC sections 253,
332(c)(7), 47 USC section 1455 (also known as section 6409 of the 2012 Middle Class
Tax Relief and Jobs Act), California Government Code sections 50030, 65850.6 and
65964, and California Public Utilities Code sections 7901 and 7901.1. Each reference to a
federal and state statutes is to the statute as it may be as amended from time-to-time and
to the extent the statute remains in effect.
B. Operation and Maintenance Standards
1. Contact and site information. The owner or operator of a wireless communication
facility must submit basic contact and site information to the city, and notify the city
within 30 days of any changes to this information, including the transfer of ownership.
The contact and site information must include: (i) the name, address, email address,
telephone number, and legal status of the owner of the facility, including official
identification number and FCC certification, and, if different from the owner, the identity
and legal status of the person or entity responsible for operating and maintaining the
facility; and (ii) the name, address, email address, and telephone number of a local
contact person for emergencies.
2. Signage. The owner and/or operator must post an identification sign at each
facility, including owner/operator emergency telephone numbers. The design, materials,
colors, and location of the identification signs shall be subject to review and approval by
the Director. If at any time a new owner or operator provider takes over operation of an
existing personal wireless service facility, the new personal wireless service provider
shall notify the Director of the change in operation within 30 days and the required and
approved signs shall be updated within 30 days to reflect the name and phone number of
the new wireless service provider. The colors, materials and design of the updated signs
shall match those of the required and approved signs. No sign shall be greater than two
square feet in size.
3. FCC compliance. Each wireless communication facility must comply with FCC
regulations, and avoid interfering with any city communication facilities, operations,
utilities, equipment, or public safety communications. If the facility negatively impacts
city facilities or equipment, the operator must comply with all FCC regulations and
orders to resolve the interference. At the city’s discretion, and at the operator's expense,
the city may retain an outside technical consultant to evaluate and verify compliance with
FCC regulations and to determine the cause of interference for an existing facility.
4. Facility maintenance. Each wireless communication facility must be maintained in
good repair, free from trash, debris, litter, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. The
operator must repair any damage as soon as reasonably possible, but no later than 90 days
from the time of notification.
Planning & Land Use
17-60
Landscaping elements at a wireless communication facility site must be maintained in
good condition, and in compliance with the approved landscape plan. The owner or
operator is responsible for replacing any damaged, dead, or decayed landscape materials
and making necessary irrigation and equipment repairs as soon as reasonably possible.
5. Noise. A wireless communication facility must be operated to minimize noise that
is audible as provided in Chapter 5 of the City Code
6. Removal. All wireless communication facility equipment must be removed within
30 days of the discontinuation of the use, and the site restored to its original,
preconstruction condition. In addition, the service provider must provide the city with a
notice of intent to vacate a site a minimum of 30 days before the vacation. For a wireless
communication facility to be located on public property, this removal requirement will be
included within the lease. For a facility to be located on private property, the property
owner is encouraged to also include this in the lease, because the property owner will
otherwise be responsible for removal.
C. Term of permit. A wireless communication facility permit is valid for an initial period of ten
years unless: (i) a longer period is required by state or federal law; or (ii) a shorter time is
required as a condition of approval for particular circumstances set forth in the decision,
particularly with respect to public safety or substantial land use reasons under California
Government Code section 65964(b). The Director may administratively extend a permit upon
verification of continued compliance with this division 17.46 and any conditions of approval.
However, a permit granted for a collocation or modification under section 17.46.080 D.2.b will
be effective for the shorter of: (i) the term of the original permit; or (ii) a longer period if
required by state or federal law.
17.46.080 Hearings; Findings.
A. Reviewing body. The Planning Commission is the reviewing body, except that:
1. the City Council is the reviewing body for a facility in Zone B or on city-owned
property or facilities (including collocations), following a recommendation from the
Planning Commission; and
2. the Director is the reviewing body for an application for a collocation that meets the
criteria set forth in section 17.46.080.D.2.b or for which the wireless communication
facility will be fully concealed or camouflaged. The Director will take action on the
application without public notice or public hearing, unless the Director refers the
application to the Planning Commission.
B. Planning Commission. After receiving a completed application, the city staff will schedule
a noticed public hearing before the Planning Commission consistent with divisions 17.62 and
17.64. If the application involves city-owned property, the Planning Commission makes a
recommendation to the City Council.
Planning & Land Use
17-61
C. City Council. The City Council will hear each application: (i) involving a facility in Zone B
or on city-owned property or facilities; or (ii) appealed from the Planning Commission.
D. Required findings; Exceptions.
1. Findings. Before approving a wireless communication facility permit, the
reviewing body must make the following findings:
a. The facility is necessary to close a significant gap in the operator's service
coverage or capacity.
b. The applicant has evaluated and met the priority for location standards of
section 17.46.040 A above.
c. The proposal satisfies each of the applicable development standards in section
17.46.070 above.
d. The proposed design is consistent with the Piedmont Design Guidelines.
e. The proposed facility has been located and designed for collocation to the
greatest extent reasonably feasible, and the applicant has submitted a statement of
its willingness to allow other wireless service providers to collocate on the
proposed facility.
2. Exceptions.
a. General. The decision-making body may grant an exception to any requirement
of this division 17.46, including without limitation the priority for location under
section 17.46.040 A, if the applicant establishes that strict compliance would
violate federal or state law.
b. Modification. The Director may consider and grant, modify and grant or deny
a modification to an existing wireless communications facility if the modification
meets the requirements of section 6409. In determining whether to approve the
requested modification the Director shall consider the following:
i. Alterations to the width, bulk, or arrangement of a wireless
communication facility that may result in a potentially significant or
material impact to public access or use of any public or private right-ofway,
or any potentially significant or material impact to public health,
safety, or welfare;
ii. Alterations to required access, parking, or landscaping from that
shown on the approved site plans;
Planning & Land Use
17-62
iii. Alterations that include excavation outside the wireless
telecommunications facility site, defined as the boundaries of the
controlled, leased or owned property surrounding the tower and base
station and any access or utility easements related to the site as shown on
the approved plans;
iv. An increase in the height of a freestanding tower that is less than the
applicable height limit;
v. Replacement of the wireless tower or foundation;
vi. Alteration or expansion of the exterior of a facility that was originally
approved as concealed or camouflaged in such a manner so that it may no
longer be concealed or camouflaged; or
vii. An increase by more than ten percent of the physical dimensions or
exposed surface area of any component of the tower or base station
(including, but not limited to, the height, circumference, or width of the
wireless tower or base station), or an increase by more than ten percent
from the dimensions of any structures required to support the wireless
tower or base station, such as guy wires, as approved and constructed
through the discretionary permit process; provided that in no event may
the height exceed the maximum height permitted under this section 17.46,
the zoning district or the wireless tower or base station’s initial approval.
Any proposed modification that is not a collocation, or for which the wireless communication
facility will be fully concealed or camouflaged, or that does not fall within the requirements of
section 6409 shall be reviewed and considered under the same provisions and requirements as
those required for the original consideration of the permit proposed for modification
Planning & Land Use
17-63
DIVISION 17.48 CANNABIS CULTIVATION AND FACILITIES
Sections
17.48.010 Purpose and intent
17.48.020 Definitions
17.48.030 Prohibitions
17.48.040 Cannabis Cultivation
17.48.050 Cannabis Deliveries
17.48.060 Penalties
17.48.070 Civil Injunction
17.48.010 Purpose and intent
The purpose and intent of this division is to prohibit any commercial cannabis facility and to
regulate cannabis cultivation within the city limits. It is recognized that it is a federal violation
under the Controlled Substances Act to possess or distribute cannabis even if for medical
purposes. Additionally, there is evidence of an increased incidence of crime-related secondary
impacts in locations associated with a cannabis facility, which is contrary to policies that are
intended to promote and maintain the public's health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 743 N.S.,
05/2018; Ord. 738 N.S., 12/2017; Ord. 728 N.S., 03/2017)
17.48.020 Definitions
In this division:
Cannabis or marijuana has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section
26001(f) and includes all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or
Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or
purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. Cannabis or marijuana
also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. Cannabis
or marijuana does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks,
oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted
therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. Cannabis or marijuana does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section
11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
Commercial cannabis activity has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code
section 26001(k), and includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing,
laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, or sale of cannabis or a cannabis
product.
Commercial cannabis facility means any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or
location where any person or entity establishes, commences, engages in, conducts, or carries
on, or permits another person or entity to establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry
on, any commercial cannabis activity that requires a state license or nonprofit license under
Business and Professions Code sections 26000 and following, including but not limited to
Planning & Land Use
17-64
cannabis cultivation, cannabis distribution, cannabis transportation, cannabis storage,
manufacturing of cannabis products, cannabis processing, the sale of any cannabis or
cannabis products, and the operation of a cannabis microbusiness.
Cultivation has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(l) and
includes any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or
trimming of cannabis.
State Cannabis Laws shall mean and include California Health and Safety Code Sections
11362.1 through 11362.45; California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5
(Compassionate Use Act of 1996); California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 to
11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act); California Health and Safety Code Sections
26000 through 26211 (Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act
(“MAUCRSA”)); California Health and Safety Code Sections 26220 through 26231.2; the
California Attorney General’s Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana
Grown for Medical Use issued in August, 2008, as such guidelines may be revised from
time to time by action of the Attorney General; California Labor Code Section 147.5;
California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 31020 and 34010 through 34021.5;
California Fish and Game Code Section 12029; California Water Code Section 13276; all
state regulations adopted pursuant to MAUCRSA; and all other applicable laws of the state
of California. (Ord. 738 N.S., 12/2017; Ord. 728 N.S., 03/2017)
17.48.030 Prohibitions on commercial cannabis facilities
Commercial cannabis facilities are prohibited in all zones in the City. No person or entity may
establish or operate a commercial cannabis facility within city limits. A property owner may not
allow its property to be used by any person or entity as a commercial cannabis facility. (Ord. 738
N.S., 12/2017; Ord. 728 N.S., 03/2017)
17.48.040 Cannabis cultivation
A. All cannabis cultivation within city limits is prohibited except that a person may cultivate no
more than six living cannabis plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to
a private residence located upon the grounds of that private residence. Such cultivation shall only
occur inside residences and accessory structures that are fully enclosed and secured against
unauthorized entry.
B. If a private residence is not occupied or inhabited by the owner of the private residence, then
no persons living in the residence may cultivate cannabis without written consent signed by the
owner expressly allowing cannabis cultivation to occur at the private residence.
C. Persons cultivating cannabis under this section shall comply with all applicable Building
Code requirements set forth in the Piedmont City Code.
D. There shall be no use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) on the
property for purposes of cannabis cultivation.
Planning & Land Use
17-65
E. All private cultivation under this section shall comply with Health and Safety Code section
11362.2(a)(3). (Ord. 738 N.S., 12/2017; Ord. 728 N.S., 03/2017)
17.48.050 Cannabis deliveries
A. State-licensed commercial cannabis facilities located outside the City may personally deliver
cannabis and cannabis products to individuals within the City, provided that such deliveries are in
strict compliance with State Cannabis Laws and have complied with Municipal Code Chapter 10
regarding business licenses.
B. Vehicles used in the delivery process must be unmarked without any designation or logo that
identifies the vehicle as a cannabis delivery vehicle.
C. Cannabis and cannabis product deliveries within the City may not occur between 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 738 N.S., 12/2017)
17.48.060 Penalties
Violation of any provision of this division is subject to penalties as set forth in City Code
Chapter 1, Article II. (Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018; Ord. 738 N.S., 12/2017)
17.48.070 Civil injunction
Any violation of this division is declared to be a public nuisance per se and contrary to the public
interest and, at the discretion of the City, will be subject to a cause of action for injunctive relief.
(Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018; Ord. 738 N.S., 12/2017)
Planning & Land Use
17-66
DIVISION 17.50 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Sections:
17.50.010 Nonconforming use
17.50.020 Nonconforming structure
17.50.010 Nonconforming use.
A. General. Use of a structure or land that was lawfully established and maintained, but which
does not conform to current use regulations is nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may
continue, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. Regulations. The following regulations apply to each nonconforming use:
1. There may be no increase or enlargement of the area, space of volume occupied and
used.
2. There may be no change in the nature or character of the nonconforming use.
3. If the nonconforming use is replaced by a conforming use, the nonconforming use is
automatically terminated.
4. If the nonconforming use discontinues active operation for a continuous period of one
year, the nonconforming use terminates and the facilities accommodating or serving the
activity must thereafter be used only for uses permitted or conditionally permitted by
the zoning district. This provision does not apply to a nonconforming dwelling unit.
17.50.020 Nonconforming structure.
A. General. A structure that was lawfully erected but which does not conform to the currently
applicable zoning requirements prescribed in the zone district is a nonconforming structure. It
may be used and maintained except as otherwise provided in this section. A nonconforming
structure is also subject to the California Building Code adopted by the city under chapter 5.
B. Regulations. The following regulations apply to a nonconforming structure:
1. Maintenance and repair. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a
nonconforming structure.
2. No alteration or enlargement. A nonconforming structure may not be altered, partially
demolished, or enlarged unless required by law, or unless the alteration or enlargement
conforms to the standards of the zoning district. An existing nonconforming structure may
be altered or enlarged without variance as long as the alteration or enlargement does not
relate to or involve the nonconformity. If an alteration or enlargement does relate to or
involve a nonconformity of a non-conforming structure, a variance is required under
division 17.70.
In this section, reconstruction means rebuilding all or a portion of an improvement in a way
that differs from the prior construction, including but not limited to differences in design or
Planning & Land Use
17-67
materials or both. Replacement means rebuilding all or a portion of an improvement to be
exactly the same as what was replaced.
3. Accessory dwelling unit. Regarding a nonconforming accessory dwelling unit, exterior
design and material modifications are permitted if:
a. they make the accessory dwelling unit architecturally consistent with the primary
unit and compliant with the current building code;
b. they comply with the Piedmont Design Guidelines; and
c. there is no increase in the size or change to the location of the accessory dwelling
unit, no increase in structure coverage or decrease in landscape coverage related to
the accessory dwelling unit, and no increase in the number of bedrooms.
4. Destruction; replacement. If a nonconforming primary structure is demolished or
destroyed for any reason to the extent of more than 70% of the structure then, and without
further action by the City Council, the structure and the land on which the structure was
located are subject to the current regulations of the zone in which the structure is located,
except as to lot area and lot frontage.
This subsection 4 does not apply to:
a. a garage, pool house, exempt accessory dwelling unit under section 17.38.030, or
other accessory structure, and any of those may be replaced as it was, within two years,
without increasing the degree of nonconformity, and without a variance under division
17.70.
b. a deck, balcony, porch, or site feature, and any of those may be replaced as it was,
within one year, without increasing the degree of nonconformity, and without a variance
under division 17.70.
If a nonconforming primary structure has been demolished or destroyed less than 70%,
reconstruction must be completed within two years from the date of issuance of the building
permit. If a property owner of a non-conforming structure has received permission to
demolish or destroy less than 70% of the structure, but during renovation, more that 70% is
destroyed or demolished, the project approval terminates and the property is subject to
current zoning regulations as set forth in the paragraph above.
The percentage of physical building destruction or demolition is determined by the Building
Official.
If the nonconforming structure is not rebuilt within the time period allowed under this
subsection 4, the nonconforming rights terminate.
Planning & Land Use
17-68
ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATION
Divisions:
17.60 General provisions
17.62 Notice requirements
17.64 Hearings; Review; Term of approval; Conditions
17.66 Design review
17.68 Conditional use permits
17.70 Variances
17.72 Zoning amendments
17.74 Development agreements
17.76 Reasonable accommodation
17.78 Appeals; Calls for review
17.80 Enforcement
DIVISION 17.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
17.60.010 General
17.60.020 Completeness of application
17.60.030 Environmental review
17.60.040 Fees and deposits
17.60.050 City indemnification
17.60.060 Approval authority
17.60.070 Decision; New application
17.60.080 Withdrawal of application
17.60.010 General.
A. General. This article 4, Administration, sets forth the general administrative authority and
procedures for decision making under this zoning ordinance. It includes general administrative
provisions and notice and hearing requirements; requirements for various discretionary
approvals: design review permit, conditional use permit, variance, zoning amendment,
development agreement, and reasonable accommodation; and provisions for appeals and
enforcement.
B. Applicant. The applicant is the person or entity, or representative, who submits an
application under this chapter. An applicant must either be the legal owner or submit the owner's
written consent with the application.
Planning & Land Use
17-69
17.60.020 Completeness of application.
A. Initial application. Within 30 calendar days after the city has received an application for a
development project, the city will determine in writing whether the application is complete, and
shall promptly transmit the determination to the applicant. If the application is determined not to
be complete, the city’s determination will specify those parts of the application which are
incomplete, and shall indicate the manner in which they can be made complete, including a list
and thorough description of the specific information needed.
If the determination is not made within 30 calendar days, and the application includes a
statement that it is an application for a development permit (as that term is used in Government
Code sections 65927 and 65943), the application will be deemed complete.
B. Resubmittal. Upon any resubmittal of an application determined not to be complete, a new
30-day period begins for determining whether the application is complete. The city will
determine in writing whether the resubmitted materials are complete and will notify the
applicant. If the written determination is not made within that 30-day period, the application
together with the submitted materials will be deemed complete.
If the city determines, after receiving the resubmitted materials, that the application is still
incomplete, the city and the applicant will follow the procedures set forth in Government Code
section 65943 (as it may be amended from time to time).
C. Time period extensions. An applicant and the city may mutually agree to extend a time
period provided by this subsection.
D. Applications deemed withdrawn. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, an
application will automatically be deemed withdrawn when an applicant fails to submit a
substantive response within 90 days after the City deems an application incomplete in a written
notice to the applicant. The Director may grant a written extension for up to an additional 30
days upon a written request for an extension received before the 90th day. The Director may
grant further written extensions only for good cause, based on circumstances outside the
applicant’s reasonable control.
17.60.030 Environmental review.
Each land use application for a discretionary approval by the city is subject to the requirements
of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the state CEQA Guidelines.
17.60.040 Fees and deposits.
A. General. Each person submitting an application for a permit, or filing an appeal, under this
chapter must pay the required fees and deposits as established by city council resolution. The fee
may be either a flat fee or the actual cost incurred by the city in processing an application.
B. Fee calculation. When a flat fee, or sliding scale, is established for a particular type of
application, the fee is based on the estimated number of hours of work by city staff at the staff
Planning & Land Use
17-70
member's hourly rate. If the estimated number of hours is exceeded, the city may charge for
additional hours worked. The hourly cost for city employees is the full, hourly cost of that
employee, including overhead.
C. Deposits.
1. Actual cost. If an application does not have an established flat fee, or if an
extraordinary cost is involved under subsection D, the fee is based on actual cost. The
Director will require that a deposit equal to the estimated cost of processing be submitted
concurrently with an application. The actual cost of city staff work is the person's hourly
rate, including overhead. For a consultant or contractor, the actual cost is the billed amount
plus 10% for the city's administrative cost.
2. Refund; Increase in deposit. If the actual cost is less than the deposit, or if the applicant
withdraws an application under section 17.60.080, the city will refund the unused balance to
the applicant within 15 working days after final action on the application, or after the
withdrawal.
If it appears that the actual cost will be greater than the deposit, the Director may require an
additional deposit, and may direct the city staff to cease work on the application until the
city has received the additional deposit. The city may not issue a permit based on the
application until the balance is paid.
D. Extraordinary costs. Extraordinary costs incurred by the city in processing an application
include the cost of consultants and experts determined by city staff, the Planning Commission or
the City Council to be necessary for a full and adequate hearing. The applicant is responsible for
these costs, which will be included in a deposit amount under subsection C.
E. Reduction for affordable dwelling units. A multi-family residential project that incorporates
affordable units is eligible for a 20% reduction in the application fees.
17.60.050 City indemnification.
Each applicant shall defend (with counsel acceptable to the city), indemnify and hold harmless
the city (including its agents, officers, and employees) from any claim, action, or proceeding to
challenge an approval of the Planning Commission, City Council, or any officer or department
concerning a permit granted under this chapter 17.
17.60.060 Approval authority.
A. Planning Director; City Clerk. The Planning Director has the primary authority to approve:
some design review permit (including signs), some wireless communication facilities permits,
some accessory dwelling unit permits. The Planning Director may, in the director's discretion,
refer any of these applications directly to the Planning Commission.
The City Clerk has the primary authority to approve home occupation permits.
Planning & Land Use
17-71
B. Public Works Director. The Public Works Director has the primary authority to approve:
encroachments permits, and sign permits on public property.
C. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission has the primary authority to approve
applications for variances, some design review permits, some wireless communication facilities
permits, some accessory dwelling unit permits, and to make recommendations to the City
Council regarding conditional use permits, zoning amendments, and development agreements.
The Planning Commission also hears appeals from decisions of the Planning Director, and
matters referred from the Planning Director. Combined applications involving multiple permits
or approvals will be heard together.
D. City Council. The City Council has the authority to approve conditional use permits,
development agreements, zoning ordinance amendments, some wireless communication facilities
permits, and to hear appeals from the Planning Commission. Combined applications involving
multiple permits or approvals will be heard together.
All actions taken under this section 17.60.020, except for subsection D (City Council), are
subject to division 17.78, Appeals and Calls for Review.
17.60.070 Decision; New application.
A. Decision. When considering an application, the hearing body may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application. The decision is based on the regulations in effect at the time
the application is approved or denied. The hearing body will inform the applicant of its reasons,
and state the basis for findings, if findings are required. The decision is final and takes effect at
the end of the appeal period, or, if appealed, after the appeal has been decided. (See division
17.78, Appeals; Calls for review.) If no appeal is filed, any required time period is measured
from the date of the original decision
B. New application. If the hearing body denies an application, it is presumed to be without
prejudice, meaning the applicant may re-submit a modified application at any time. However, the
hearing body may deny an application with prejudice, meaning that the applicant may not
resubmit a new application for substantially the same project for one year.
17.60.080 Withdrawal of application.
An applicant may withdraw an application at any time during the review process before the final
decision, by filling out the request for withdrawal form. Upon withdrawal, the applicant may
request a partial refund of fees, in proportion to the staff time and costs already expended, in the
Director's discretion.
Planning & Land Use
17-72
DIVISION 17.62 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
17.62.010 General.
17.62.020 Contents of notice.
17.62.030 Summary of notice requirements.
17.62.010 General.
Whenever a public hearing is required, notice of the public hearing will be given in accordance
with this section. Unless stated otherwise, notice will be given at least 14 calendar days before
the hearing.
In addition to the notices sent to the applicant and other property owners under section 17.62.030
C, notice shall also be mailed or delivered to any person who has filed a written request for
notice with the City Clerk. The city may charge a fee that is reasonably related to the cost of
providing this service. Requests for notice must be renewed annually.
The failure of any person or entity to receive notice does not constitute grounds for any court to
invalidate the actions of the city for which the notice was given. (Gov't. Code §65093.)
A public hearing conducted under this part may be continued from time to time to a specific date
and time, without additional notice.
For combined applications with multiple permits, the greater notice requirement applies to the
entire packet of applications.
In addition to the notice requirements set forth here, the Planning Director may give notice of a
hearing in any other manner the director deems necessary or desirable.
17.62.020 Contents of notice.
When a notice of a public hearing is required, the notice shall include the following information:
1. A general description (in text or by diagram) of the location of the property that is the
subject of the hearing;
2. A general explanation of the matter to be considered;
3. The date, time and place of the public hearing;
4. The identity of the hearing body;
5. A reference to application materials on file for detailed information;
6. A statement that any interested person may appear and be heard; and
7. Other information which is required by statute or specific provisions of this chapter or
which the Planning Director deems necessary or desirable.
17.62.030 Summary of notice requirements.
A. General. Notice of a public hearing will be given for a particular matter in accordance with
the schedule set forth at subsection E below.
Planning & Land Use
17-73
Published notice means that the notice will be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation, at least 14 calendar days before the hearing.
Notice regarding landscape plans will be given as part of the related application.
B. Notice by applicant.
1. Before Planning Commission. The applicant for a design review permit or a variance, to
be considered by the Planning Commission, must notify the adjacent property owners of the
proposed project at least 30 calendar days before the date of the initial hearing. The notice
must be in writing, describe the project in specific detail, and give the date of the hearing on
the application. The applicant must submit to the Planning Director at least 30 calendar
days before the hearing an affidavit of service by mail or personal delivery and a copy of the
written notice.
2. Before Director. The applicant for an expedited design review permit under section
17.66.040 B.3 may be required to notify adjacent neighbors as specified in the Design
Guidelines or the application instructions.
C. Method of city notice.
1. Publication or posting/mailing. The city will give notice either by (i) publication in a
newspaper of general circulation circulated in the city; or (ii) posting on the official city hall
bulletin board and mailing a copy to each property owner of record shown on the latest
equalized assessment rolls according to the schedule in subsection E. In addition to these
requirements, the city may post notification at the project site.
2. Publication required. If the number of owners to whom notice would be sent under
subsection B.1 is greater than 1,000, the city will give notice by placing a display
advertisement of at least one-fourth page in a newspaper having general circulation within
the city.
3. Property reclassification. If a property reclassification from one zoning district to
another has been proposed by a person other than the property owner, including the city, the
city will mail notice of all hearings to the property owner.
D. Compliance with public notice requirements. Compliance with public notice requirements
prescribed by this chapter are deemed sufficient notice to allow the city to proceed with a public
hearing and take action on an application, regardless of actual receipt of mailed, posted or
delivered notice. (Gov't. Code §65093.)
Planning & Land Use
17-74
E. Schedule of notice requirements. Notice of an application will be given under this chapter as
set forth in the following schedule:
Notice by City at least 14 days before the hearing, measured from
the project boundary. 2
Notice
by
applicant
30 days
before
hearing1
to
adjacent
property
owners
to
property
owners
within 100
feet
to
property
owners
within 200
feet
to
property
owners
within 300
feet
to property
owners
within 500
feet
Design review permit Variable depending on application. See division 17.66.
Variance
Single (other than for
height or floor area ratio)
X
X
More than one, or for
height or floor area ratio
X X
Signs X5 X
Landscape plan X5 X5
Lot line adjustment
Between two lots
More than two lots
X
X
Wireless communication
facility permit
X5 X
Accessory Dwelling Unit
Permit6
X5
X
Negative declaration or
Environmental Impact
Report required
X5 X
Tract map or parcel map X X
Conditional use permit, or
modification
X
Reasonable
accommodation3
X
Zoning Regulation
Amendment
Publish notice in newspaper of general circulation within the City.7
Zoning Map Amendment Publish notice in newspaper of general circulation within the City.7
Other applications X
Appeal 4 no
1 See section 17.62.030B.
2 See section 17.62.030C.
3 Subject to section 17.38.050.
4 Publication under section 17.62.030 is not required for an appeal hearing.
5 For application considered by Planning Commission
6 For ADU applications subject to sections 17.38.050.B.2 and/or 17.38.070.C
7 Subject to section 17.62.030, subsections A and C.
(Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
Planning & Land Use
17-75
DIVISION 17.64 HEARINGS; TERM OF APPROVAL; CONDITIONS
Sections:
17.64.010 Hearings
17.64.020 Term of approval
17.64.030 Conditions of approval
17.64.010 Hearings.
A. Planning Commission. If an application will be considered by the Planning Commission,
city staff will schedule the matter at the next meeting that has an open agenda, once the
application is complete, and at least 14 days later to allow time for noticing.
B. City Council. If this chapter requires a City Council hearing, the hearing will be scheduled
for the next available regular City Council meeting unless the hearing is for an appeal, in which
case the hearing will be scheduled at least 45 calendar days after the filing of an appeal.
C. Continued hearing. When necessary for proper evaluation of an application, the Planning
Commission or City Council may continue a hearing to a later meeting date.
D. Voting. A City Council or Planning Commission decision must be made by a majority of
the body. (See City Charter Section 2.07C and City Code Section 25.14.) (Ord. 743 N.S.,
05/2018)
17.64.020 Term of approval.
A. General. An approved conditional use permit, design review permit or variance lapses one
year after its date of final approval, or at an alternative time specified as a condition of approval,
unless one of the following has occurred:
1. A building permit has been issued, substantial money expended, and construction
diligently pursued; or
2. A final inspection has been issued; or
3. The conditional use is established in reliance on the approval.
An applicant is not allowed to proceed with construction if the approval has expired.
B. Administrative extension. The Director will grant one six-month extension for any design
review permit or variance approval by the Planning Commission, City Council, or staff, upon
written application by the property owner on a form provided by the Director prior to expiration
of the original approval. The extension fee is the amount established by City Council resolution.
C. Re-application. An application for re-approval of an expired, previous approval is subject to
all the requirements of this code in effect on the date of the final decision on the re-application.
(Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
Planning & Land Use
17-76
17.64.030 Conditions of approval.
A. General. In its review of an application, the reviewing body may impose reasonable
conditions necessary to:
1. Achieve the general purposes of this chapter or the specific purposes of the zoning
district in which the site is located, or to make it consistent with the general plan and
Piedmont Design Guidelines;
2. Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; or
3. Ensure operation and maintenance of the use in a manner compatible with existing and
potential uses on adjoining properties or in the surrounding area.
B. Guarantee. The Director, Planning Commission, or City Council may impose a condition of
approval requiring a guarantee that specified conditions of approval will be met. The guarantee
may be in the form of a bond, cash deposit, letter of credit or other guarantee. The city may also
require that the applicant agree in writing to the city's right to complete or repair incomplete or
incorrect work on the applicant's property, to recover the costs incurred from the applicant, and if
unpaid, to impose a lien against the property for the costs. The costs may include staff time,
contractor and consultant services, and legal services. If the conditions are not met, the City may
use the guarantee to meet the conditions. The guarantee will be released upon a showing that all
the specified conditions of approval have been met.
Planning & Land Use
17-77
DIVISION 17.66 DESIGN REVIEW PERMIT
Sections:
17.66.010 Intent
17.66.020 Implementation
17.66.030 Permit required; Exceptions
17.66.040 Approval authority
17.66.050 Procedures: Application; Notice and hearing; Decision; Effective date; Appeal
17.66.060 Standards
17.66.010 Intent.
Design review is intended to: promote orderly, attractive, safe and harmonious development;
uphold the aesthetic values of the community; and ensure excellence of architectural design; all
as set forth in the Piedmont Design Guidelines.
17.66.020 Implementation.
A. Piedmont Design Guidelines. The City Council has adopted the Piedmont Design
Guidelines that are available online and at city hall. The Guidelines are the criteria for the
applicant and hearing body in determining whether a specific project conforms to section
17.66.060, Standards.
B. Director. The Director will prepare:
1. the permit application forms; and
2. the following public lists for guidance to applicants. These lists are based on past and
ongoing conventions, and Planning Commission direction as to what is:
a. a small improvement. These represent exceptions, not requiring design review under
section 17.66.030.
b. a minor modification. Improvements within this category qualify for expedited
review under section 17.66.040 B.3.
Other improvements, which are not listed as small or minor in the above lists, are considered
significant and require a design review permit, subject to the notification requirements of
division 17.62.
17.66.030 Permit required; Exceptions.
A. Permit required. A design review permit is required for any of the following, unless an
exception applies under subsection B.
1. improvement requiring a variance, conditional use permit, or building permit;
Planning & Land Use
17-78
2. fence, wall, retaining wall, or trash enclosure as provided in division 17.32.
No improvement subject to design review under this division may be constructed, repaired or
maintained except in accordance with a design review permit. The term improvement in this
division means (1) the construction, alteration and repair of a building, structure, or facility
permanently affixed to real property, or (2) a site feature.
The city will not issue a building permit under chapter 5 until the applicant has obtained the
required design review permit. The city will not allow demolition unless the applicant has
approval of plans for a replacement structure or other site improvements under this chapter 17,
and has obtained a building permit under chapter 5.
B. Exceptions. No design review permit is required for a small improvement or for an interior
improvement not requiring a variance. The Director determines what is a small improvement,
and will maintain a list, available to the public. (See section 17.66.020 B.)
17.66.040 Approval authority
A. Planning Commission.
1. Applicability. The Planning Commission has the responsibility to review a design
review permit if the project is:
a. part of an application for a variance or conditional use permit;
b. is valued at $125,000 or more (adjusted for inflation1);
c. a site feature greater than 7 feet high and located in a side or rear yard setback, or a
site feature of any height located within a 20-foot street setback; or
d. a retaining wall greater than 30 inches in height located within a street yard setback
or a fence of any height located within a street yard setback; or
e. referred to the Planning Commission by the Director.
However, if any component of a project application requires final approval by the City
Council, including a City project, the Planning Commission makes a recommendation and
the Council is the final decision-making body.
1 The amount of $125,000 is automatically adjusted for inflation annually on January 1 of each
year beginning in 2018 based upon the California Construction Cost Index published by the
California Department of General Services from data produced by the Engineering News
Record.
Planning & Land Use
17-79
2. Notice. If a project is subject to Planning Commission approval, the city will give
notice:
a. in the same manner required for the underlying application of which design review
is a part; or
b. to property owners within 100 feet of the property for a stand-alone design review
permit application, including those for nonresidential signs under section 17.36.040.C.2
and landscape plans under section 17.34.020.A.2, except that design review permit
applications for a new house shall require notice to property owners within 300 feet of
the property. (See division 17.62. In some cases, the applicant provides the notice to other
property owners.)
3. Standards. In reviewing an application for a design review permit, the Planning
Commission will apply the standards set forth in section 17.66.060, Standards.
B. Director.
1. Applicability. The Director has the authority to approve a design review permit
application if the project is not covered by the Planning Commission applicability threshold
under subsection A.1 above. The Director may refer an application to the Planning
Commission.
2. Notice. The city will give notice of a design review permit application to the adjacent
property owners if the proposal represents a significant change. The Director determines
what is a significant change. (See section 17.66.020 B.)
3. Expedited review. An application for a minor modification is entitled to expedited
review. The Director determines what is a minor modification, and will maintain a list,
available to the public. (See section 17.66.020 B.)
4. Standards. In reviewing an application for a design review permit, the Director will
apply the standards set forth in section 17.66.060, Standards.
5. Changes.
a. Conditions of approval. Only the approving hearing body may approve a change to
a condition of approval, unless the condition provides otherwise.
b. Plans. A change in the plans will be reviewed by the approving hearing body,
except that the Director may approve a change to plans approved by the Planning
Commission or City Council if the change does not meet the threshold applicability
provisions for review by the Planning Commission (see section 17.66.040 A 1), or is a
minor modification. (See section 17.66.020 B.)
Planning & Land Use
17-80
17.66.050 Procedures: Application; Notice and hearing; Decision; Effective date;
Appeal.
A. Application. An applicant for a design review permit must submit a complete application,
accompanied by plans and materials in the form approved by the Director, and the application
fee. The Director may waive submission of items deemed unnecessary to determine compliance
with this chapter. An application is considered complete if it is in accordance with section
17.60.020.
B. Notice and hearing. The hearing body will hold a hearing on the application, unless the
application qualifies for expedited review under section 17.66.040B.3, or no neighbor requests a
hearing under section 17.66.040 B.2. Notice requirements are set forth in sections 17.66.040 A.2
and B.2, and in division 17.62.
C. Decision. The hearing body will approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application.
The Director will notify the applicant of the decision in writing.
D. Effective date. A decision under this division takes effect at the end of the time allowed for
an appeal, which is 10 calendar days after the date of the decision. If the decision is appealed, the
decision is not final until the appeal process has been exhausted. (See division 17.78.)
E. Appeal. A decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission, and a
decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council, all in accordance
with the appeal procedures of division 17.78.
17.66.060 Standards.
The hearing body may not approve a design review permit unless the design of the project
conforms to all of the following standards:
A. The proposed design is consistent with the City's General Plan and Piedmont Design
Guidelines.
B. The design has little or no effect on neighboring properties’ existing views, privacy, and
access to direct and indirect light.
C. The proposed design does not adversely affect pedestrian or vehicular safety.
Planning & Land Use
17-81
DIVISION 17.68 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
Sections:
17.68.010 General; Applicability.
17.68.020 Application.
17.68.030 Hearing body
17.68.040 Findings
17.68.050 Review
17.68.060 Modification
17.68.010 General: Applicability.
A. General. No person shall begin a conditional use without first obtaining a conditional use
permit. After recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council may grant a
conditional use permit, subject to conditions.
B. Applicability. A conditional use permit is required for:
1. a use listed as a conditional use in any zone, or a change in an existing conditional use.
A conditional use permit is not required for a single-family residence.
2. new construction, or a structural change to: commercial or mixed use in Zone D.
C. Wireless communication facilities permit. A wireless communication facility is a conditional
use in Zones A through E. However, a wireless communication facilities permit under division
17.46 is required instead of a conditional use permit.
17.68.020 Application.
The applicant must submit a written application for a conditional use permit on a form provided
by the Director. The application shall be accompanied by plans as set forth in the required
materials for a use permit, and the application fee. Where necessary, the Director or hearing body
may waive a requirement or require additional information.
17.68.030 Hearing body.
The Planning Commission will hold a hearing on the application and make a recommendation to
the City Council. The decision of the City Council is final.
17.68.040 Findings.
The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may approve a conditional use
permit only after making the following findings:
1. The proposed use is compatible with the general plan and conforms to the zoning code.
2. The use is primarily intended to serve Piedmont residents (rather than the larger region);
and
Planning & Land Use
17-82
3. The use will not have a material adverse effect on the health, safety or welfare of
persons residing or working in the vicinity. Considerations for this finding include: no
substantial increase in traffic, parking, or noise; no adverse effect on the character of the
neighborhood; no tendency to adversely affect surrounding property values.
17.68.050 Review.
A. Review. Each conditional use permit is subject to review two years after the permit is
approved, or a longer period if approved with the permit, and each five years after that, or longer
as determined by the City Council. The Director will initiate the review and provide a report to
the Planning Commission. If the Director or Planning Commission determines that there may be
grounds for revocation of the permit, the Director will schedule the matter for a revocation
hearing under section 17.80.050.
B. Applicability to prior conditional use permits. If a use permit issued before December 2013
has a condition with an automatic review or termination date, that condition is superseded by this
section.
17.68.060 Modification.
A person wishing to make a minor modification to a conditional use permit may submit an
application for modification to the Director, together with the application fee. Consideration of a
request for a minor modification requires the same procedures and findings as for the original
use permit.
Planning & Land Use
17-83
SECTION 17.70 VARIANCE
Sections:
17.70.010 General; Exceptions.
17.70.020 Application
17.70.030 Hearing body
17.70.040 Findings
17.70.010 General; Exceptions.
A. General. The city may approve a variance from the provisions of this chapter, except for
those features set forth in subsection B, which do not require a variance.
B. Exceptions.
1. These features do not require a variance: fence, retaining wall, or site feature.
2. A variance is not required to replace a nonconforming:
a. garage, pool house, or exempt accessory dwelling unit under section 17.38.030, or
other accessory structure, which is destroyed, and any of those may be replaced as it
was, within two years, without increasing the degree of nonconformity, and without a
variance under this division; (See section 17.50.020 B.4.)
b. deck, balcony, porch, or site feature, which is destroyed, and any of those may be
replaced as it was, within one year, without increasing the degree of nonconformity, and
without a variance under this division. (See section 17.50.020 B.4.)
3. If a proposed improvement of an existing structure is subject only to a design review
permit except that a feature of the improvement requires a variance, the city may approve it
without the need for a variance if: (1) the extent of the nonconformity is unchanged or
reduced; and (2) the proposal meets the design review permit requirements of section
17.66.050, Standards. (See section 17.66.020 F.)
17.70.020 Application.
The applicant must submit a written application for a variance on a form provided by the
Director. The application shall be accompanied by: plans as set forth in the required materials
for a variance; a statement of the reasons for and evidence in support of the request; and the
application fee. Where necessary, the Director or hearing body may waive a requirement or
require additional information, including a survey.
17.70.030 Hearing body.
The Planning Commission will hold a hearing and decide on a variance request.
Planning & Land Use
17-84
However, when another related application is normally decided by the City Council, the City
Council will also be the decision-making body on the variance, and the Planning Commission
will make a recommendation to the City Council. For example, this applies to an application for
a subdivision (under chapter 19), conditional use permit (under division 17.68), or a wireless
communications facility permit (under division 17.46).
17.70.040 Findings.
A. Findings. The hearing body may approve a variance only if it makes the following findings:
1. The property and existing improvements present unusual physical circumstances of the
property (including but not limited to size, shape, topography, location and surroundings),
so that strictly applying the terms of this chapter would keep the property from being used in
the same manner as other conforming properties in the zone;
2. The project is compatible with the immediately surrounding neighborhood and the
public welfare; and
3. Accomplishing the improvement without a variance would cause unreasonable hardship
in planning, design, or construction. In this subsection 3, unreasonable hardship refers to
the unusual physical characteristics of the property and existing improvements, and not to
conditions personal to the applicant. (See also Reasonable accommodation, at division
17.76.)
B. No variance for use. The city may not grant a variance authorizing a use or activity not
otherwise permitted.
Planning & Land Use
17-85
DIVISION 17.72 ZONING AMENDMENT
Sections:
17.72.010 General
17.72.020 Initiating a zoning amendment
17.72.030 Application
17.72.040 Report; Notice and public hearing; Planning Commission recommendation.
17.72.050 City Council action
17.72.010 General.
The zoning designations may be changed by amending the zoning map, and the zoning
regulations may be changed by amending this chapter.
17.72.020 Initiating an amendment.
A. Zoning map. An amendment to the zoning map may be initiated by motion of the City
Council or Planning Commission, or by request of all owners of property for which the change is
sought.
B. Zoning regulations. An amendment to the zoning regulations may be initiated by motion of
the City Council or the Planning Commission, or by request of a resident, property owner or
business owner in the city.
C. City Charter. A proposed amendment to the zoning map or zoning classifications is subject
to City Charter section 9.02. (See section 17.02.010C.)
17.72.030 Application.
An individual applicant may submit a zoning amendment application on the form provided by
the city, together with the application fee.
17.72.040 Report; Notice and public hearing; Planning Commission recommendation.
A. Report. The Director will set a date, time and place for a public hearing and prepare a report
to the Planning Commission on the proposed zoning map or zoning regulation amendment.
B. Notice and public hearing. Notice of the public hearing on the proposed amendment will be
given in accord with division 17.62.
C. Planning Commission recommendation. Following the public hearing, the Planning
Commission must make findings as to whether the proposed zoning regulation or zoning map
amendment is consistent with the general plan, the purposes of this chapter 17, and the
limitations on residential reclassification prescribed in City Charter section 9.02, and shall
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the proposal. A Planning Commission
recommendation of denial of an application for a zoning map or zoning regulation amendment
submitted by individual request terminates the proceedings, unless appealed.
Planning & Land Use
17-86
17.72.050 City council action.
A. Notice and hearing. The Planning Director will set a public hearing before the City Council
within 60 calendar days after the date of the Planning Commission recommendation. The city
will provide notice of the hearing as set forth in division 17.64, Hearings. At the public hearing,
the City Council will hear evidence for and against the proposed amendment. The City Council
may continue the public hearing to a definite date and time without additional notice.
B. City Council decision. After the public hearing, the City Council may approve, modify, or
reject the Planning Commission recommendation. Before adopting an ordinance, the Council
must make findings that the proposed regulation or map amendment is consistent with the
policies of the general plan, the purposes of this chapter 17, and the limitations on residential
reclassification prescribed in City Charter section 9.02.
Planning & Land Use
17-87
DIVISION 17.74 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:
17.74.010 Purpose; Scope
17.74.020 Application
17.74.030 Contents of development agreement
17.74.040 Initial review
17.74.050 Consideration and decision
17.74.060 Amendment; Cancellation
17.74.070 Annual review
17.74.080 Effect of development agreement
17.74.010 Purpose; Scope.
The purpose of this division is to implement the development agreement provisions of the state
planning and zoning law. All development agreements shall be processed in accordance with this
division.
A development agreement provides assurance to a developer that he or she may proceed with a
project in accordance with existing policies, rules and regulations and subject to certain
conditions of approval. The assurance strengthens the public planning process, encourages
private participation in comprehensive planning, and reduce economic costs of development.
Also, by requiring some public benefit, this process assures some additional benefit to the public
in exchange for the vested rights granted under a development agreement. (Gov't. Code
§§65864-65869.5)
17.74.020 Application.
A. Filing by owner. An application for a development agreement may only be filed by a person
having a legal or equitable interest in real property.
B. Form of application. An application for a development agreement must be on a form
approved by the Director.
C. Application fees. The applicant shall pay fees for the filing and
processing of an application as established by resolution of the City Council.
17.74.030 Contents of development agreement.
A. Required provisions. A development agreement must include the following:
1. The duration of the agreement;
2. The permitted uses of the property;
3. The density or intensity of the use;
4. The maximum height and size of the proposed buildings;
5. Provisions for the dedication of land for public purposes;
Planning & Land Use
17-88
6. The public benefit offered by the applicant as consideration for entering into the
agreement;
7. The provisions set forth in 17.74.080B.
B. Optional provisions. A development agreement may include the following:
1. Conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions;
however, these conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements may not prevent
development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of development set
forth in the agreement;
2. Provisions providing that construction will begin within a specified time and that the
project or any phase be completed with a specified time;
3. Terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of necessary public facilities and
subsequent reimbursement over time;
4. Provisions requiring compliance with specific plans previously approved under a design
review permit. (See division 17.66.)
C. Provisions not allowed. A development agreement may not include:
1. Requirements for the city to provide public facilities, improvements or services;
2. Requirements for the city to exercise its legislative or quasi-judicial powers in a
particular way;
3. Waivers or modifications of any city fees or requirements.
17.74.040 Initial review.
The Director will determine whether the application is complete, and schedule a public hearing
before the City Council. At the hearing, the Council will determine whether it wishes to enter
into such an agreement and, if so, the general subject areas the staff is authorized to negotiate.
The city will give notice of the hearing shall be given as provided in Government Code Sections
65090 and 65091.
17.74.050 Consideration and decision.
A. Negotiations. The Director will direct the negotiations with the developer regarding terms of
the development agreement. The Director will determine what environmental review is
appropriate under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Once negotiations are
completed, the Director will schedule the proposed development agreement for the required
hearings under this section.
B. Planning Commission hearing and recommendation. The Planning Commission will hold a
public hearing to consider whether the development agreement should be approved. The city will
give notice of the hearing as provided under Government Code sections 65090 and 65091. The
Commission may recommend to the City Council approval, approval subject to conditions, or
denial of the application.
D. City Council determination. The City Council will hold a public hearing to consider whether
the development agreement should be approved. The city will give notice of the hearing as
provided under Government Code sections 65090 and 65091. If the City Council approves the
Planning & Land Use
17-89
development agreement, it must be by City Council resolution, authorizing the City
Administrator to sign the development agreement.
E. Findings. The Planning Commission may recommend approval and the City Council may
approve the development agreement only after finding that the development is consistent with
the general plan, applicable city codes and policies and this chapter.
F. Recordation. Within 10 days after the city enters into a development agreement, the City
Clerk will record a copy of the agreement with the county recorder.
17.74.060 Amendment and cancellation.
A development agreement may be amended or cancelled using the same procedure for entering
into the agreement, under sections. (Gov't. Code § 65868.)
17.74.070 Annual review.
A. Review. The Planning Commission will hold a public hearing to review each development
agreement at least every 12 months from the date it is entered into, and shall forward their report
to the City Council. Additionally, the Planning Commission or City Council, or both, may hold
public hearings to conduct more frequent reviews of a development agreement. The City Council
may impose a reasonable fee to cover the costs of this review.
B. Notice. The Director will give notice of the intention to conduct a review under this section
as provided in Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091. In addition, at least 10 days before
the hearing, the Director will give notice to all persons having a legal or equitable interest in the
real property subject to the agreement. The notice shall include the following:
1. A statement that the applicant, or the successor-in-interest to the agreement, has the
burden of demonstrating good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement; and
2. A statement that if, as a result of the review, the Planning Commission or City Council
finds on the basis of substantial evidence that the applicant or successor to the agreement has
not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement, the City may
modify or terminate the agreement.
C. Determination. If the Planning Commission finds, on the basis of substantial evidence, that
the applicant or successor-in-interest has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions
of the agreement, it may recommend modification or termination to the City Council. Based on
substantial evidence that the applicant or successor has not complied in good faith with the terms
or conditions of the agreement, the City Council may modify or terminate the agreement. (Gov't.
Code §65865.1)
17.74.080 Effect of development agreement.
A. General. The development of the property will be governed by those rules, regulations and
official policies in effect at the time of execution of the agreement, regarding permitted uses of
Planning & Land Use
17-90
the land, density, design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, except as
otherwise provided by the development agreement or as provided in subsection B below:
B. Limitations. Notwithstanding the vested rights set forth in subsection A above, the property
owner must:
1. Pay the processing and development impact fees in effect at the time those fees are
paid;
2. Comply with building code requirements in effect on a city-wide basis at the time of
construction;
3. Comply with construction and technical design standards or specifications for public
improvements that are applicable city-wide;
4. Comply with changes in city laws, regulations, plans or policies applicable city- wide,
the terms of which are found by the City Council, based on substantial evidence, to be
necessary to protect members of the public from a condition dangerous to their health or
safety;
5. Comply with a change in city law, regulations, plans or policies which is:
a. specifically mandated by state or federal law, or by any regional governmental
agency that has legal authority over the city under state law or a joint powers
agreement; or
b. a result of or in response to state or federal law, or regional agency action, made
necessary in order for the city to avoid losing or not receiving substantial funding or
other substantial public benefits or facilities that would be available to the city only if it
makes such a change; or
c. specifically mandated by, or necessary for compliance with or implementation of,
the terms of a permit, entitlement or other authorization necessary for the development
of the property issued or granted to the city, county and/or property owners by any
federal, state or regional agency; and
6. Following any subsequent environmental review, comply with required mitigation
measures.
C. City’s rights. A development agreement does not prevent the city in subsequent actions
applicable to the property from:
1. applying new rules, regulations and policies which do not conflict with those set forth in
the development agreement; or
2. denying or conditionally approving a subsequent development project application on the
basis of such existing or new rules, regulations and policies. (Gov't. Code § 65866.)
Planning & Land Use
17-91
DIVISION 17.76 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Sections:
17.76.010 Intent
17.76.020 Requesting reasonable accommodation
17.76.030 Application
17.76.040 Approval authority; Hearing; Decision
17.76.050 Findings; Other requirements
17.76.060 Appeal
17.76.070 Definitions
17.76.010 Intent.
It is the city’s policy to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in
regulations and procedures to ensure equal access to housing, and to facilitate the development
of housing. The purpose of this division is to provide a procedure under which a disabled person
may request a reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning requirements.
This division is based on requirements of the Federal and State fair housing laws, and
implements the Housing Element of the City’s General Plan. It is distinct from the requirements
for a variance set forth in division 17.70, Variances.
17.76.020 Requesting reasonable accommodation.
A. Request. An individual with a disability may request a reasonable accommodation in the
application of the city’s land use and zoning regulations. Such a request may include a
modification or exception to the requirements for the siting, development and use of housing or
housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers. A reasonable accommodation
cannot waive a requirement for a conditional use permit when otherwise required or result in
approval of uses otherwise prohibited by the city’s land use and zoning regulations.
B. Availability of information. Information regarding this reasonable accommodation
procedure will be available at the public information counters in the department of public works,
advising the public of the availability of the procedure for eligible applicants, and be made
available on the city’s website.
C. Assistance. If an applicant needs assistance in making the request, planning staff will
endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is available to the
applicant.
D. Balancing rights and requirements. The city will attempt to balance (1) the privacy rights
and reasonable request of an applicant for confidentiality, with (2) the land use requirements for
notice and public hearing, factual findings and rights to appeal, the city’s requests for
information, consideration of an application, preparation of written findings, and maintenance of
records for a request for reasonable accommodation.
Planning & Land Use
17-92
17.76.030 Application.
The applicant must submit a request for reasonable accommodation on a form provided by the
city. The application must include the following information:
1. the basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the fair housing
laws: identification and description of the disability which is the basis for the request for
accommodation, including current, written medical certification and description of
disability and its effects on the person’s medical, physical or mental limitations;
2. the rule, policy, practice and/or procedure of the city for which the request for
accommodation is being made, including the zoning code regulation from which
reasonable accommodation is being requested;
3. the type of accommodation sought;
4. the reason(s) why the accommodation is reasonable and necessary for the needs of the
individual(s) with a disability (where appropriate, include a summary of any potential
means and alternatives considered in evaluating the need for the accommodation);
5. copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, plans or background information
reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the need for the accommodation; and
6. other supportive information deemed necessary by the city to facilitate proper
consideration of the request, consistent with fair housing laws.
The fee for an application for reasonable accommodation shall be established by resolution of the
City Council.
17.76.040 Approval authority; Notice; Decision.
A. Approval authority.
1. Director. The Director has the authority to review and decide upon requests for
reasonable accommodation, including whether the applicant is an individual with a disability
within the meaning of this division 17.76, except as noted in subsection A.2 of this section.
If the application involves physical changes to the property subject to Director review under
division 17.66, the Director will review and decide the design review permit application.
The Director may refer the matter to the Planning Commission.
2. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission will review and decide upon requests
for reasonable accommodation (including whether the applicant is an individual with a
disability within the meaning of this division), when an application involves a variance or
other land use entitlement under this chapter, or when referred by the Director.
B. Notice. No advance notice or public hearing is required for Director's consideration of a
reasonable accommodation request. A request for reasonable accommodation subject to review
Planning & Land Use
17-93
by the Planning Commission requires advance notice and a public hearing under the
requirements of divisions 17.62 and 17.64.
C. Decision. The Director will render a decision or refer the matter to the Planning Commission
within 30 days after the application is complete. The reviewing body and will approve, approve
with conditions or deny the application, based on the findings set forth in section 17.76.050.
17.76.050 Findings; Other requirements.
A. Findings. The reviewing body will approve the application, with or without conditions, if it
makes the following findings:
1. The housing will be used by an individual with a disability;
2. The requested accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an
individual with a disability;
3. The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative
burden on the city; and
4. The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature
of a city program or law, including land use and zoning.
B. Other requirements.
1. An approved request for reasonable accommodation is subject to the applicant’s
compliance with all other applicable zoning regulations.
2. A modification approved under this division is considered a personal accommodation
for the individual applicant and does not run with the land.
3. Where appropriate, the reviewing body may condition its approval on any or all of the
following:
a. Inspection of the property periodically, as specified, to verify compliance with this
section and any conditions of approval;
b. Removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an
unreasonable financial burden, when the need for which the accommodation was
granted no longer exists;
c. Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the
accommodation was granted no longer exists;
d. Recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the accommodating feature
once the need for it no longer exists;
Planning & Land Use
17-94
e. Measures to reduce the impact on surrounding uses;
f. Measures in consideration of the physical attributes of the property and structures;
g. Other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit
and/or that will not result in an encroachment into required setbacks, exceedance of
maximum height, lot coverage or floor area ratio requirements specified for the zone
district; and
h. Other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
17.76.060 Appeal.
A decision under this Division may be appealed to the Planning Commission or City Council in
accordance with division 17.78, Appeals.
17.76.070 Definitions.
Individual with a disability means a person who has a medical, physical or mental condition that
limits a major life activity (as those terms are defined in California Government Code section
12926), anyone who is regarded as having such a condition or anyone who has a record of
having such a condition. It includes an authorized representative of a disabled person. The term
individual with a disability does not include a person who is currently using illegal substances,
unless he or she has a separate disability. (42 U.S.C. § 3602(h).)
Reasonable accommodation means providing disabled persons flexibility in the application of
land use and zoning regulations and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when
necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. It may include such things as yard area
modifications for ramps, handrails or other such accessibility improvements; landscape
additions, such as widened driveways, parking area or walkways; building additions for
accessibility; tree removal; or reduced off-street parking where the disability clearly limits the
number of people operating vehicles. Reasonable accommodation does not include an
accommodation that would (1) impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city or
(2) require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city’s land use and zoning program.
(Govt. Code § 12927(c)(1), (l) and § 12955(l); 42 U.S.C. § 3604(f)(3)(B); 28 C.F.R. § 35.150
(a)(3).)
Planning & Land Use
17-95
DIVISION 17.78 APPEALS; CALL FOR REVIEW
Sections:
17.78.010 General
17.78.020 Application
17.78.030 Notice; Hearing; Decision; Remand
17.78.040 Standard of review
17.78.050 Call for review
17.78.010 General.
Any interested person may appeal a decision of the Director to the Planning Commission, or a
decision of the Planning Commission to the City Council, all under the terms of this division
17.78.
The city will not approve a building permit during the appeal period.
17.78.020 Application.
A person wishing to file an appeal must submit an application, stating the grounds for appeal,
within ten calendar days after the date of the decision. The request must be filed with the City
Clerk, and accompanied by the appeal fee.
17.78.030 Notice; Hearing; Decision; Remand.
A. Notice. The City Clerk will give notice of the appeal date and time to: the appellant; the
applicant if not the appellant; those property owners notified in the original application hearing;
any person who has submitted a written comment on the application or who commented in
person at the hearing; and to any other person requesting notice.
B. Hearing. The appeal body will hear the appeal as soon as is reasonably possible, taking into
account the notice requirements. The appeal body may continue the hearing, but not more than
once without the consent of the appellant. At the hearing, the appeal body will consider the
written and oral evidence presented.
C. Decision. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appeal body will decide the appeal. The
standard of review governing the appeal is set forth in section 17.78.040, Standard of review.
The appeal body may sustain, modify, add to, or overrule the decision appealed, and make other
findings consistent with this chapter, including the right to require or modify the requirements
for story poles, surveys, time periods for completion or extension, and any other conditions
relating to the project for which approval is sought. The appeal body will report its decision to
the appellant, the original applicant, and the decision maker.
D. Remand. Notwithstanding subsection C above, the City Council acting as the appeal body
may remand the matter to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The remand will
include either specific issues to be considered, or direction that the Planning Commission open
the entire application for de novo review. Unless the City Council determines otherwise: (1) the
Planning & Land Use
17-96
remand hearing before the Planning Commission will be scheduled at a Planning Commission
meeting, occurring between 14 and 75 days after the date of remand action, or as may be
extended by mutual agreement by the appellant and applicant; and (2) no additional fees will be
charged to the applicant or appellant relating to the remand. The decision of the Planning
Commission on the remand is final unless appealed under this division 17.78, or the City Council
retains appeal jurisdiction over the entire matter at the time of the remand and requests only an
advisory opinion on specific issues from the Planning Commission. The burden of proof on
remand is on the applicant.
17.78.040 Standard of review.
A. General. An appeal is not a de novo hearing, but instead will be governed by the following
principles:
1. Deference. Due deference shall be given to the actions of the Planning Commission in
light of the substantial number of planning applications heard by them and the major
accumulated group experience that those actions represent.
2. Grounds for overruling decision. The appeal body may overrule the action of the
decision maker only if one of the following occurs:
a. the findings made by the decision maker as a basis for its action are not supported
by the weight of the evidence;
b. there is a significant error in the application of the requirements of this chapter 17
or other requirements of the City Code;
c. there is a significant error in the application of the Piedmont Design Guidelines; or
d. significant errors in the application, plans, drawings or other materials provided to
the decision maker are discovered after the hearing, which were a basis of the decision.
3. Burden of proof. During an appeal, the burden of proof is on the appellant.
B. Definitions. In this division 17.78, the following definitions apply:
Burden of proof means the obligation to provide evidence or proof significant enough to
overcome any other evidence presented.
Significant error means an error that has or potentially will have an important negative
impact.
Weight of the evidence means more than 50% of the evidence.
Planning & Land Use
17-97
17.78.050 Call for review.
A. Initiating call for review. A member of the City Council or Planning Commission, or the
City Administrator, may call a matter for review, without an appeal fee. The City Administrator,
Planning Commissioner, or Council Member may call the matter for review for the good of the
city, without stating specific reasons for the call. The act of calling the matter for review does
not, by itself, disqualify the Planning Commissioner or Council Member from participating as
part of the decision-making body so long as that Commissioner or Council Member is neutral
and unbiased and has not previously announced to any member of the public or city staff a
preferred outcome on the matter.
B. Hearing body. If a decision of the Director is called for review, it will be heard by the
Planning Commission. If a decision of the Planning Commission is called for review, it will be
heard by the City Council.
C. Timing. The person calling for review must file a written request within ten days of the
decision. (If the tenth day falls on a weekend or city holiday, the deadline is the close of
business on the following business day.)
D. De novo hearing. The hearing will be a de novo hearing. The burden of proof is on the
applicant.
Planning & Land Use
17-98
DIVISION 17.80 ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
17.80.010 Violations
17.80.020 Permits, licenses, certificates, approvals
17.80.030 Enforcement responsibilities
17.80.040 Informal show cause hearing
17.80.050 Revocation or modification
17.80.060 Notice of violation
17.80.010 Violations.
A. General. Violation of a permit or approval, or of any required condition, constitutes a
violation of this chapter. Each day the violation (or a portion of it) continues is a separate
offense.
B. Administrative citation. A violation of this chapter may be enforced under chapter 1, article
II.
C. Public nuisance. A violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated under
chapter 6, Government Code sections 38773 through 38773.7, or any other remedy available by
law. The City Council may provide for the summary abatement of a nuisance at the expense of
the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it and by ordinance may make the
expense of abatement a lien against the property on which it is maintained and a personal
obligation against the property owner.
D. Criminal penalty. A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is punishable by fine or
imprisonment or both as provided in Penal Code section 19.
E. Civil penalties. The City Council may enact penalties and abatement procedures for failure
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
17.80.020 Permits, licenses, certificates, and approvals.
A permit, license, certificate, or approval granted in conflict with a provision of this chapter is
void.
17.80.030 Enforcement responsibilities.
The Director is responsible for enforcing the terms of discretionary permits and their conditions
under this chapter. The chief building official is responsible for enforcing the City Code
regarding the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration, or addition
to a building or structure. All other officers of the city are responsible for enforcing provisions
related to their areas of responsibility.
17.80.040 Informal show cause hearing.
If the Director has reason to believe a violation of this chapter exists, the Director may direct the
violator or property owner or both to appear before the Director to show cause why the city
Planning & Land Use
17-99
should not proceed with enforcement action. Notice of the possible violation and the time and
place of the hearing will be mailed to the property owner and any other interested person at least
ten calendar days before the hearing. The contents of the notice shall be as set forth in division
17.62.
At the hearing, the Director will consider the testimony of the city staff, the property owner and
any other interested person. The Director may make a finding as to whether or not a violation of
this chapter exists, and may recommend to the staff and to the property owner one or more
courses of action. The Director may, in his or her discretion, refer the matter directly to the
Planning Commission for a revocation hearing under section 17.80.050, or a notice of violation
hearing under section 17.80.060.
17.80.050 Revocation or modification.
A. General. If the Director or Planning Commission determines there may be grounds for
revocation of a conditional use permit, variance, design review permit, wireless communication
facilities permit, accessory dwelling unit permit, or other discretionary approval under this
chapter, the Director will schedule a revocation hearing before the Planning Commission.
B. Notice and public hearing. The city will give notice in the same manner required for a public
hearing to consider approval. The contents of the notice will be as prescribed by Division 17.62.
The hearing body will hear the testimony of city staff, the permittee, and any other interested
person. A public hearing may be continued to a specific date and time without additional public
notice.
C. Required findings. The hearing body may revoke or modify a permit or approval if it makes
one or more of the following findings:
1. The permit or approval was issued on the basis of erroneous or misleading information
or representation.
2. The use or the user is in violation of a condition of approval of the permit or approval,
including the terms of the use stated in the application, or other law or regulation.
3. The use is so conducted as to be detrimental to the public health, welfare, or safety, or
as to be a nuisance.
D. Modification. If the hearing body finds that grounds for revocation exist (under subsection C
above), it may, instead of revocation, modify the conditions of approval so as to eliminate the
reason for revocation.
E. Decision and notice; Effective date. The hearing body will render a decision and mail notice
of the decision to the permittee and to any other person who has filed a written request for notice.
A decision to revoke becomes final ten days after the decision, unless appealed.
Planning & Land Use
17-100
F. Other remedies. The city’s right to revoke a discretionary permit or approval is in addition to
any other remedy allowed by law.
17.80.060 Notice of violation.
A. General. If property in the city exists in violation of this title, and the owner fails or refuses
to correct the violation, the city may record a notice of violation against the affected property.
B. Procedure; Recording notice. Before recording such a notice, the city will do all of the
following:
1. The Director will send written notice to the current owner that a violation exists and
request that the owner correct the violation within a specific, reasonable period of time. The
Director may, in his or her discretion, send more than one notice and conduct an informal
show cause hearing to discuss the violation with the owner. (See section 17.80.040.)
2. If the owner fails or refuses to correct the violation within the time specified, the
Director shall mail to the current owner by regular first class and by certified mail a notice
of intention to record a notice of violation, describing the real property in detail, naming the
owners, describing the violation in detail (including relevant municipal code sections), and
stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence. The notice shall
specify a time, date and place for a Planning Commission hearing at which the owner may
present evidence to the Planning Commission why the notice should not be recorded. The
hearing shall take place no sooner than 30 calendar days and no later than 60 calendar days
from the date of mailing.
3. The Planning Commission will hear the matter on the date scheduled. If, after the owner
and the city staff have presented evidence, the Commission determines that there is no
violation, the Director will mail a clearance letter to the current owner. If the owner fails to
appear, or the Commission determines that there is a violation, the Commission may, by
resolution, direct the Director to record the notice of violation with the county recorder. The
Commission's decision may be appealed to the City Council under division 17.78.
4. The notice of violation, when recorded, is constructive notice of the violation to all
successors in interest in the property, under California Civil Code sections 1213 and 1215.
C. Release. If the owner corrects the violation after the notice has been recorded, and has
notified the city in writing and consented to an inspection to confirm the correction, the Director
will record a release or cancellation of the notice of violation.
Planning & Land Use
17-101
ARTICLE 5. DEFINITIONS; MEASUREMENTS
17.90.010 Definitions
17.90.020 Measurements
17.90.010 Definitions.
In this chapter:
Abutting means next to, or against. It does not include a property across a street.
Accessory use. See Uses.
Adjacent means next to, or against. For notification purposes, it includes a property directly
across a street.
Affordable housing and related definitions. See section 17.38.020.
Americans with Disabilities Act or ADA means the federal act that prohibits discrimination and
ensures equal opportunity for persons with disabilities in employment, government services,
public accommodations, commercial facilities, and transportation, including amendments made
to the Act.
Basement means that portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade.
Bedroom includes any room with features generally characteristic of bedrooms, regardless of its
designation on a building plan. A bedroom has adequate privacy and meets the minimum size
and habitation requirements of the Building Code. It includes and is not limited to a room with:
(a) access to a full bathroom on the same floor or within half a floor, if the house has a split
level; (b) access to a full bathroom through a common hallway or other common space such as a
kitchen, living room and/or dining room. A bedroom need not have a closet.
Building means a structure for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or
possessions. See also Structure.
Nonconforming building means a building or structure which was legally established, but
which does not conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is presently located. See
division 17.50.
Building Code means the California Building Codes adopted by the city at chapter 5.
Business (license) tax. See chapter 10.
Day means a calendar day, unless stated otherwise. (See also section 17.04.080 regarding
extensions of time for holidays and weekends.
Planning & Land Use
17-102
City Code means the Piedmont City Code.
Conditional use permit or use permit. See division 17.68.
Daylight plane. See Section 17.90.020, Measurements.
Director or Planning Director means the City Planning Director or his or her designee.
Dwellings:
Accessory dwelling unit. (Formerly second unit.) See division 17.38.
Dwelling unit means a room or a suite of connecting rooms, which provides complete,
independent living quarters for one or more persons, including permanent facilities for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and which complies with all building code
requirements.
Guest cottage means an attached or detached accessory structure that is used for habitation
without payment or compensation. A guest cottage may not be used as an independent
dwelling unit. (See unintended accessory dwelling unit, section 17.38.030 D.1.)
Multi-family dwelling means a residential structure containing more than one dwelling unit
and designed to be occupied by more than one family independently of each other.
Primary unit means a principal single-family dwelling.
Rented room. See section 17.40.020.
Single-family dwelling or single-family residence means a residence for one family.
Short term rental. See section 17.40.020.
Fair Housing Laws means (1) the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. § 3601 and following)
and (2) the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Govt. Code § 12955 and following),
including amendments to them.
Family means the functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are an interactive
group of persons jointly occupying a single dwelling unit including the joint use of and
responsibility for common areas, sharing household activities and responsibilities such as meals,
chores, household maintenance, and expenses. If the dwelling unit is rented, this means that all
adult residents have chosen to jointly occupy the entire premises of the dwelling unit, under a
single written lease for the entire dwelling, with joint use and responsibility of the premises, and
the makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by the residents of the unit rather
than by the landlord or property manager.
Fence. See Measurements.
Planning & Land Use
17-103
Floor area. See Measurements.
Footprint. See Measurements.
Frontage. See Measurements.
Grade. See Measurements.
Ground floor is the floor level in a commercial or mixed-use building nearest the lowest adjacent
grade.
Hearing body or appeal body means the Planning Director, Planning Commission, or City
Council authorized under this chapter to hear a matter.
Home occupation. See division 17.44.
Improvement(s) means any building, structure, landscaping, or other alteration of the natural or
existing state of land.
Includes means includes but not limited to.
Kitchen:
Kitchen, accessory means permanent facilities for the purpose of food storage, preparation
and/or cooking, located on a single-family residential property, which are accessory and
incidental to a primary kitchen. An accessory kitchen includes, but is not limited to: kitchen
facilities or a wet-bar in a pool house, guest cottage, domestic quarters, or recreation room;
or a wet-bar or outdoor kitchen.
Kitchen, primary means the main kitchen facilities within a single-family residence or
accessory dwelling unit having permanent facilities for the purpose of food storage,
preparation and cooking.
Landscape; hardscape; open space:
Landscaping means the planting, irrigation, and maintenance of land with living plant and
other organic materials.
Hardscape surface means any non-landscaped surface where vegetation would not easily
grow. See Measurements at section 17.90.020.
Open space means an expanse of land that is essentially unimproved except for vegetation
and walkways.
Living space means space within a dwelling unit or accessory structure used for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, bathing, washing, and sanitation purposes.
Planning & Land Use
17-104
Lots; lot lines:
Lot means a parcel of land under one ownership.
Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets and with frontage on
at least two of those streets.
Interior lot means a lot not defined as a corner lot or a through lot.
Lot line means one of the boundary lines of a lot.
Rear lot line is the lot line most directly opposite the street lot line.
Side lot line means a lot line that is not defined as a street lot line or rear lot line.
Street lot line means a lot line along a street.
Through lot means a lot both the street lot line and rear lot line of which have frontage on a
street.
Person means an individual natural person, firm, corporation, association, organization,
partnership, limited liability company, business trust, corporation or company, or the authorized
agent of the person. It includes a governmental entity other than the city.
Reasonable accommodation. See division 17.78.
Religious assembly means a facility for religious worship and incidental religious education and
social functions, but not including a private school.
Residence. See Dwelling.
Rented room. See section 17.40.020.
Setback. See Measurements, section 17.90.020.
Short-term rental. See section 17.40.030.
Sign. See section 17.36.010.
Street means a public vehicular roadway. It does not include a public alley, or a private roadway.
(A list of streets is set forth in the Piedmont Design Guidelines.)
Structure; Site feature:
Accessory structure means a detached structure, the use of which is appropriate, incidental
to, and customarily or necessarily related to the zone and to the principal use of the lot or to
that of the primary structure.
Planning & Land Use
17-105
Deck. See Measurements, section 17.90.020.
Primary structure means the structure on a lot in which the principal use is conducted. It
does not include an accessory structure, site feature, underground facility, built feature listed
in Building Code section 5.2.2, on-grade improvement, or temporary handicap structure.
Site feature means a subordinate structure that is intended to functionally or decoratively
enhance a property and that is primarily used for recreation, decoration or as a utility feature.
A list of site features is set forth in the Piedmont Design Guidelines. Site feature does not
include an accessory structure, primary structure, or built feature listed in Building Code
section 5.2.2.
Structure means a built feature that is located or attached to the ground, and that is 12 inches
or higher above existing or proposed grade. Structure does not include fencing or retaining
walls. See also Building.
Structural change means a physical change in an exterior wall, an interior bearing wall, a
floor, or a roof.
Uses.
Use means the purpose for which a parcel or improvement is designed, arranged, or
intended.
Accessory use means a use that is appropriate, subordinate, incidental, and customarily or
necessarily related to a lawfully existing principal use on the same lot.
Conditional use means a principal use for which a conditional use permit is required. (See
division 17.68. See also wireless communication facility permit at division 17.46.)
Mixed use commercial/residential means a development that combines commercial and
residential uses and has both (a) ground floor retail, office or service commercial; and (b) a
multi-family residential dwelling. See Measurement.
Nonconforming use means a use that was legally established consistent with the zoning in
effect at the time of its establishment, but which does not conform to the regulations of the
zone in which it is presently located. See division17.50.
Permitted use means a principal use that is allowed as a matter of right in a particular zone.
Principal use means the primary use permitted or conditionally permitted on a lot.
Variance. See division 17.70.
Planning & Land Use
17-106
View means an existing significant view involving more than the immediately surrounding
properties or a view of sky, including, but not limited to, any of the following: city skyline,
historic landmark, bridge, distant cities, geologic feature, significant hillside terrain, wooded
canyon or ridge.
Wireless communication facility and related definitions. See section 17.46.020.
Yards.
Rear yard means a yard abutting the rear lot line, measured between the rear lot line and the
nearest point of the primary structure.
Side yard means a yard measured between the side lot line and the nearest point of the
primary structure.
Street yard means a yard facing a street, measured between the street lot line and the nearest
point of the primary structure. (Ord. 742 N.S., 05/2018)
17.90.020 Measurements
Building envelope is the physical barrier between the interior and exterior, typically a wall, floor,
window, skylight, clerestory, door, or other fenestration.
Building height is measured from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion
of the ground covered by the footprint of the building to the highest point of the roof edge,
penthouse, mechanical equipment, or parapet wall. Building height is not measured to the
highest point of a chimney or communications antenna.
(A + B)/2 = Building height
Coverage means the percentage of the lot area that is covered. Coverage may refer either to (1)
all structures and site features including their vertical projections to the ground except eaves,
sills, cornices, awnings that project three feet or less from the wall surface, (2) hardscape
surfaces, or (3) to both, as may be specified in the context. (See Design Guidelines.)
Planning & Land Use
17-107
Daylight plane means a height limitation that
when combined with the maximum height limit,
defines the maximum building envelope. A new
structure or addition must fall within this
envelope. The daylight plane is measured inward
toward the center of the property at an angle of 45
degrees from a point defined by its height above
grade and distance from the abutting lot line.
Deck means an expanse of wood or other material where any part of the horizontal surface is
greater than 12 inches above the ground directly below the point of measurement.
Fence includes a railing, free-standing wall, or a decorative element such as lattice, trellis, and
covered gate, or any combination of these features. Neither the trellis or any part of the fence
may be wider than 24 inches in the smallest plan dimension. A fence may be free-standing or
self-supporting.
If measurement "E" is less than 24 inches, the
fence and retaining walls are measured
together (e.g., A+B=Height).
If measurement "E" is greater than 24 inches,
the fence and retaining walls are measured
independently.
(e.g., measurement C would be independent of
A+B)
If measurement "D" is = 24" the improvement is
considered a fence.
If measurement "D" is > 24" the improvement is
considered a site feature.
The measurement and terracing of fences and retaining walls. See section 17.30.010.
Planning & Land Use
17-108
Floor area of a building means the sum of the gross horizontal area of the floors of the building,
measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls
separating two buildings, and includes, but is not limited to:
1. living space on all levels, including within a basement or attic;
2. elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
3. bay window or window seat that projects beyond the exterior wall in which a person can
reasonably stand or sit, even if the window or seat does not have a minimum ceiling
height of seven feet, six inches;
4. seventy square feet or more of contiguous non-habitable attic area that has permanent
access, a minimum ceiling height of five feet, and an average ceiling height of at least
seven feet six inches. Permanent access includes built-in stairs (even if they do not
meet all of the building code requirements), but does not include built-in or pull-down
ladders;
5. seventy square feet or more of contiguous non-habitable basement area that has a
minimum ceiling height of seven feet and at least 42 inches of the basement level,
measured from the basement ceiling, is above grade at the exterior wall;
6. enclosed porch or lanai, heated or not;
7. high-volume space that exceeds an average height of 15 feet, measured from finished
floor to the outer roof, is counted as two stories; and
8. area within a building used for commercial purposes.
Unless listed above, living space not considered habitable under the Building Code because
of window size, ventilation, access, ceiling height, heating, or electrical service (e.g.
unconditioned storage area) is not counted in the floor area, but if the space is actually used
for living, sleeping, eating, bathing, washing, or cooking, the space will be included, subject
to the interpretation of the Director.
Floor height is measured from the floor level of a story to the floor level of the story directly
above or roof surface directly above. See also Story.
Footprint means the total land area covered by all accessory and primary structures on a lot,
measured from outside the exterior walls and supporting columns or posts, except that the
following are not included in determining footprint:
1. The portions of any uncovered and unenclosed decks, porches, landings, or patios, not
including railings, which are less than 30 inches above finished grade and which project
no more than 36 inches from the footprint;
2. Uncovered and unenclosed stairways, including railings, which are less than six feet
above finished grade and which project no more than 36 inches from the footprint;
3. Eave or and roof overhang that projects up to three feet from the exterior wall surface or
supporting column or post;
4. Trellis, awning or similar feature that projects horizontally up to three feet from the
exterior wall surface or supporting column or post.
Planning & Land Use
17-109
Frontage means the length of a lot line of a lot contiguous with a portion of a public or private
street, whether or not the entrance to any structure on that lot faces the street. Frontage may
occur along a front, side, or rear lot line.
Grade.
Average grade means the average level of land on the surface defined as the shortest
distance between finished grade at the highest and lowest sides of a structure.
Existing grade means the level of the ground or pavement as it exists before it is disturbed in
preparation for a project.
Hardscape includes: a structure; paving material (concrete, asphalt, brick, stone, gravel, wood,
stepping stone or other similar walkway); swimming pool; or patio, deck, balcony, or terrace.
Hardscape does not include building eaves or landscaping. Nor does it include retaining walls,
fences, furniture, statuary, or other individual built features used in conjunction with landscaping
which individually do not cover more than ten square feet and cumulatively do not cover more
than 100 square feet.
Setback means the required distance that a building, structure or other designated item must be
located from a lot line. Setbacks are measured from the lot line to the footprint of the structure or
building.
Story means a portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper
surface of the floor or roof above. See also Floor height. (Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
Rev. 2018-06-06 (Ord. 743 N.S., 05/2018)
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-1
Chapter 18
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§18.1 Permit required to dig or remove any portion of street or sidewalk
§18.2 Depositing, etc., glass, tacks, rubbish, etc., on streets or alleys prohibited; removal required
§18.3 Cleaning, etc., clothes, vehicles, etc., on streets and alleys prohibited
§18.4 Doors in sidewalks
§18.5 Defacing, etc., sidewalks and curbs
§18.6 Obstruction of gutters; diversion of storm water; culverts excepted
§18.7 Fences and buildings not to extend over side walk or street
§18.8 Permission required to erect telegraph, etc., poles
§18.9 Trees, weeds, etc., near streets and sidewalks
ARTICLE II. CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS, DRIVEWAYS AND
PARKING AREAS BY PRIVATE CONTRACT
§18.10 REVOKED: Ord. No. 390 N.S., §4.
§18.11 Permit and Inspections; fees.
§18.12 Performance Bond Requirements.
§18.13 Same-Procedure if notice ignored or repairs not completed.
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATIONS
§18.14 Other than public utility-Statement to be filed; deposit.
§18.15 Same-Manner of refilling and resurfacing; cost.
§18.16 Refilling and resurfacing to be completed within ten days; exception.
§18.17 REVOKED: Ord. No. 417 N.S., §4.
§18.18 Statement and plat to be filed with superintendent of streets; permit.
§18.19 Refilling generally; recovery of costs when refilling done by City.
1 For state law as to authority of City relative to streets and sidewalks, see Gov. C., §40401. As to City streets
generally, see Sts. & H. C., §1800 et seq. As to authority of City to prescribe requirements relative to
maintenance of streets, see Sts. & H.C., §1921.
As to construction of sidewalks and curbs under Improvement Act of 1911, see Sts. & H.C., §§5870 to 5894.
As to Improvement Act of 1911, see Sts. & H.C., §§5000 to 6794. As to Municipal Improvement Act of 1913,
see Sts. & H.C., §§10000 to 10609.
As to special gas tax street improvement fund, see §§2.20 to 2.22 of this Code. As to erection of signs and
banners over streets, see §3.2 of this Code.
As to use of roller skates, coasters, etc., on streets and sidewalks in business district, see §11.12. As to driving
animals and vehicles on sidewalks, see §11.13. As to one-way streets, see §11.16. As to parking on sidewalks,
see §11.49. As to streets in subdivisions, see §§19.9 to 19.17.
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-2
§18.20 Depth of water and gas pipes in street.
ARTICLE IV. OBSTRUCTIONS OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§18.21 Barricades and lights around obstructions.
§18.22 Prohibited generally.
§18.23 Exceptions to section 18.22.
§18.24 Use of streets and sidewalks by licensed peddlers or vendors.
§18.25 Violations declared nuisance; removal by police.
ARTICLE V. REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF CITY SIDEWALKS AND
DRIVEWAYS
§18.26 Conditions apply to construction or repair.
§18.27 When construction required.
§18.28 Conditions of damage requiring repair or replacement.
§18.29 Procedure for notice to repair or replace.
§18.30 Violations.
§18.31 Driveways.
§18.32 Alternative action to §18.30.
§18.33 Preservation of Surveyor's Monuments.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 18.1 PERMIT REQUIRED TO DIG OR REMOVE ANY PORTION OF STREET OR
SIDEWALK2
No person shall dig or remove, or cause to be dug or removed, any portion of a roadway or
sidewalk or any public street, lane, alley or place used as a street, lane, alley or public ground,
without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from the superintendent of streets. (Ord. No. 2 N.S.,
10/33)
SEC. 18.2 DEPOSITING, ETC., GLASS, TACKS, RUBBISH, ETC., ON STREETS OR
ALLEYS PROHIBITED; REMOVAL REQUIRED
No person shall throw or deposit or permit or cause to be thrown or deposited any tacks,
broken ware or glass, dirt, paper, sweepings, ashes, shavings, filthy water, offal, straw, wood, stones,
earth, lime, manure, refuse matter or rubbish of any kind whatsoever into any street, lane, alley or
public ground in the City. The person having control of premises from which any of the aforesaid
articles shall be or may have been thrown or deposited, or owning or controlling any of the aforesaid
articles so thrown or deposited in any street, lane, alley or public ground or place used as a street,
2 As to excavations generally, see §§18.14 to 18.20 of this Code.
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-3
lane, alley or public ground, shall remove the same therefrom within twenty-four hours after
receiving knowledge of the violation. (Ord. No. 2 N.S., 10/33)
SEC. 18.3 CLEANING, ETC. CLOTHES, VEHICLES, ETC. ON STREETS AND ALLEYS
PROHIBITED
No person shall clean, scale or wash any clothes, carriage, wagon or other vehicle, or any
other thing tending to create a nuisance on any of the streets, lanes, alleys or public grounds of the
City. (Ord. No. 2 N.S., 10/33)
SEC. 18.4 DOORS IN SIDEWALKS
Doors in sidewalks used to cover an opening for an elevator, stairway or chute must be
kept in such a condition that they will not endanger persons or property. It shall be unlawful for any
person owning or in charge or control of any doors in sidewalks used for covering entrances to
elevators, stairways or chutes, or other openings in the sidewalk leading to the basement, to allow
such doors to remain open, except when such elevator, stairway or chute is being used for loading or
unloading or transferring of merchandise or material. (Ord. No. 199, N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 18.5 DEFACING, ETC., SIDEWALKS AND CURBS
No person shall cut, carve, hack, hew or otherwise injure or deface any bituminous, cement
or other sidewalk or curb on any public street, alley or public place within the City. (Ord. No. 2,
N.S., 10/33)
SEC. 18.6 OBSTRUCTION OF GUTTERS; DIVERSION OF STORM WATER; CULVERTS
EXCEPTED3
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain, or to cause to be constructed or
maintained in any gutter of any public street in the City, or to permit to remain in any such gutter in
front of any property owned by such person or under his control, anything of either a temporary or
permanent character which shall wholly or partly obstruct or divert any storm water which shall flow
or collect in such gutter, or which shall be likely to cause such obstruction or diversion; provided,
however, that nothing in this chapter shall affect the maintenance or construction of culverts at street
corners and street crossings under the supervision of the municipal authorities, or any gutter crossing
authorized by the Council. (Ord. No. 2 N.S., 10/33)
SEC. 18.7 FENCES4 AND BUILDINGS NOT TO EXTEND OVER SIDEWALK OR STREET
No person shall maintain, conduct or place, or cause to be constructed or placed on
premises belonging to him, or in his possession, or under his control, any building or fence which
3 In connection with this section, see §12.14 of this Code.
4 As to regulations for fences generally, see §17.4 of this Code.
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-4
shall extend over the line of the sidewalk or the street. (Ord. No. 2 N.S., 10/33)
SEC. 18.8 PERMISSION REQUIRED TO ERECT TELEGRAPH, ETC., POLES
No person shall erect or cause to be erected upon or in any public street, lane, alley,
sidewalk, sidewalk area, or other public place within the City, any telegraph, telephone or electric
light pole, or any pole for the suspension of electric telegraph, telephone, electric light or electric
power wires or cables, without first having secured therefor the express permission of the Council.
(Ord. No. 24 N.S., 5/10)
SEC. 18.9 TREES,5 WEEDS, ETC., NEAR STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
The obstruction of the space between the street curb and the property line in front of any lot
in the City in such a manner as to mar the appearance of such space, or interfere with or obstruct the
use of the sidewalk, or menace the public safety in case of fire, by trees, overhanging branches of
trees, weeds, grass or other vegetable growth, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. No.
52 N.S., 10/08)
ARTICLE II. CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS,
CURBS, GUTTERS, DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS BY PRIVATE
CONTRACT6
SEC. 18.10 REVOKED: Ord. No. 390 N.S., 8/79
SEC. 18.11 PERMIT AND INSPECTIONS; FEES
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed in the City, by
private contract, (other than a contract let by the City or permitted by resolution of the City Council)
any concrete sidewalk, concrete driveway, curb or gutter or any other concrete or related
construction whatsoever in the street area, without first obtaining from the superintendent of streets a
permit, in writing, so to do. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to cause an
inspection to be made of such concrete sidewalks, driveways, curb or gutter or curb cut, or any
concrete or other construction in the street area, to ascertain whether such work has been done in
accordance with the provisions of this article, and the permit issued therefor, or in accordance with
plans and specifications then on file in the office of the superintendent of streets. The superintendent
of streets shall charge an inspection fee therefor based upon charges listed in Table 3-A as set forth
in Section 5.2 of this Code. (Ord. No. 205 N.S., 1/59; Ord. No. 390 N.S., 8/79)
SEC. 18.12 PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIREMENTS
5 As to cutting, mutilating, etc., trees, see §12.12 of this Code. As to trees obstructing sewers, see §12.13.
6 As to excavations generally, see §7.1 to 7.16 of this Code. As to permit to dig or remove portions of streets or
sidewalks, see §18.1.
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-5
1. Right-of-Way Bond. Any contractor, person or entity desiring to perform any work
within the street right-of-way, including the sidewalk and parking strip, must secure a street right-ofway
bond, covering labor and materials and faithful performance, from the City to ensure that the
City sidewalk, curb, gutter and/or street are returned to the condition required by the City.
2. Failure of Improvements. Should such work break, disintegrate or otherwise fail to
comply with the provisions of this Chapter 18 or other provisions of the City Code, the Director of
Public Works of the City shall notify the contractor, person or entity making the deposit of such
break, disintegration or failure and set forth the location and amount of work to be repaired. Such
contractor, person or entity shall, within ten working days from the date of the notice, make such
needed repairs. If such repairs are not made within the designated time, such repairs may be made
by the Superintendent of Streets and the cost of such repair shall be paid for from the deposit on
hand with the City, demand being made for such costs by the Director of Public Works.
3. Sidewalk Bond. Before issuance of a permit involving the removal and replacement
of any City sidewalk, the contractor, person or entity desiring such permit shall first secure a street
right-of-way bond from the City in an amount to be set from time to time by Council resolution. The
bond may be either in the form of a cash deposit or of a surety company bond in a form and with a
bonding company acceptable to the Director of Public Works in the appropriate amount, or of an
interest bearing deposit in the appropriate amount, which deposit would be assigned to the City in a
form and with a depository acceptable to the Director of Public Works. The bond shall be retained
by the City for a minimum of thirty (30) days following acceptance of the work by the City at its
discretion for up to one year following acceptance of the work by the City.
4. Street, Curb or Gutter Bond. Before the issuance of a permit involving the removal
of the street and/or the curb and/or gutter, the individual and/or contractor desiring such permit shall
first secure a street right-of-way bond from the City in an amount to be set from time to time by
Council resolution. The bond may be in the form of either a cash deposit or of a surety company
bond in a form and with a bonding company acceptable to the Director of Public Works in the
appropriate amount, or of an interest bearing deposit in the appropriate amount, which deposit would
be assigned to the City in a form and with a depository acceptable to the Director of Public Works.
The bond shall be retained by the City for a minimum of one year following the acceptance of the
work by the City, and may be retained by the City at its discretion for up to two years following
acceptance of the work by the City.
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-6
5. Increase of Bond. At the discretion of the Director of Public Works, the minimum
amount of bond or cash deposit set from time to time by City Council Resolution may be increased
up to but not exceeding the maximum amount that shall also be set by City Council Resolution.
(Ord. No. 205 N.S., 1/59; Ord. No. 390 N.S., 8/79; Ord. No. 407 N.S., 8/80; Ord. No. 447 N.S.,
7/83; Ord. No. 504 N.S., 9/88)
SEC. 18.13 SAME-PROCEDURE IF NOTICE IGNORED OR REPAIRS NOT COMPLETED
If work is not commenced within ten days after such notice is given as provided in the
preceding section and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the
superintendent of streets shall proceed to cause such work to be done in the manner prescribed by
the City Council. (Ord. No. 105 N.S., 8/42)
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATIONS
SEC. 18.14 OTHER THAN PUBLIC UTILITY-STATEMENT TO BE FILED; DEPOSIT
Whenever any person, other than a public utility, shall for any purpose desire to make an
opening for the purpose of constructing a main line conduit and for laying pipe lines, such person
shall first file with the superintendent of streets a statement, in writing, setting forth the exact
location of the proposed opening, the surface dimensions thereof and the number of square feet
within the surface, and each such statement shall be signed by the person, by or on behalf of whom
the same is filed, and such person shall at the time of filing such statement and plat or diagram
deposit with the superintendent of streets the sum of money equal to one dollar per square foot of
surface which he proposes to open as shown by the statement or such other sum as the Council may
fix and determine from time to time by resolution. (Ord. No. 2 N.S., 10/33; Ord. No. 87 N.S., 6/39;
Ord. No. 206 N.S.,1/59)
SEC. 18.15 SAME-MANNER OF REFILLING AND RESURFACING; COST
When any opening shall have been completed, the refilling and resurfacing shall be done
by the street department of the City and under the direction and supervision of the superintendent of
streets, and the cost of the refilling and resurfacing shall be charged to the person, but such charge
and cost in any event shall not exceed the sum of twenty dollars. (Ord. No. 2 N.S., 10/33; Ord. No.
87 N.S., 6/39)
SEC. 18.16 REFILLING AND RESURFACING TO BE COMPLETED WITHIN TEN DAYS;
EXCEPTION
In the event that any opening shall have been made as provided in this article and shall
have been allowed to remain open for a period of more than ten days without special authority
therefor from the Council, the superintendent of streets shall cause such opening to be filled and
resurfaced and the cost therefor shall be charged to the person responsible for making such opening.
(Ord. No. 2 N.S., 10/33; Ord. No. 87 N.S., 6/39; Ord. No. 206 N.S., 1/59)
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-7
SEC. 18.17 REVOKED: Ord. No. 417 N.S., 3/81
SEC. 18.18 STATEMENT AND PLAT TO BE FILED WITH SUPERINTENDENT OF
STREETS; PERMIT
Whenever any person, including any public utility, shall for any purpose desire to make an
opening in the surface of any street, avenue, lane, alley or public way in the City, such person or
utility shall first file with the superintendent of streets a statement in writing signed by the person or
utility by or on behalf of whom it is filed, setting forth the exact location of the proposed opening,
the surface dimension thereof and the amount of surface area, together with a plat or diagram
showing the form and location of such proposed opening and shall obtain a permit therefor prior to
the commencement of any such work. (Ord. No. 206 N.S., 1/59)
SEC. 18.19 REFILLING GENERALLY; RECOVERY OF COSTS WHEN REFILLING DONE
BY CITY
When the work requiring any such opening as provided in the preceding section, shall have
been completed, the refilling of such opening shall be promptly done by the permittee, subject to the
inspection and approval of the superintendent of streets. The resurfacing thereof, if the area is less
than two hundred square feet, shall be done by the City and charged to the permittee at rates fixed by
the superintendent of streets. If such area is two hundred square feet or more, such resurfacing shall
be done by the permittee, subject to the inspection and approval of the superintendent of streets. The
fee for inspections required herein shall be fixed by the superintendent of streets from time to time.
(Ord. No. 206 N.S., 1/59)
SEC. 18.20 DEPTH OF WATER AND GAS PIPES IN STREET
The top of all water pipes and the top of all cables, wires and/or conduits and the top of all
gas pipes, which are laid under the surface of any street or roadway of the City, must be at least three
feet (3') below the surface of such street or roadway; provided that the top of any cable, wire, pipe
and/or conduit may be no less than 16 inches below the surface of the street or roadway based on the
following conditions:
1. At all times the top of any such cable, wire, pipe and/or conduit must be at least the
depth below the street or roadway required by the then current rules and regulations
of the California Public Utilities Commission, and must fully comply with any other
conditions and requirements of such rules and regulations; provided that if such rules
and regulations set a minimum depth for the cable, wire, pipe and/or conduit in
question, subject to a lesser depth if such lesser depth is provided by local law or
regulations, then the minimum depth permitted by local law in the City shall be
deemed to be 16 inches, provided the duct material itself, or additional top protection
installed, is in conformance with the applicable Public Utilities Commission regulations.
2. The owner of such cable, wire, pipe and/or conduit must execute and deliver to the
City a hold-harmless agreement with wording approved by the City, which
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-8
agreement shall bind such owner to hold the City harmless and defend the City
against any claims and actions whatsoever resulting from personal injury and/or
property damage and/or any other type of damage caused by such cable, wire or
conduit. Such hold-harmless agreement may be prepared in a blanket form to cover
numerous cables, wires, pipes and/or conduits, if the entity involved is a public
utility.
a. Such agreement shall provide that the owner of such cables, wires, pipes
and/or conduits shall have the responsibility to physically remove or relocate
them promptly upon the request of the City, whether such request is oral or
written, in the event City deems such removal or relocation is required for a
publicly funded project or for the public health, safety or welfare, all at the
expense of owner, and City may require that such removal or relocation be
done immediately if the situation so warrants. City shall have no liability
whatsoever for any such expense of removal or relocation or any other costs
or damages relating to such cables, wires, pipes and/or conduits so
necessitated by such publicly funded projects or the public health, safety or
welfare. In the case of a public utility operating pursuant to a franchise
granted in accordance with the Franchise Act of 1937 (Public Utilities Code
§6201 et seq.), the duty to relocate set forth in Public Utilities Code §6297 as
provided or hereafter amended shall be deemed to satisfy the provisions of
this Section 18.20.2.a.
b. If the owner of such cable, wire, pipe and/or conduit is not a public utility,
City may require the owner to insure the City against any claims or actions
set forth in subsection 2 above up to a maximum in damages of
$1,000.000.00, and to name City as an additional assured on any such
insurance coverage.
c. In the case of a public utility operating pursuant to a franchise granted in
accordance with the Franchise Act of 1937 (Public Utilities Code §6201 et
seq.), the indemnity provision set forth in Public Utilities Code §6296 as in
effect on December 31, 1982, or as hereafter amended, provided that any
such amendment shall be determined by the city attorney to be in keeping
with the intent of this Code provision, shall be deemed to satisfy the
requirements of this Section 18.20.2. (Ord. No. 2 N.S., 10/33; Ord. No. 445
N.S., 7/83)
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-9
ARTICLE IV. OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SEC. 18.21 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS AROUND OBSTRUCTIONS
Whenever any person shall erect or repair any building or other structure within the City
and shall cause or permit any building materials, rubbish or other thing to be placed on any public
street, lane, alley or sidewalk or other places in the City where people are accustomed to walk or ride
and whenever any person shall be engaged in constructing any sewer or laying any gas, water or
other pipe or conduit or making any excavation in and through any of the streets, lanes, alleys, high
ways and sidewalks or other places in the City where people are accustomed to walk or ride, whether
such work is authorized by the City or its agents or others, it shall be the duty of every such person
to protect, with a sufficient number of lights, the materials, rubbish, goods, wares, merchandise,
machinery, apparatus, heaps, excavations and other things caused or permitted by them to be or
remain in or at any of the places in this section mentioned and in such manner as to enable the same
to be distinctly seen by all passers-by and to maintain such lights from dusk until daylight during
every night which any obstruction of the character in the section mentioned is allowed to remain in
or at any such place, and every person who shall neglect the duty imposed by this section shall, in
addition to the penalty imposed by Section 1.7, be liable for all damages to persons and to property
growing out of such neglect. (Ord. No. 206 N.S., 1/59)
SEC. 18.22 PROHIBITED GENERALLY
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed anywhere upon any
sidewalk or roadway, anything which shall obstruct, restrict or prevent the use of any portion of such
sidewalk or roadway; provided, that this section shall not apply to the articles or things listed in
section 18.23. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 18.23 EXCEPTIONS TO SECTION 18.22
The following goods or articles are excepted from the provisions of Section 18.22:
(a) Goods, wares, merchandise or containers may be allowed on the outer one
third of the sidewalk for not to exceed one hour while in the actual course of receipt,
delivery or removal.
(b) Materials used in the construction or repair of any building or structure, together with
the necessary pedestrian walkways, barricades and warning signs, when permission
has been obtained from the proper City departments.
(c) Trees, shrubs and flowers with the necessary barricades when planted or maintained
either by the City or by private parties under rules and regulations of the park
department or authority of the Council expressed by resolution or ordinance.
(d) Poles, fire and police boxes, lampposts, parking, street directional or warning signs,
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-10
drinking fountains, hydrants, flagpoles or standards, decorations for public events,
sidewalk clocks, barber poles, refuse cans, book return receptacles, barriers and any
other similar installation; provided, however, that any such installation belongs to
the City or is authorized by this Code or other ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(e) Benches at such locations and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may
be prescribed by the chief of police.
(f) Mailboxes and armed forces recruiting signs that are placed in such locations that
they do not interfere with the normal use of the sidewalk by pedestrians.
(g) Newspapers and newspaper racks of a type and at locations approved by and under
such conditions as may be imposed by the chief of police.
(h) Anything for temporary noncommercial use at such locations and such times as may
be permitted by the police department under the following rules and regulations:
l. Any person desiring such permission shall make application therefor to the
police department specifying the object or thing to be used, the proposed time
and place and the purpose for which it is intended to be used, and such other
information as may be required by the police department.
2. If there are no prior applications for such time and place and the use of such
object or thing at such time or place will not create a traffic hazard, the
permit may be issued. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC. 18.24 USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS BY LICENSED PEDDLERS OR
VENDORS
Any properly licensed peddler or vendor may use the public streets and sidewalks of the
City for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise; provided, that such peddlers or vendors, in the
conduct of their business shall not stop, nor permit any vehicle used by them in the conduct of their
business to stand in one place for more than five minutes at any one time. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
SEC 18.25 VIOLATIONS DECLARED NUISANCE; REMOVAL BY POLICE
Anything placed or permitted to remain upon any sidewalk or roadway in violation of
Section 18.22 is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance and the police department is hereby
authorized and empowered to abate such nuisance by removing the same to the office of the police
department or the corporation yard of the City. (Ord. No. 199 N.S., 9/58)
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-11
ARTICLE V. REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
OF CITY SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS
SEC. 18.26 CONDITIONS APPLYING TO CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR
The following conditions applying to the requirements of construction and/or repair of
sidewalks and driveways within the City as more specifically set forth in other Sections of this
Article V of Chapter 18 of the City Code:
a. When the real property is developed for any use.
b. In conjunction with the issuance of any permit or aggregate of permits, within the
year preceding the date of application, in the amount of $5,000.00 or more on the
real property.
c. In conjunction with the sale of the real property.
d. When the property owner of such real property becomes aware of an unsafe
condition on such property.
e. When property owner is notified by the City of an unsafe condition on such property.
SEC. 18.27 WHEN CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED
New sidewalks and/or driveways must be constructed if required by the superintendent of
streets in the situations set forth in subparagraphs a, b, c, d, and/or e of Section 18.26 of this Code, at
the expense of the property owner. (Ord. No. 397 N.S., 3/80)
SEC. 18.28 CONDITIONS OF DAMAGE REQUIRING REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT
In the event a sidewalk and/or driveway is damaged or deteriorated, such sidewalk and/or
driveway may be required by the City to be repaired or replaced as follows:
a. If there is a vertical displacement of 3/4 of an inch or less of a sidewalk, such repair
may be required by the City of the property owner whose property touches, abuts or
comes closest to such sidewalk in question, in any of the situations set forth in subparagraphs
a, b, c, d, and/or e of Section 18.26 of this Code, or of any person or
entity, including utility companies and contractors, whose actions damage the
sidewalk.
b. If there is vertical displacement of in excess of 3/4 of an inch of a sidewalk, or if in
the opinion of the superintendent of streets any damage or displacement of the
sidewalk creates an unsafe condition, then such sidewalk may be required by the City
to be replaced by the property owner whose property touches, abuts, or comes closest
to such sidewalk in question, in any of the situations set forth in subparagraphs a, b,
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-12
c, d, and/or e of Section 18.26 of this Code, or by any person or entity, including
utility companies and contractors, whose actions damage the sidewalk.
c. In the event a driveway has a vertical displacement of 3/4 of an inch or less at any
point, such repair may be required by the City of the property owner whose property
touches, abuts or comes closest to such driveway in question, in any of the situations
set forth in subparagraphs a, b, c, d, and/or e of Section 18.26 of this Code, or of any
person or entity, including utility companies and contractors, whose actions damage
the driveway or driveway approach.
d. In the event a driveway has a vertical displacement of in excess of 3/4 of an inch at
any point, or if in the opinion of the superintendent of streets any damage or displacement
of the driveway creates an unsafe condition, then such driveway may be
required by the City to be replaced by the property owner whose property touches,
abuts or comes closest to such driveway in question, in any of the situations set forth
in subparagraphs a, b, c, d, and/or of Section 18.26 of this.Code, or by any person or
entity, including public utility companies and contractors, whose actions damage the
driveway. (Ord. 397 N.S., 3/80)
e. Any patching of vertical displacements with temporary or more permanent materials,
whether such materials are asphalt, an asphalt-concrete mixture or otherwise, shall
not be considered to remove such vertical displacements from the provisions of this
section 18.28 of the Code. Only replacement of broken sections of sidewalk with
concrete or other City-approved materials as durable as concrete in such a manner
that the replaced section of sidewalk is on a level plane with the adjoining sections of
sidewalk shall be considered sufficient to remove such displacements from the provisions
of Section 18.28 of the Code. (Ord. No. 397 N.S, 3/80; Ord. No. 440 N.S.,
4/83)
SEC. 18.29 PROCEDURE FOR NOTICE TO REPAIR OR REPLACE
Any repair, replacement and/or new construction of sidewalks and/or driveways shall be
required in the following manner:
a. A written notice to repair, replace and/or provide new construction shall be prepared
by the City, specifying what type of work is required, how it is to be done, the
materials to be used, the location of the work, and when the work must be completed,
and specifying the unsafe condition that affects the public safety, making such repair,
replacement or new construction necessary.
b. Such written notice shall be delivered to the property owner or to the person or entity
whose actions have caused the damage either by personal service or by mailing the
notice postage prepaid to the last address on the records of the City of a property
owner or to the address of the person or entity whose actions caused the damage, as
the case may be.
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-13
c. In addition, a copy of such written notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the property in question by the City, and such posted notice must be not less than 8
inches by 10 inches in size.
d. The written notice shall state that the work must be commenced within two weeks of
the date of the notice, and completed by the date indicated, and if it is not either
commenced or completed as set forth in the notice, that the superintendent of streets
may carry out the repair, replacement or new construction, and the cost of the same
shall be a lien on the property.
e. The property owner or his agent may within the two week period set forth in Section
18.29(d) file a written appeal with the city clerk at City Hall, which appeal shall set
forth any reasons why the property owner should be exempted from the requirements
of Article V of Chapter 18 of the Code, and which appeal shall be set at the next City
Council meeting that is at least seven (7) calendar days from the date the appeal is
filed. The Council at the appeal hearing shall hear all testimony and review all
documents submitted. In the event the Council determines that a special hardship
would arise due to the enforcement of the requirements of Article V of Chapter 18 of
the Code, then the Council may further place any conditions on such exemption that
the Council may deem proper. If the appeal is denied, the property owner shall have
an additional time added to the time for commencing and completing the work equal
the date the appeal was denied. (Ord. No. 397 N.S., 3/80)
SEC. 18.30 VIOLATIONS
If the work is not commenced or completed when required in the written notice under
Section 18.29 hereof, the superintendent of streets may carry out such work, either by City staff or
by contracting such work out to a private contractor, and the cost of such work, including labor and
materials, shall be paid or become a lien against the real property in question, as follows:
a. A notice of the cost of the work shall be given in the same manner as provided in
Section 18.29 hereof, and the date and time of a hearing before the Council shall be
included in such notice, specifying that the question of placing a lien against the real
property shall be considered by the Council unless the cost of the work has been paid
in full prior to the hearing.
b. At the hearing the Council shall consider the report of the superintendent of streets
on the work performed, and any protests which may be filed, and shall decide
whether the cost of the work or any part of it shall become an assessment and lien
against the real property, and the decision of the Council shall be final.
c. In the event the Council determines all or any part of the cost of work becomes an
assessment and lien against the real property, such assessment shall be collected as
provided in Article 3 of Chapter 22 of the California Streets and Highways Code,
Streets & Sidewalks
2/7/83 18-14
commencing with Section 5625, as such Article 3 may be amended from time to
time; provided that there shall be no limitation to sidewalk repair, but such
provisions of Article 3 shall apply to all costs of work required under Article V of
Chapter 18 of this Code and to the owners of real property to which such work
applies. (Ord. No. 387 N.S., 6/79)
SEC. 18.31 DRIVEWAYS
The term "driveway" as used in Article V of Chapter 18 of the Code shall include all
approaches, aprons or other portions of a driveway between the street and that edge of the sidewalk
located furthest from the street. In no case shall the requirements of this Article V of Chapter 18
apply to any portion of a driveway located further from the street than the edge of the sidewalk
located furthest from the street. (Ord. No. 387 N.S., 6/79)
SEC. 18.32 ALTERNATIVE ACTION TO SECTION 18.30
As an alternative to the provisions of Section 18.30, if the work is not commenced or
completed when required in the written notice under Section 18.29 hereof, the City may prepare and
record a written notice setting forth the address of the property, facts relating to the unsafe sidewalk
and/or driveway, and a statement that the repairs must be completed as part of any transfer of the
property, and that the owner of such property shall be liable for any personal injuries and/or property
damage caused by such unsafe sidewalk and/or driveway. (Ord. No. 397, N.S., 3/80)
SEC. 18.33 PRESERVATION OF SURVEYORS' MONUMENTS
It shall be illegal to remove, damage or destroy any surveyor’s monument located in a
sidewalk or curb within the City without immediately replacing it with a monument of equal
durability and visibility located in exactly the same location as the original surveyor's monument, as
provided in Business and Professions Code §8771, as amended from time to time.
A licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer shall file with the Alameda County
Engineer a corner record for every survey corner as provided in Business and Professions Code
§8773, providing a duplicate original to the City department of public works.
Where it is determined by City staff the "corner" or monument involved does not require
the preparation of a "Record of Survey," "Corner Record" or similar filing as required by the
referenced statute(s), a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer, authorized to practice
land surveying, shall file with the City department of public works a reproducible plan or drawing
showing the monument and its location in a manner and form approved by the department of public
works. (Ord. No. 432 N.S., 11/82; Ord. No. 437, N.S., 2/83)
Rev. 5/23/95
Chapter 19
SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
19.1 Title.
19.2 Purpose.
19.3 Application/scope.
19.4 Exceptions.
19.5 Exception – Lot line adjustment.
19.6 Exception – Waiver of tentative parcel map.
19.7 Owner-initiated parcel merger.
19.8 Consistency.
19.9 Reversion to acreage
19.10 Correction and amendment of recorded map.
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS
19.11 Definitions
ARTICLE III. RESPONSIBILITIES – ADMINISTRATION
19.12 Planning commission.
19.13 City council.
19.14 Public works department.
19.15 City engineer.
19.16 City clerk.
19.17 City attorney.
19.18 Conflict of interest.
ARTICLE IV MAPS – GENERAL PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
19.19 Regulations generally.
19.20 Summary of types of maps.
19.21 Designated remainder.
19.22 Public hearings – When required.
19.23 Public hearings – Notice.
19.24 Appeals.
19.25 Fees.
19.26 Time limit extensions.
19.27 Review by other agencies.
2
ARTICLE V. MAPS – TENTATIVE AND VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
19.28 General.
19.29 Form and contents.
19.30 Accompanying data and reports.
19.31 Preliminary soil and engineering geology reports.
19.32 Department review and referral.
19.33 Planning commission and city council review and determination.
19.34 Expiration of tentative map.
19.35 Amendments to an approved tentative map.
19.36 Vesting tentative maps.
ARTICLE VI. FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS
19.37 General.
19.38 Survey required.
19.39 Form.
19.40 Contents.
19.41 Preliminary submittal for city approval.
19.42 City engineer review and approval – Final and parcel maps.
19.43 City council approval – Final and parcel maps.
19.44 Filing with county recorder.
ARTICLE VII. DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS; DEDICATION
19.45 General standards.
19.46 Improvements required.
19.47 Dedication.
19.48 Deferred improvement agreements.
19.49 Improvement plans.
19.50 Subdivision improvement agreement.
19.51 Improvement security.
19.52 Construction and inspection.
19.53 Time of completion.
19.54 Acceptance of improvements.
ARTICLE VIII. RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS
19.55 Purpose.
19.56 Condominium defined.
19.57 Standards – General.
19.58 Site requirements.
19.59 Structural requirements.
19.60 Inspection and fees.
19.61 Condominium conversions – Purpose.
3
19.62 Condominium conversions – Application, procedures, standards.
19.63 Condominium conversions – findings.
ARTICLE IX. COMMERCIAL CONDOMINIUMS
19.64 Intent and purpose.
19.65 Definitions.
19.66 Standards.
19.67 Inspection and fees.
19.68 Condominium conversions.
ARTICLE X. CITY-INITIATED PARCEL MERGER
19.69 Purpose.
19.70 Criteria for merger of contiguous parcels.
19.71 Conditions of contiguous parcels permitting merger.
19.72 Procedure.
19.73 Unmerger.
19.74 Appeal.
19.75 Owner-initiated action.
19.76 Effect of nonprejudicial error.
ARTICLE XI. ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIAL REVIEW
19.77 Prohibition.
19.78 Penalty for violation.
19.79 Remedies.
19.80 Certificate of compliance.
19.81 Notice of violation.
19.82 Judicial review.
4
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 19.1 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Subdivision Ordinance” of the city.
(GC §66410) (Parenthetical references throughout this chapter are to the California
Government Code unless stated otherwise.)
SEC. 19.2 PURPOSE.
The purposes of this chapter and any rules, regulations and specifications adopted
under it are (1) to regulate and control the division of land within the city and (2) to
supplement the State Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and
survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all required maps, and the procedure
to be followed in securing the official approval of the city regarding the maps. The
regulations in this chapter are necessary to implement the city’s general plan and to
preserve the public health, safety and general welfare.
SEC. 19.3 APPLICATION/SCOPE.
The regulations in this chapter apply to the subdivision of land within the city and
to the preparation, approval and filing of subdivision maps. If there is a conflict between
this chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act, the Map Act prevails.
SEC. 19.4 EXCEPTIONS.
This chapter does not apply to:
A. The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar spaces within
apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks
or trailer parks; (GC §66412(a))
B. Mineral, oil or gas leases; (GC §66412 (b))
C. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the California Health and Safety
Code; (GC §66412(c))
D. A lot line adjustment between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the
land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel and where a greater
number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created; provided, that the
lot line adjustment is approved by the city under Piedmont Municipal Code section
19.5; (GC §66412(d))
5
E. Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or a
local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands is a party; (GC
§66412(e))
F. Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the State Revenue and Taxation
Code; (GC §66412(f))
G. The conversion of a community apartment project or a stock cooperative to a
condominium. However, the conversion is subject to the requirements of Sections
66412(g) and 66412(h) of the Subdivision Map Act; (GC §66412(g), (h))
H. The leasing of or the granting of an easement to a parcel of land or any portion or
portions thereof, in conjunction with the financing, erection and sale or lease of a
wind-powered electrical generation device on the land, if the project is subject to
discretionary action by the city; (GC §66412(i))
I. The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in
conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single
parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other city ordinances
regulating design and improvements; (GC §66412.1(a))
J. The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on
a single parcel; (GC §66412.1(b))
K. The construction, financing or leasing of a second dwelling unit under Government
Code Sections 65852.1 and 65852.2, but this chapter shall apply to the sale or
ownership transfer of such a unit; (GC §66412.2)
L. Leasing of agricultural land for agricultural purposes (the cultivation of food or
fiber, and grazing or pasturing of livestock); (GC §66412(k))
M. Subdivisions of four parcels or fewer for construction of removable commercial
buildings having a floor area of less than 100 square feet; (GC §66412.5)
N. The subdivision of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation
(defined in Public Utilities Code Section 230) which is created by a short-term
lease (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing); (GC
§66428)
O. Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or
land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for right-of-way, unless a showing
is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy
necessitates a parcel map. “Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency”
includes a fee interest, a leasehold interest, an easement or a license; (GC §§ 66428
and 66426.5) and
6
P. The leasing or licensing of a portion of a parcel, or the granting of an easement, use
permit or similar right to a telephone corporation exclusively for the placement and
operation of cellular radio transmission facilities, if the action is subject to
discretionary action by the city. (GC §66412(j))
SEC. 19.5 EXCEPTION – LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.
A lot line adjustment is a shift or rotation of an existing lot line between four or
fewer parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel and
where a greater number of parcels than originally existed are not thereby created. (GC
§66412(d)) (For owner-initiated merger of parcels, see PMC §19.7).
This chapter does not apply to a lot line adjustment provided:
A. No additional parcels are created, and the adjustment is limited to four or fewer
existing adjoining parcels;
B. The resulting parcels conform to the Piedmont Zoning Code, Piedmont Municipal
Code section Title 15 (Buildings and Construction), and the general plan. A plot
plan is required to determine conformance with these requirements;
C. The resulting parcels do not interfere with existing utilities, infrastructure or
easements;
D. Real property taxes have been prepaid;
E. The adjustment is approved by the director;
F. The owner prepares a deed and plat map. However, if a record of survey is required
under Business and Professions Code Section 8762, the owner shall prepare a
record of survey; and
G. The city approves a deed description and plat map or record of survey, and the
county recorder records these documents.
A complete application for a lot line adjustment will be reviewed for conformance
with this section by the city planner, the public works director and the city engineer. The
public works director shall approve or disapprove the application within the time period
allowed under the Permit Streamlining Act (GC §65920 and following).
SEC. 19.6 EXCEPTION – WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP.
A. The public works director may, but is not required to, waive the requirements for a
parcel map for the following: (GC §66428)
7
1. A division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent
domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees;
2. A division of property resulting from conveyance of land or interest therein
to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such
as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for
streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc. “Land conveyed to or from a
governmental agency” includes a fee interest, a leasehold interest, an
easement or a license; and
3. A division of property which has been merged under this chapter, the
Subdivision Map Act or any prior ordinance of the city.
B. A person requesting a parcel map waiver shall comply with the requirements set
forth in the city’s Subdivision Manual. To waive the parcel map requirements, the
director, in consultation with the city engineer, shall find that the proposed division
of land complies with requirements as to:
1. Area and frontage;
2. The city’s standard engineering details for improvement and design,
floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary
disposal facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection;
3. Other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this code; and
4. The city’s Subdivision Manual.
C. Whenever a parcel map is waived under this section, a parcel map shall be
submitted to the city engineer and director. If approved, the city clerk shall transmit
the map to the county recorder. If the county recorder rejects that map for filing, the
city shall rescind its approval of the map per the requirements of Government Code
Section 66466.
SEC. 19.7 OWNER-INITIATED PARCEL MERGER.
A. Owner-Initiated Merger. The owner(s) of contiguous parcels under common
ownership may merge the parcels without reverting to acreage if: (1) the ownership
and deeds of trust for the parcels are identical; (2) no streets or easements are to be
vacated; (3) one of the parcels is less than 5,000 square feet or does not meet slope
stability standards; and (4) the resulting parcel(s) comply with the general plan and
Piedmont Zoning Code, or substantially reduce the current non-compliance. The
applicant shall submit an application for merger by filing the following items:
8
1. Application, in a form provided by the city;
2. Filing fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council;
3. A current title report;
4. Legal descriptions of the resulting merged parcels, prepared by or under the
direction of a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized
to practice land surveying (except no separate description is needed in the
case of lots or parcels of a recorded subdivision or parcel map).
The public works director may waive the requirements for a tentative parcel map
under Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.6. The city engineer shall require the
recordation of a notice of merger (see PMC §19.72(E)). (GC §66499.20 3/4)
B. Owner-Initiated Merger and Resubdivision. Subdivided lands under common
ownership may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by
complying with all the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land. The
filing of the final map or parcel map with the county recorder shall constitute legal
merging of the separate parcels into one parcel and the resubdivision of the parcel,
and the real property shall thereafter be shown with the new lot or parcel
boundaries on the assessment roll. Any public streets or public easements to be left
in effect shall be adequately delineated on the map. The filing of the map shall
constitute abandonment of any public street or public easement not shown on the
map if a written notation on each abandonment is listed by reference to the
recording data creating the street or easement, and certified to on the map by the
city clerk or city engineer. Any unused fees or deposits previously made regarding
the original subdivision shall be credited pro rata towards any requirements for the
same purposes which are applicable at the time of resubdivision. (GC §66499.20
1/2)
C. Fees. The owner shall pay a fee for processing an owner-initiated merger or
unmerger as provided for in Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.25.
D. Inapplicability. The requirements and procedures of Piedmont Municipal Code
section 19.70 through 19.73 do not apply to the owner-initiated actions in this
section.
SEC. 19.8 CONSISTENCY.
No land may be subdivided or developed for a purpose which is inconsistent with
the city’s general plan, the Piedmont Zoning Code or other applicable provisions of this
code. (GC §66474)
9
SEC. 19.9 REVERSION TO ACREAGE.
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage under the Subdivision Map Act.
The procedures set forth in Government Code sections 66499.11 through 66499.20 ¾
apply.
SEC. 19.10 CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF RECORDED MAP.
After a final map or parcel map has been filed with the county recorder, it may be
amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map for any of the purposes set
forth in Government Code section 66469. The requirements and procedures of
Government Code sections 66469 through 66472.1 apply.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
19.11.1 Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this article govern
the construction of this chapter. The definitions in the Piedmont Zoning Code and the
Subdivision Map Act also apply and are incorporated here by reference.
19.11.2 Acreage. “Acreage” means a parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in
this title, and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously, or where
a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage.
19.11.3 Adjoining. “Adjoining” means touching or bounding at a point or line.
19.11.4 Alley. “Alley” means a public way to be used primarily for vehicular
access to the back or side of a parcel of real property that otherwise abuts a street.
19.11.5 Block. “Block” means an area of land separated from other areas by
adjacent streets, rights-of-way, railroads, public areas or the subdivision boundary.
19.11.6 City engineer. “City engineer” is the engineer of the city. The land
surveying functions of the city engineer may be performed by the city engineer if that
person was registered as a civil engineer before January 1, 1982 (R.C.E. No. lower than
33,966), or is a registered land surveyor, by a city surveyor if that position is created by the
city, or by another person authorized by state law to perform land surveying and
designated by the city engineer. (GC §66416.5)
19.11.7 City planner. “City planner” is the designated planner of the city in the
public works department.
19.11.8 Community apartment project. “Community apartment project” means a
common interest development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the
10
right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located on it. (Civil Code §1351(d),
Business and Professions Code §11004)
19.11.9 Condominium. “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting
of an undivided interest in common in a portion of the property together with a separate
interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final
map, parcel map or condominium plan. The condominium may be residential, industrial or
commercial. (Civil Code §§783, 1351(f))
19.11.10 Condominium manual. “Condominium manual” means the manual of
regulations related to residential and non-residential condominiums, on file in the public
works department.
19.11.11 Conversion. “Conversion” means the creation of separate ownership
interests in an existing building.
19.11.12 County. “County” means Alameda County.
19.11.13 County recorder. “County recorder” is the Alameda county recorder.
19.11.14 Cul-de-sac. “Cul-de-sac” means a street which connects to another public
street only at one end and is not planned for later extension.
19.11.15 Days. “Days” means calendar days unless this chapter or state law specifies
otherwise.
19.11.16 Dedication. “Dedication” means the transfer by a subdivider to a public
entity of title to real property or an interest therein, or of an easement or right in real
property, the transfer of facilities, the installation of improvements or any combination of
these.
19.11.17 Department. “Department” means the public works department of the city.
19.11.18 Design. “Design” means:
a. Street alignments, grades and widths;
b. Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and
grades thereof;
c. Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;
c. Fire roads and firebreaks;
e. Lot size and configuration;
f. Traffic access;
g. Grading;
h. Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and
11
i. Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of
the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or
implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan. (GC
§66418) (Ord. 1417 § 2, 1994)
19.11.19 Development. “Development” means the uses to which the land which is
the subject of a map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alterations of
the land and construction incident thereto. (GC §66418.1)
19.11.20 Director. Director” means the public works director of the city or his or her
designee.
19.11.21 Environmental Quality Act. “Environmental Quality Act” means the
California Environmental Quality Act and its implementing guidelines.
19.11.22 Engineering geologist. “Engineering geologist” means a geologist who is
certified in the state of California to practice engineering geology. Engineering geology
means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and
evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.
19.11.23 Final map. “Final map” or “tract map” means a map showing a subdivision
of five or more lots, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map
Act and this chapter (except as provided in PMC §19.20).
19.11.24 Flood hazard. “Flood hazard” is the threat of overflow stormwaters having
the capability to flood lands or improvements, transport or deposit debris, scour the surface
soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of channels.
19.11.25 General plan. “General plan” means the general plan of the city and all
amendments to it.
19.11.26 Grading regulations. “Grading regulations” means the grading, erosion and
sediment control regulations set forth in the latest city-council approved edition of the
California Building Code.
19.11.27 Improvements. “Improvements” refers to:
a. Street work, traffic controls, freeways, bridges, overcrossings, interchanges,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways, flood control or storm-drainage
facilities, water facilities, sanitary sewers and facilities, public utilities,
lighting facilities, landscaping and fences to be installed by the subdivider
on the land to be used for public rights-of-way, private streets and
easements as a condition of map approval; and
12
b. Any other improvements necessary to implement the general plan and as
defined by Section 66419 of the Subdivision Map Act. See also Piedmont
Municipal Code section §19.46. (GC §§66419, 66452.6(a)(3))
19.11.28 Improvement plan. “Improvement plan” means an engineering plan
submitted by a registered civil engineer showing the location and construction details of
the streets, roads, drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains and the pertinent
structures and other on-tract and off-tract improvements required for a subdivision, as
specified in Piedmont Municipal Code section §19.49.
19.11.29 Lot. “Lot” means a parcel or portion of land separate from others and
delineated or described as a single integral unit on a subdivision map or by such other map
approved under the Subdivision Map Act. (Assessor’s parcel numbers and assessor’s
parcel maps are created for the convenience of the county assessor and do not create legal
rights or control property rights under the Subdivision Map Act.)
19.11.30 Lot line adjustment. “Lot line adjustment” means a shift or rotation of an
existing lot line between four or fewer existing, adjoining parcels, where the land taken
from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel and where a greater number of parcels than
originally existed are not created, as provided in Piedmont Municipal Code section §19.5.
(GC §66412(d))
19.11.31 Major street. “Major street” means a public street which is identified as a
major street by the general plan. It is a street which carries the major flow of traffic
passing through or adjacent to a subdivision and for which the traffic entering or crossing
from intersecting roads and streets may be controlled.
19.11.32 Major subdivision. “Major subdivision” means the subdivision of land into
five or more parcels or lots.
19.11.33 Merger. “Merger” means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of
land under one ownership into one parcel, as provided in Article X Piedmont Municipal
Code section. (GC §66451.11) See also section 19.7 regarding owner-initiated parcel
mergers.
19.11.34 Minor subdivision. “Minor subdivision” means the subdivision of land into
four or fewer parcels or lots.
19.11.35 Parcel map. “Parcel map” means a map showing a subdivision of four or
fewer lots, or a subdivision for which a parcel map is authorized under Piedmont
Municipal Code section 19.20, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and
this chapter. (GC §66426)
13
19.11.36 Permit Streamlining Act. “Permit Streamlining Act” means Government
Code section 65950 and following, which regulates the timing of review and approval of
development projects.
19.11.37 Piedmont Zoning Code. “Piedmont Zoning Code” means Chapter 17 of the
Piedmont Municipal Code.
19.11.38 Planning commission. Planning commission” means the planning
commission of the city.
19.11.39 Plot plan. “Plot plan” means an engineering diagram that shows the
building layout, the position of roads, buildings, easements, rights-of-way, setbacks and
utilities with their respective dimensions and distances.
19.11.40 Private street. “Private street” means any street not a public street.
19.11.41 Public street. “Public street” means a street for which the right-of-way is
owned by or offered for dedication to the public and accepted by the city.
19.11.42 Public works department. “Public works department” or “department”
means the public works department of the city.
19.11.43 Public works director. “Public works director” or “director” means the
public works director of the city.
19.11.44 Registered civil engineer. “Registered civil engineer” means a civil
engineer registered by the state of California and doing work consistent with the engineer’s
authority under the California Business and Professions Code and the State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. (Business and Professions
Code Sections 6700, 8700)
19.11.45 Remainder. “Remainder” or “designated remainder” means that portion of
an existing parcel which is designated on the required map as not a part of the subdivision.
It is that portion not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. The remainder is
not counted as a parcel for the purpose of determining whether a final or parcel map is
required. A remainder of five acres or more need not be shown on the map, and its location
need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing
boundaries of the remainder. (Reference: PMC §19.21) (GC §66424.6)
19.11.46 Scenic easement or open space easement. “Scenic easement” or “open
space easement” means an easement granted to the public whereby the owner relinquishes
or limits the right to construct improvements on the land. (GC §51051, Civil Code §815.1)
19.11.47 Soil engineer. “Soil engineer” means a state of California registered civil
engineer whose field of expertise is soil mechanics.
14
19.11.48 Standard engineering details. “Standard engineering details” or “standard
details” means those standard details for public improvements prepared by the city
engineer and adopted by resolution of the city council.
19.11.49 Stock cooperative. “Stock cooperative” means a common interest
development in which a corporation is formed primarily for the purpose of holding title to
improved real property, and substantially all of the shareholders receive a right of
exclusive occupancy in a portion of the property. (Civil Code Section 1351(m), Business
and Professions Code Section 11003.2)
19.11.50 Street. “Street” means a strip of land which provides access to lots. Street
includes a public or private street, avenue, road, highway, lane, alley, court, square,
crossing or intersection.
19.11.51 Subdivider. “Subdivider” means a person who proposes to divide, divides
or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision. (GC §66423)
19.2.52 Subdivision. “Subdivision” means the division of land for the purpose of
sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. The land may be improved or
unimproved and is that land shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit
or as contiguous units. Property is considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by
roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes
condominium projects, community apartment projects and stock cooperatives. (GC
§66424)
19.11.53 Subdivision improvement agreement. “Subdivision improvement
agreement” or “subdivision agreement” means an agreement betweenthe subdivider and
the city, usually including financial security, to assure the completion of public
improvements after the approval of a final or parcel map. See section 19.50 of this chapter.
19.11.54 Subdivision Map Act. “Subdivision Map Act” is the provision of Division
2, Subdivisions, of the California Government Code, beginning with Section 66410.
19.11.55 Subdivision Manual. The “Subdivision manual” is a document available
from the city that contains procedures and further details regarding the subdivision
application and approval process, and other requirements.
19.11.56 Tentative map. “Tentative map” means a map made for the purpose of
showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing
conditions in and around it. (GC §66424.5) A “tentative parcel map” refers specifically
to that provided for a parcel map.
19.11.57 Vesting tentative map. “Vesting tentative map” is a tentative map for a
subdivision that has printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map” at
15
the time it is filed with the city, and is processed in accordance with Piedmont Municipal
Code section 19.36. (GC §§66424.5 and 66452)
ARTICLE III RESPONSIBILITIES – ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 19.12 PLANNING COMMISSION.
The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency regarding
subdivisions under the Subdivision Map Act. It has the powers and duties provided in the
Subdivision Map Act and this chapter including:
A. Making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed
subdivisions and either imposing requirements and conditions on the subdivisions
approved by the planning commission or recommending requirements and
conditions on the subdivisions to be considered by the city council;
B. For all subdivisions, making recommendations to the city council for approval,
conditional approval, or denial of applications for tentative maps, final maps and
parcel maps; and
C. Acting as the appeal board for decisions of the city engineer, city planner or
department. (GC Sections 66415, 66452.6(e), 66474.7)
SEC. 19.13 CITY COUNCIL.
The city council has the powers and duties provided by law and this chapter, including, but
not limited to:
A. Approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative maps, final maps, parcel
maps, and subdivision improvement agreements;
B. Accepting land or improvements which are proposed for dedication;
C. Acting as the appeal board for hearing appeals of planning commission actions
C. Approving parcel mergers;
E. Granting authorization to the city engineer for the acceptance of: (1) dedications for
subdivisions of four or fewer parcels; and (2) off-site dedications lying outside a
subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed;
F. Determining violations of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter;
16
G. Approving proposed street names; and
H. Establishing of any processing fees necessary to implement the provisions of this
chapter.
SEC. 19.14 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
The responsibilities of the Director of Public Works department include:
A. Processing of tentative maps;
B. Determining whether a proposed subdivision conforms to the general plan, any
applicable specific plans, and the Piedmont Zoning Code;
C. Approving, approving with conditions, or denying a request for a lot line
adjustment under section 19.5, in consultation with the city engineer and city
planner. In the director’s discretion, any such application may be referred to the
city council for decision;
D. Sending proper notice of proceedings under this chapter;
E. Collection of all required application fees and deposits;
F. Collection of plan check, inspection and development fees;
G Processing separate or concurrent applications for variance or design review related
to a subdivision.
SEC. 19.15 CITY ENGINEER.
The responsibilities of the city engineer include:
A. Establishing standard engineering details for approval by the city council;
B. Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the Subdivision
Map Act and this chapter;
C. Examining and certifying that final and parcel maps are in substantial compliance
with the approved tentative map; and the processing and certification of final and
parcel maps, reversion to acreage maps and amended maps, and the processing and
approval of subdivision improvement plans;
D. Processing and approval, in consultation with the city planner, of a waiver of
tentative parcel map, lot line adjustment or certificate of compliance;
17
E. Advising the city council of violations of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter.
F. Inspection and approval of subdivision improvements;
G. Review and approval of grant deeds for subdivision dedications which are outside a
subdivision boundary; and
H. Determining when applications are complete, under the Permit Streamlining Act
(GC §65920 and following).
I. When necessary to carry out these responsibilities, the city engineer may designate
and authorize a representative to act on his or her behalf. (GC §§66416.5, 66431)
SEC. 19.16 CITY CLERK.
The responsibilities of the city clerk include:
A. Certifying that the city council has approved, conditionally approved, or denied the
tentative map for a subdivision; and
B. Scheduling any appeal to the planning commission or city council.
SEC. 19.17 CITY ATTORNEY.
The city attorney’s responsibilities include reviewing and approving as to form all
subdivision improvement agreements and security liability agreements and insurance, and
the governing documents for a community apartment project, condominium, stock
cooperative, or conversion.
SEC. 19.18 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
When the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter requires the execution of certificate
or affidavit or the performance of an act by a person in his official capacity who is also the
owner, subdivider or an agent or employee of a subdivider, the certificate or affidavit shall
be executed or such act performed by some other qualified person authorized to act by the
city council.
ARTICLE IV MAPS – GENERAL PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 19.19 REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
Each subdivision created in the city shall conform to the regulations in this chapter.
18
SEC. 19.20 SUMMARY OF TYPES OF MAPS.
A. Tentative and Final Maps – Major Subdivisions. A tentative map and a final map
are required for a major subdivision, that is, a division of land proposed to be
divided into five or more parcels as determined by the city engineer and the
department. (GC §66426) However, a tentative map and a parcel map are required
for a major subdivision listed as one of the exceptions pursuant to Government
Code section 66426.
B. Tentative Parcel and Parcel Maps – Minor Subdivisions. A tentative parcel map
and parcel map are required for all minor subdivisions of four parcels or fewer (or
for major subdivisions excepted in Government Code section 66426). However,
maps are not required for:
1. The subdivision of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad
corporation, defined by Section 230 of the State Public Utilities Code,
which is created by a short-term lease terminable by either party on not
more than 30 days’ notice in writing; (GC §66428)
2. Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public
utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for
conveyance to such public utility for right-of-way, unless a showing is
made by the department in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that
public policy necessitates a parcel map. “Land conveyed to or from a
governmental agency” includes a fee interest, a leasehold interest, an
easement or a license. (GC §§66428, 66426.5);
3. A lot line adjustment approved under Piedmont Municipal Code section
19.5; (GC §66412(d)) and
4. A parcel map waived under Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.6. (GC
§66428)
C. Vesting Tentative Maps. Whenever this chapter requires the filing of a tentative
map, the subdivider may file a vesting tentative map instead. The procedures for
and rights of a vesting tentative map are set forth in Piedmont Municipal Code
section 19.36. (GC §§66424.5, 66452)
SEC. 19.21 DESIGNATED REMAINDER.
A. A subdivider of unimproved land may designate as a remainder that portion which
is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. The designated remainder
shall not be counted as a parcel for the purpose of determining whether a parcel
map or final map is required. (GC §§66424.6, 66434(e))
19
B. For a designated remainder parcel, the fulfillment of construction requirements for
improvements is not required until:
1. A permit or other grant of approval for development of the remainder parcel
is issued by the city; or
2. The construction of the improvements is required under an agreement
between the subdivider and the city; or
3. The city makes a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is
necessary for reasons of:
a. The public health and safety; or
b. The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly
development of the surrounding area. (GC §66424.6(a)(2))
C. When fulfillment of the construction requirements is to be delayed, the subdivider
shall record a declaration of restrictions approved by the city attorney, or an
agreement with the city, stating:
1. What the required improvements are; and
2. That the subdivider or a successor owner is required to complete them all
before the city will grant a permit or other approval for development.
D. If a designated remainder is subsequently sold, the subdivider or the owner must
obtain a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance. (GC
§§66424.6(d), 66499.34, 66499.35)
SEC. 19.22 PUBLIC HEARINGS – WHEN REQUIRED.
The planning commission and city council shall hold a public hearing on any
tentative map application.
SEC. 19.23 PUBLIC HEARINGS – NOTICE.
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, notice of a public hearing shall be given
as set forth in this section. (GC §§ 66451.3(a), 65090, 65091)
A. When. Notice shall be given at least 10 days before the hearing.
B. Contents. The notice shall include the date, time and place of the hearing, the
identity of the hearing officer or body, a general explanation of the matter to be
20
considered, and a general description by text or diagram of the location of the
property. The notice shall also include the following: “If you challenge the
proposed action in court, you may be limited to raising only those issues you or
someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice, or in written
correspondence delivered to the (planning commission or city council) at, or prior
to, the public hearing.” (GC §§65094, 65009(b)(2))
C. Manner.
1. Notice shall be given in the manner required by Government Code Section
65090 and Section 65091 which is summarized as follows:
a. Publication once in a newspaper of general circulation;
b. Mailing or delivery to the property owner and project applicant;
c. Mailing or delivery to each local agency expected to provide water,
sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services
to the project; and
d. Mailing or delivery to all owners of real property within 300 feet of
the property. If the number of owners exceeds 1,000, the city may
instead publish notice of at least one-eighth page in a newspaper of
general circulation.
2. In addition, the city may give notice in any other manner it deems necessary
or desirable.
3. If the proposed project is a conversion of residential real property to a
condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative, notice shall be
given to each tenant of the property. (GC §§66451.3, 66452.5(e))
D. Continued Hearings. A public hearing may be continued from time to time and, if
continued to a specific date, time and place, no new notice is required. (GC
§65095)
E. Appeal or Request for Modification. If a decision under this chapter is appealed or
if a subdivider requests a change in a condition of approval either before or after a
final or parcel map is filed, notice of the appeal or request shall be given in the
manner described in Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.23.
F. Staff Reports. A report on a tentative map by the department shall be in writing and
provided to the subdivider (and to each tenant in the case of a proposed
condominium, community apartment project or stock cooperative) at least three
days before any hearing or action. (GC §66452.3)
21
G. Costs. The subdivider is responsible for the costs incurred in giving proper notice.
(GC §§66451.3(c), 66452.3)
H. Substantial compliance with these notice requirements is sufficient. A technical
failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the
procedures in this chapter. (GC §65093)
SEC. 19.24 APPEALS.
A. A determination by a city staff member or the city engineer under this chapter may
be appealed to the planning commission. A determination by the planning
commission under this chapter may be appealed to the city council.
B. The subdivider or other person may file an appeal to the planning commission
within 10 calendar days after the action is taken by filing it with the city clerk by
the close of the business day on a form prescribed by the city and paying an appeal
fee. The subdivider or other person may file an appeal of a planning commission
determination to the city council within 10 days after the action is taken by filing it
with the city clerk by the close of the business day on a form prescribed by the city
and paying an appeal fee.
C. The hearing on the appeal shall be held by the planning commission or the city
council, whichever has jurisdiction, at the next available meeting within 30 days of
the filing of the notice of appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given as
prescribed in Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.23(E).
D. The appeal body shall make its decision on the appeal in writing within 10 days
after the hearing is concluded. (GC §66452.5)
SEC. 19.25 FEES.
An applicant requesting any service from the city under this chapter shall pay all
processing fees and deposits established by resolution of the city council at the time the
application or appeal is filed. The fees may not exceed the amount reasonably required to
administer this chapter. (GC Sections 66014, 66016, 66017, 66451.1, 66451.2, 66451.3,
66451.6)
SEC. 19.26 TIME LIMIT EXTENSIONS.
The time limits specified in this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act for reporting
and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the person or
body required to act. However, the city may not require a routine waiver of time limits
except as necessary to permit concurrent processing of related approvals or an
environmental impact report on the same project. (GC §66451.1)
22
SEC. 19.27 REVIEW BY OTHER AGENCIES.
A. Agency Within Planning Area. A local agency within the planning area of a
proposed subdivision may make recommendations to the city regarding a tentative
map if it does so in writing within 15 days after the notice and map are mailed by
the city. A local agency which desires to make such recommendations shall file
with the city a written request and map indicating the territory in which it wishes to
make such recommendations. (GC §§66453, 66455.1)
B. State Department of Transportation. The State Department of Transportation may
make recommendations regarding a tentative map if the proposed subdivision is
within one mile of a state highway routing and if the recommendations are
submitted in writing to the city within 15 days after the notice and map were mailed
by the city. (GC §66455)
C. School Districts. Within five days after the application for a tentative map is
accepted as complete, the department shall send a notice of the filing to the
governing board of any affected school district. The notice shall contain
information about the location, number of units, density, and other relevant
information. Within 15 working days after the notice was mailed, the board may
submit to the city a report and recommendation regarding the proposed subdivision
and its impact on the school district. Failure of the school district to respond within
the 15-working-day period is considered a recommendation for approval. (GC
§66455.7)
If the proposal shows an area for a public school site, the city shall notify the State
Department of Education. The notice shall include the identification of an existing
or proposed runway within a distance specified by Education Code Section 17215.
(GC §66455.9)
D. Water Suppliers. Within five days after a tentative map application is accepted as
complete, the department shall send a copy of the application to any public water
supplier that may supply water for the subdivision. Water suppliers may submit
their comments in writing within 15 days after the application was sent by the city.
(GC §66455.3)
ARTICLE V MAPS – TENTATIVE AND VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
SEC. 19.28 GENERAL.
A. This Article governs the form, contents, submittal and approval procedures and
requirements for submittal of tentative and vesting tentative maps. The same
23
tentative map requirements and procedures apply both to major subdivisions (five
or more parcels) and to minor subdivisions (four or fewer parcels) except where
stated otherwise.
B. A subdivider may file with the city a tentative map of a proposed subdivision of
unincorporated territory adjacent to the city in accord with Government Code
Section 66454.
SEC. 19.29 FORM AND CONTENTS.
The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department and
shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative
map shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The map shall be drawn to an engineer’s scale,
large enough to show all information clearly, but no less than one inch equals 100 feet.
The map shall contain not less than the following:
A. A title including the subdivision number obtained from the county recorder, and
type of subdivision;
B. Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and person preparing the map,
including registration or license number;
C. Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision;
names and locations of streets adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall be
indicated;
D. The recording or subdivision numbers of adjacent subdivisions and the names of
owners of adjacent properties;
E. Boundary lines of the city, school district, and other taxing districts when within or
contiguous to the subdivision;
F. Date of map preparation and map revision, if the map is revised after the initial
submittal to the city, north arrow, and scale;
G. A vicinity map showing streets, adjoining subdivisions, shopping centers, schools,
and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to
the community; and
H. Existing topography of the proposed site and at least 100 feet beyond its boundary
if undeveloped, and proposed changes in topography. The contours of the land shall
be shown at intervals of not more than one foot for ground slopes between level
and five percent, and not more than five feet for ground slopes in excess of five
percent. Elevations shall be according to U.S. Geodetic Survey datum, commonly
termed mean sea level;
24
I. Existing improvements to be shown include, but are not limited to:
1. Type, circumference and dripline of all existing trees; other significant
vegetation with a trunk diameter of four inches or more, measured 24 inches
above existing grade. Any trees or other significant vegetation proposed to
be removed shall be so indicated;
2. The location and outline of existing structures to scale identified by type.
Structures to be removed shall be so marked;
3. Existing drainage channels, culverts, irrigation ditches, wells and springs,
and the approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or
stormwater overflow, and the location, width and direction of flow of each
watercourse;
4. The location, pavement and right-of-way width, typical section, grade and
name of existing streets, highways and driveways within and/or contiguous
to the proposed subdivision;
5. The widths, location and identity of all existing easements; and
6. The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains
and storm drains within and/or contiguous to the proposed subdivision. The
approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated.
The location of existing overhead and underground utility lines and poles
within and/or contiguous to the proposed subdivision shall be indicated;
J. Proposed improvements to be shown include, but are not limited to:
1. The location, grade, centerline radius, arc length of curves, pavement, and
right-of-way width of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be
shown, including pavement widths, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, medians, and
slopes of cuts and fills. Proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated;
2. The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs;
3. The location, width and purpose of all easements;
4. The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by
more than four degrees;
5. Engineering plan and data showing the approximate finished grading of
each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed
building pads, and the top and toe of cut and fill slopes, to scale;
25
6. Areas to be used for public purposes or facilities;
7. Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use;
8. Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space;
9. The location and size of sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, and
storm drains, including all necessary provisions for handling water supply,
stormwater and sewage. Proposed slopes, approximate elevation, direction
of flow and type of facility for sanitary sewers, storm drains, and overland
drainage releases shall be indicated; and
10. A planting plan for slopes, erosion control, street trees, other landscaping
and fencing;
K. Lot numbers beginning with the numeral “1” and continuing consecutively
throughout the subdivision;
L. The name or names of any engineering geologist or soil engineer whose services
were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map;
M. The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and each
building site;
N. The approximate boundaries of areas subject to inundation or stormwater
overflows, the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses;
O. The size of the smallest and largest lots;
P. If the subdivider plans to develop the site in phases, the proposed phases and their
proposed sequence of construction; (GC §66456.1)
Q. Proposed street names;
R. Energy conservation information. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative
map is required, excluding a conversion, shall provide, to the extent feasible, for
future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision; (GC
§66473.1) and
S. The department may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the type
of subdivision does not need to comply with these requirements or if other
circumstances justify a waiver.
26
T. The department may require other drawings, data, or information as deemed
necessary by the department to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map
Act and this chapter.
SEC. 19.30 ACCOMPANYING DATA AND REPORTS.
At the time of filing, a tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data
and reports, if the same information is not shown on the tentative map:
A. A statement of present zoning and of existing and proposed uses of the property,
and any proposed zoning changes, whether immediate or future;
B. A description of the proposed subdivision, including the number of lots, their
average size, and nature of proposed development;
C. A description of landscaping, fences, bridges, gates or other proposed
improvements which may not be fully shown on the map;
D. A preliminary title report, not more than six months old and acceptable to the
department, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map;
E. Soil and engineering geology reports as set forth in Piedmont Municipal Code
section 19.31;
F. A statement of the time when improvements are proposed to be completed;
G. Proposed tract or deed restrictions, if any;
H. Description, location and existing elevation of an established city bench mark or
other bench marks within the immediate vicinity;
I. Information as required by the department to allow a determination on
environmental review to be made in accordance with the California Environmental
Quality Act;
J. A signed statement of compliance under Government Code Section 65962.5(f)
indicating whether the proposed project is located on a hazardous waste and
substance site as defined in that section (see PMC 19.31(E)); (GC §65940)
K. For a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall also submit all of the following
information, unless a requirement is waived by the department after consultation
with the city engineer: (GC §66498.8)
1. The height, size and location of buildings, including elevations, and
2. Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put;
27
L. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the department or the planning
commission in order to review the tentative map; and
M. For major subdivisions, design review related materials as required by Piedmont
Zoning Code 17.20, the Application Materials Checklist, and the Subdivision
Manual.
SEC. 19.31 PRELIMINARY SOIL AND ENGINEERING GEOLOGY REPORTS.
A. Preliminary Soil Report. A preliminary soil engineering report prepared by a soil
engineer, based upon adequate test borings or excavations, shall be filed with each
application for a tentative subdivision map. The report shall include any
information appropriate for the site, including any information required by the city
engineer. (GC §§66490, 66491, Business and Professions Code §6736.1)
B. Preliminary Engineering Geology Report. A preliminary engineering geology
report prepared by an engineering geologist shall be submitted with each
application for a tentative subdivision map, unless waived by the city engineer. The
report shall include any information appropriate for the site, including any
information required by the city engineer. (GC §§66490, 66491)
C. Expanded Investigation. If the preliminary soil report or the preliminary
engineering geology report indicates, or the city engineer has knowledge of, the
presence of soil or geologic conditions which, if corrective measures are not taken,
could lead to structural defects, then a soil or engineering geology investigation of
each proposed lot shall be submitted with the final map. (GC §§66490, 66491)
D. Compliance Required. A tentative subdivision map application is not considered as
filed until the required preliminary reports have been submitted with the map (see
PMC 19.52).
E. Hazardous Waste and Substances Statement. Under Government Code Section
65962.5, the California Secretary for Environmental Protection is required to
consolidate information regarding land where certain hazardous wastes or
contaminants are present, and to distribute a list to each city and county in which
sites on the list are located. An applicant for any development project must consult
the list sent to the city and submit a signed statement to the city indicating whether
the project and any alternatives are located on the list. (GC §65940)
SEC. 19.32 DEPARTMENT REVIEW AND REFERRAL.
A subdivider shall file a completed tentative map application with the department.
The application shall include a sufficient number of prints of the tentative map as required
by the department, together with the filing fee established by city council resolution. The
28
city engineer, in consultation with the department, shall within 30 days after submittal of
the application, determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Permit Streamlining Act. (GC §§65943, 66452)
Within five days after the application is accepted as complete, the department shall forward
copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies and utilities which have 15 days
to submit their findings and recommendations in writing to the department. (GC §§66453,
66455, 66455.1, 66455.7; see PMC §19.27)
SEC. 19.33 PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL REVIEW AND
DETERMINATION.
A. Notice of Public Hearings. The department shall set a date for a public hearing
before the planning commission and/or city council, provide notice as required by
Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.23, and prepare a report with
recommendations. The department shall send a copy of the report to the subdivider
at least three days before the public hearing. (GC §66452.3)
B. Planning Commission and City Council Actions.
1. For all subdivisions, the planning commission shall make its
recommendation to the city council, within 50 days after the tentative map
was accepted for filing (accepted as complete under the Permit Streamlining
Act), for approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map; and
within 30 days after the planning commission makes its recommendation,
the city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative
map. (GC §§66452.1(a), (c), 66452.2)
2. The time periods specified in subsection (B)(1) of this section begin after
certification of the environmental impact report, adoption of a negative
declaration, or a determination that the project is exempt from the
requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (GC
§66452.1(c))
3. If no action is taken within these time limits or an extension mutually
approved under Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.26, the tentative map
is deemed approved insofar as it complies with the general plan, an
applicable specific plan, this chapter, including city-approved policies,
standards and requirements, the Subdivision Manual, the Piedmont Zoning
Code, and the Subdivision Map Act. (GC §66452.4)
C. Approval.
1. Before approving a tentative map or tentative parcel map, the city council
must first approve the design review application and any required variances.
29
2. The city council may approve or conditionally approve a tentative map or
tentative parcel map if it finds all of the following: (GC §§66473.5, 66474)
a. The proposed map is consistent with the general plan, any policy or
guideline implementing the general plan, other applicable provisions
of the Piedmont Municipal Code and the Subdivision Manual;
b. The site is physically suitable for the type of development;
c. The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of
development;
d. The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements will
not cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and
avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. (Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the city council may approve such a tentative map if
an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the
project and a statement of overriding considerations was made to the
effect that specific economic, social, or other considerations make
infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified
in the environmental impact report.);
e. The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not
cause serious public health problems; and
f. The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access
through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.
3. The city council may modify or delete a condition of approval
recommended in the department’s report, except a condition required by
city code. The city council may add additional requirements as a condition
of its approval. (GC §66474.10)
4. The city council may require that the subdivider defend, indemnify, and
hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, and employees from any claim,
action or proceedings against the city to attack the approval of a subdivision
under Government Code Section 66474.9.
D. Denial. The city council may deny approval of the tentative map on any of the
grounds provided by the Subdivision Map Act or this code. The city council shall
deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: (GC
§§66473, 66474, 66474.01, 66474.4, 66474.6)
30
1. The proposed map is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable
specific plan, any policy or guideline implementing the general plan
(including the city’s design guidelines), the criteria in the Subdivision
Manual or other applicable provisions of this code;
2. The site is not physically suitable for the type of development;
3. The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;
4. The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to
cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;
5. The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause
serious public health problems; or
6. The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with
easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of
property within the proposed subdivision.
E. Standards in Effect. In determining whether to approve or disapprove a tentative
map application, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and standards
in effect at the time the application was accepted as complete. The city may apply
ordinances, policies, and standards adopted later if (1) the subdivider applicant
requests changes in connection with the same development project, and they are
approved, or (2) if the city had formally initiated proceedings to amend the general
or specific plan, Piedmont Zoning Code or subdivision ordinance and published
notice of the proposed change before the application was accepted as complete.
(GC §66474.2)
F. Appeal. Any person may appeal a decision of the planning commission under
Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.24.
G. Form of Approved Tentative Map. Within 90 days after approval of the tentative
map, the subdivider shall submit a revised map to the department which conforms
to any changes required by the conditions of approval.
SEC. 19.34 EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAP.
A. Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map expires 24
months after its approval. The expiration of the map terminates all proceedings, and
no final or parcel map may be filed without first processing a new tentative map.
(GC Sections 66452.6(a), (d), 66463.5)
31
B. Statutory Extensions.
1. $178,000 or More of Public Improvements. If the subdivider is subject to a
requirement of $178,000 or more to construct, improve or finance public
improvements outside the tentative map boundaries (excluding public rightof-
way improvements which abut the property), each filing of a phased final
map extends the expiration of the tentative map by 36 months, not to exceed
a total of 10 years. The amount shall be adjusted for inflation each year after
2005 as provided in Government Code Section 66452.6(a).
2. Development Moratorium. The 24-month period of time specified in
subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during
which a development moratorium, defined by state of California
Subdivision Map Act Section 66452.6(f), is in existence up to five years.
(GC §66452.6(b), (f))
C. Discretionary Extensions.
1. General. Upon application of the subdivider submitted before the tentative
map expires, the city council may approve an extension of the tentative map
for a period or periods not to exceed a total of three years. No public
hearing is required. (GC §66452.6(e)) Ord. 681 N.S. 9/2/08
2. Pending Litigation. If a lawsuit involving the approval of the tentative map
is pending, the city council may, upon request, stay the approval period of
the map for up to five years. (GC §66452.6(c))
D. Improvement Plans Review. A tentative subdivision map remains valid during the
period that the review of subdivision map and improvement plans by the city is
underway, and the subdivider is actively pursuing approval of a final map.
However, under no circumstances will the map remain valid for a period beyond 12
months after the expiration date of the tentative map. In addition, if the city
engineer determines at any time during the improvement review period that the
subdivider is not actively pursuing the approval of the final map, as evidenced by
subdivider’s failure to adhere to time deadlines as set forth in guidelines
promulgated by the city engineer, the privileges granted by this section will end
and the map will expire, provided the expiration date of the tentative map has
passed. (GC §66452.6(d))
SEC. 19.35 AMENDMENTS TO AN APPROVED TENTATIVE MAP.
A. Minor Amendments. The planning commission may approve minor amendments to
the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval if:
32
1. The changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative
map approval;
2. No feature, facility, or amenity is deleted which substantially affects the
project’s quality, safety, or function;
3. Changes in plans do not reduce natural areas, create new visible retaining or
drainage structures, or substantially change pad elevations;
4. Changes in the design do not eliminate or add more units or lots; and
5. There are no resulting violations of this code.
Each amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved
tentative map and certified by the department. Minor amendments under this
subsection may include minor amendments relating to exterior elevations,
landscaping, interior floor plans with no exterior changes, or site circulation plans.
B. Other Amendments. Amendments to the tentative map or conditions of approval
which, in the opinion of the department, are not minor, or do not meet the criteria in
subsection A of this section, shall be presented to the city council for its
consideration and decision at a noticed public hearing. Processing shall be in
accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this
article. An approved amendment does not by itself alter the expiration date of the
tentative map.
SEC. 19.36 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS.
A. General. Whenever a tentative map is required, a vesting tentative map may be
filed instead. The words “vesting tentative map” must be printed conspicuously on
each page of the map. (GC §§66452, 66498.1 – 66498.9)
B. Procedures and Requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
procedures and requirements for a tentative map and subdivisions generally apply
to a vesting tentative map. The subdivider shall submit additional information at the
time of filing the tentative map as set forth in Piedmont Municipal Code section
19.30(K).
C. Development Rights.
1. Development Rights Created.
a. The approval of a vesting tentative map confers a vested right to
proceed with development in substantial compliance with the city’s
ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the city
33
determines the application is complete. If, before the application is
complete, the city had formally initiated proceedings to amend an
ordinance, policy or standard, the city may apply the ordinance,
policy or standard in its amended form if the amendment is in effect
on the date the city approved the tentative map. (GC §§66498.1(a),
66474.2(b))
b. The approval of a vesting tentative map does not confer a right to
proceed with development (including the specific number or
configuration of lots) if the development cannot be constructed in
conformance with the applicable ordinances, policies and standard
2. Duration of Development Rights. The right to proceed with development as
set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section continues for one year
following the recordation of the final map or parcel map. If a project
covered by a single vesting tentative map is divided into phases and more
than one final map is recorded, the one-year period begins for each phase
when the final map for that phase is recorded. (GC §66498.5(b))
3. Expiration of Development Rights. The right to proceed with development
as set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires if a final map or
parcel map is not approved before the vesting tentative map expires under
Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.34. (GC §§66498.1(d), 66463.5(g))
If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit
during the one-year period specified in subsection (C)(2) of this section, the
right to proceed with development continues until the building permit
expires. (GC §66948.5(d))
If a final map or parcel map is recorded based upon a vesting tentative map,
and the development rights expire, the final map remains in effect without
the development rights.
4. Extension of Time for Exercise of Development Rights. If the city does not
complete processing of an application for a grading permit or for design or
architectural review within 30 days of the date the application is complete,
the one-year period specified in subsection (C)(2) of this section is
automatically extended by the time exceeding the 30-day period used by the
city to complete processing. (GC §66498.5(c))
Before the expiration of the one year specified in subsection (C)(2) of this
section a subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a one-year
extension. (GC §66463.5(g))
34
D. City’s Right to Condition or Deny Approval.
1. This Article does not:
a. Enlarge or diminish the types of conditions which the city
may impose on a development; or
b. Diminish or alter the city’s power to protect against a
condition dangerous to the public health or safety. (GC
§66498.6)
2. The city may condition or deny a permit, approval, extension, or
entitlement relating to a vesting tentative map if it determines that either:
a. The failure to do so would place the residents of the
subdivision or the community in a condition dangerous to
their health or safety; or
b. The condition or denial is required to comply with state or
federal law. (GC §66498.1 (c))
ARTICLE VI FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS
SEC. 19.37 GENERAL.
The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of a final or parcel map shall
conform to the Subdivision Map Act and this article. (GC §66433). The final or parcel
map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed
land surveyor. The city engineer may waive a requirement of this article regarding map
contents and accompanying information if the city engineer finds that the requirement is
not applicable to the subdivision.
SEC. 19.38 SURVEY REQUIRED.
An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines,
centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied
into the survey.
At the time of making the survey for the final or parcel map, the engineer or
surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments, conforming with the standards of Section
8771 of the Business and Professions Code, so that another engineer or surveyor may
readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to
35
recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer.
The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1/20,000
for calculated closures.
SEC. 19.39 FORM.
The form of the final or parcel map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and
the following requirements. (GC §66434)
A. The final or parcel map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process
guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film.
Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed
upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface
shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. (GC
§66434(a), 66445(a))
B. The size of each sheet shall be 18 inches by 26 inches. A marginal line shall be
drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch.
(GC §§66434(b), 66445(b))
C. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals 20 feet or as may be
necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish
this end.
D. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the
map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet
shall be clearly shown. When two or more sheets including the certificate sheet are
used, a key sheet shall be included. (GC §§66434(b), 66445(b))
E. All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-eighth-inch minimum height
and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible in prints and other
reproductions made from the original drawings.
F. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line onesixteenth
inch thick, in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.
G. All dimensions shown on the final map shall be in feet and decimals of a foot.
H. All lines shown on the final map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision
itself shall be clearly distinguishable and any area enclosed by such lines shall be
labeled “not a part of this subdivision.” (GC §§66434(e), 66445(d))
I. There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of
bearings and the equation of the bearing to true north. The basis of bearings shall
be approved by the city engineer.
36
J. The final form of the final or parcel map shall be as approved by the city engineer.
SEC. 19.40 CONTENTS.
The contents of the final or parcel map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act
and as follows: (GC §§66434, 66445)
A. Title Sheet. The title sheet shall include:
1. The subdivision number conspicuously placed at the top of the sheet;
2. Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, acceptances of
dedication and notarial seals required by law; (GC §§66435, 66435.2,
66445(e)(i))
3. The date of preparation and the signed certificate of the subdivider’s
engineer or surveyor who prepared the map;
4. A certificate of dedication signed by those persons having any record title
interest in the land subdivided, if any land is to be dedicated for public use;
5. A certificate enacted by all parties having any record title interest in the
land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map;
and (GC §66430)
6. Certificates for execution by the city engineer and the city clerk.
7. A statement from the County Recorder/Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
that all taxes have been paid or a bond for taxes has been posted. (See
P.M.C. §19.43E.)
8. A statement that a geotechnical soils report has been prepared. (See P.M.C.
§19.31.)
B. Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and the location
of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been
previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The
following words shall appear in the title, “City of Piedmont, Alameda County,
California.”
C. Linear, Angular and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be
shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines,
the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel
which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish
37
the boundary. Arc length, radius, and total central angle and radial bearings of all
curves shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data
shown on the map.
D. Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments
shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at or on city engineer
approved offsets at the following locations:
1. The intersection of street centerlines;
2. Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on centerlines; and
3. Other locations as may be required by the city engineer. (GC §§66495, 66498)
E. Lots. Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall
continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous
lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which
event, lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last
number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the
map, unless approved by the city engineer. The subdivider shall show the area of
any lot on the map, calculated excluding the area within any public street or alley
(either existing or proposed) abutting the lot, but including the area within any
easements for other purposes (either existing or proposed).
F. Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be
identified by subdivision number and reference to the book and page of the filed
map showing such subdivision, and if no subdivision is adjacent, then by the name
of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the
last record owner.
G. City Boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be
clearly designated as shall locations of boundary lines of the school district or other
taxing districts adjacent to or intersecting the subdivision.
H. Street Names. The names of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, or highways
within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown. (GC §§66434(d), 66445(c))
I. Easements and Dedications.
1. Every easement and proposed dedication for road or street, path, water
main, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewer, utility or other public use as
may be required shall be offered for dedication to the public for acceptance
by the city or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map.
If at the time the final map is approved, a street, path, alley or storm
drainage easement is not accepted by the city council, the offer of
dedication shall remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any
later date, accept and open the street, path, alley or storm drainage easement
38
for public use. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder. (GC §66477.2(a); PMC §19.43(D))
2. The city may accept or reject (subject to later acceptance) a dedication lying
outside the subdivision boundary which requires a separate grant deed. The
offer of dedication and the city’s acceptance or rejection shall be recorded
in the office of the county recorder.
3. Every easement of record shall be shown on the map, together with the
name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the
conveyance, e.g., recorder’s serial number and date, or book and page of
official records.
4. An easement not disclosed by the records in the office of the county
recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be
specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant
tenements for which the easement was created.
5. Each easement of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map
with the widths, lengths and bearings of record.
J. Open Space Areas. Open space areas, may be shown, subject to the approval of the
city. These areas shall be dedicated as open space easements unless otherwise
specified in the approval of the tentative map
K. Statements and Certificates. Each certificate, statement and acknowledgment
required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter shall appear on the final or
parcel map and may be combined where appropriate. (GC §§66435, 66435.1 –
66443, 66445(e) – (i), 66447 – 66450, 66430)
L. Miscellaneous. The map shall also show:
1. The location and width of all existing and proposed easements;
2. The limitation, if any, on the right of access to and from a street; and
3. The location and width of nonaccess strips and reserve strips.
M. Deferred Improvements (Parcel Map Only). In a subdivision of four or fewer lots,
if fulfillment of construction requirements is being deferred under Piedmont
Municipal Code section 19.48, the parcel map shall contain a statement which
reads substantially as follows: (GC §66411.1(a))
Notice: Certain off-site and/or on-site improvements are required in connection
with these lots. (City of Piedmont File Number ______) No person may obtain a
building permit for any lot on this map until all of the required improvements are
completed or financial security has been posted with the city to assure completion
prior to building occupancy.
39
SEC. 19.41 PRELIMINARY SUBMITTAL FOR CITY APPROVAL.
The subdivider shall submit four sets of preliminary prints of the final or parcel
map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the
following data, plans, reports, and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer,
and where applicable, the city attorney.
A. Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by Piedmont Municipal Code
section 19.49;
B. Preliminary Engineering Geology Report. A preliminary engineering geology
report prepared in accordance with the city grading regulations and Piedmont
Municipal Code section 19.31;
C. Preliminary Soil Report. A preliminary soil report prepared in accordance with the
city grading regulations and Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.31;
D. Title Report. A title report not more than six months old, showing the legal owners
at the time of submittal of the final map; (GC §66430)
E. Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in a form acceptable to the city engineer
and city attorney, shall be issued by a title company to and for the benefit and
protection of the city and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording
of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is
necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided and all public easements
being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the
proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the
making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary;
F. Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. A signed deed for each required off-site
easement or right-of-way which has not been offered for dedication on the final
map and written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of right of entry or
permanent easement across private property outside of the subdivision permitting
or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the
maintenance of the facility;
G. Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements,
street centerlines and monument lines;
H. Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic
calculations for all drainage facilities;
I. Governing Documents. For a cooperative apartment project, condominium, stock
cooperative, or conversion, the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions containing the provisions described in Civil Code section 1353, and all
40
other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate under Civil Code
section 1363; for all other subdivisions, any declaration of covenants, conditions,
and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All governing documents are
subject to review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney;
J. Utilities. Evidence satisfactory to the city that the utility easements are appropriate;
K. Improvement Agreement. If the required improvements are not completed before
the presentation of the final map, the subdivider shall file an agreement in
accordance with the requirements of Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.50. The
subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the
requirements of Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.51;
L. Other Information. Additional data, reports or information required by the
conditions of approval, the city engineer or city attorney. (GC §66434.2)
SEC. 19.42 CITY ENGINEER REVIEW AND APPROVAL – FINAL AND PARCEL
MAPS.
A. Final Maps. The city engineer, in consultation with the department, shall review the
final map to determine if it conforms to the approved tentative map conditions, the
Subdivision Map Act, and this chapter. The subdivider shall make corrections and
additions until the map is acceptable to the city engineer. The subdivider shall
submit to the city engineer all of the required documents as set forth in the city’s
Subdivision Manual. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals and the
subdivider’s payment of required fees, the city engineer shall, within 20 days, sign
the appropriate certificate and present the corrected final map with accompanying
documents to the city council for its consideration and approval. (GC §§66442,
53077.5)
B. Parcel Maps. The city engineer, in consultation with the department, shall review
the parcel map to determine if it conforms to the approved tentative map
conditions, the Subdivision Map Act, and this chapter. The subdivider shall make
corrections and additions until the map is acceptable to the city engineer. The
subdivider shall submit to the city engineer all of the required documents as set
forth in the city’s Subdivision Manual. Upon receipt of all required certificates and
submittals and the subdivider’s payment of required fees, the city engineer shall,
within 20 days, sign the appropriate certificate and present the corrected parcel map
with accompanying documents to the city council for its consideration and
approval. (GC §§66463, 66450)
SEC. 19.43 CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL – FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS.
A. The date the final or parcel map is deemed filed with the city council is the date of
the council meeting at which the council receives the map. The council shall
41
consider approval of the improvement agreement and security, and completeness of
the tax certificate before approving the map. (GC §§66457, 66492)
B. Upon presentation of the final or parcel map, the city council shall approve the map
if it conforms with the tentative map conditions of approval, the Subdivision Map
Act, and this chapter. If it does not conform, the council shall disapprove the map.
The council shall make its decision at the meeting at which it receives the map or at
its next regular meeting. (GC §§66458, 66463(d), 66473)
C. The city council may not postpone or refuse approval of a final or parcel map
because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring
construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the
subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest in to permit the improvements
to be made. In this case, the city shall follow the procedure according to
Government Code section 66462.5.
D. At the time of its action on the final or parcel map, the council shall accept, accept
subject to improvement, or reject each offer of dedication. A rejected offer remains
open to future acceptance under Government Code Section 66477.2 and Code of
Civil Procedure Section 771.1. (GC Sections 66463(a), 66477.1, 66477.3)
E. Before the map is submitted to the city council for approval, the subdivider shall:
1. Submit a certificate from the county tax collector stating that all taxes and
assessments due have been paid pursuant to Government Code Section
66492; and
2. Provide verification that he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of
the county board of supervisors security for taxes and assessments pursuant
to Government Code Section 66493.
SEC. 19.44 FILING WITH COUNTY RECORDER.
Upon approval of the final or parcel map by the city council, the city engineer and
the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall,
subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map to
the county recorder. If the county recorder rejects the map for filing under Government
Code Section 66466, the city shall rescind its approval of the map. (GC §§66429, 66464,
66466) After the filing, the subdivider shall provide to the city a copy of the recorded final
map or parcel map and a microfilm copy.
42
ARTICLE VII DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS
19.45 GENERAL STANDARDS.
The subdivider shall design and construct all required improvements on-site and
off-site in accordance with standard engineering details and standard details and other
approved standards, as provided by this article and as adopted by the city. Subject to the
Subdivision Map Act, the city engineer may authorize an exception to the construction
standards in this Article.
A decision or interpretation by the city engineer regarding the specifications, details
or design of improvements is final unless appealed under Piedmont Municipal Code
Section 19.24.
No map may be presented to the council for approval until the subdivider either
completes the required improvements or enters into an improvement agreement with the
city.
19.46 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
A. General. All improvements required as tentative map conditions of approval or by
city ordinance or resolution, together with the required improvements set forth
below, are required of all subdivisions.
B. Frontage Improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate
adopted geometric section, including, but not limited to, street structural sections,
curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions. Transit facilities (bus
shelters, bus turnouts and bus pads) shall be provided on a collector street or major
street when requested by the local transit authority.
C. Storm Drainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and
conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be
designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm drain system shall
provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be
adversely affected by any increase in run-off attributed to the development. Off-site
storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement.
D. Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an
approved sanitary sewer system, designed for the ultimate development of the area.
E. Water Supply. Each unit or lot within the division shall be served by an approved
domestic water system.
F. Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas, electric,
telephone or cablevision facilities.
43
G. Underground Utilities. All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision
and along street frontages adjacent to the subdivision shall be placed underground
if the adjacent property has underground facilities. The city council may, in its
discretion, waive the undergrounding requirement and may then require a fee in
lieu of the undergrounding. The amount of the fee shall be determined by the city
engineer, based on the reasonable estimated cost of that portion of a future
underground project attributable to the subdivision. Any in lieu fees shall be
placed in a special undergrounding account.
H. Access. Every lot or parcel created shall have access to a public or private street.
1. Lots located on public streets in zoning districts other than residential shall
have a minimum frontage in accordance with the Piedmont Zoning Code.
2. Lots located on public streets in residential zoning districts shall have a
minimum frontage in accordance with the Piedmont Zoning Code.
3. Lots located on private streets are subject to the frontage requirements of
Piedmont Zoning Code 17.10.3, 17.12.3 and 17.14.3. The subdivider shall
submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade, and
material specifications of a proposed private street, the topography and
means of access to each lot, and the drainage, water supply, sewerage and
the utilities of the lots served by the private street.
4. Reserve strips, or nonaccess at the end of streets or at the boundaries of the
subdivision, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when required by
the city.
I. Monuments.
1. At the time of making the survey for the final or parcel map, the engineer or
surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with (a) the
standards described in Business and Professions Code section 8771 and (b)
the city standards, so that another engineer or surveyor may easily retrace
the survey.
2. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded if the
engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set by
a specified date and if the subdivider provides security to guarantee the cost.
3. Within five days after the final setting of all monuments, the engineer or
surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider and to the city engineer.
44
J. Other Improvements. Other improvements such as street lights, fire hydrants, signs,
street trees and landscaping, or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, are required as
determined by the city engineer in accordance with this chapter and city standards
and specifications.
SEC. 19.47 DEDICATION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS.
A. Every street, alley, walkway, drainage channel, reserve strip (or waiver of access
rights), easement, and other right-of-way shown on the final or parcel map intended
for public use shall be offered for dedication at the time the final or parcel map is
filed. (GC §§66475, 66476, 66477.1, 66477.2, 66477.3)
B. When property is dedicated in fee for public purposes, other than for open space,
parks or schools, the city shall record with the county recorder a certificate,
attached to the map, which contains:
1. The name and address of the subdivider;
2. A legal description of the dedicated property; and
3. A statement that the city shall reconvey the property if the city determines
that the public purpose or the need for the property no longer exists. (GC
§66477.5)
C. The subdivider shall provide rights-of-way and easements for all on-site and offsite
streets, utilities, sidewalks and appurtenant landscaping. The subdivider shall
pay all acquisition costs.
D. If any off-site rights-of-way or easements are required:
1. The subdivider shall enter into the city’s standard right-of-way agreement
which specifies how and when the necessary title to an interest in the land
shall be acquired. The subdivider shall enter into this agreement before the
first plan check of the map and improvement plans are submitted to the city.
2. Before city council approval of the final map, one of the following must
have occurred:
a. The city has received signed deeds for all off-site rights-of-way and
easements; or
b. The subdivider has executed the standard city contract for real
property acquisition and deposited the estimated acquisition costs
into a city trust account, and the subdivider has formally requested
and the city council has approved a resolution of intent to use its
45
powers of condemnation to acquire the rights-of-way and/or
easements.
SEC. 19.48 DEFERRED IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS.
A. Minor Subdivisions. When improvements are deferred, the owner of the real
property shall enter into an agreement with the city in a form acceptable to the city
engineer and city attorney for the installation of all frontage improvements at a time
in the future as specified by the city. The agreement shall provide that: (GC
§66411.1)
1. The owner shall begin construction of improvements within 90 days of the
receipt of the notice to proceed from the city, or as mutually agreed upon in
writing;
2. In the event of a default by the owner, the city is authorized to cause
construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the
owner, including interest from the date of notice of the cost and expense
until paid. The interest rate shall be consistent with the requirements of
Article 15, Section 1 of the California State Constitution;
3. The agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the expense of
the owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of title to
the real property of the obligations set forth therein, and shall also constitute
a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including
interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in
payment. The obligations under the agreement shall run with the property
and constitute a lien against it; and
4. In the event of litigation occasioned by default of the owner, the owner
agrees to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys’ fees. Those
costs shall become a part of the lien against the real property.
The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to this chapter and all applicable
provisions of this code in effect at the time of construction.
B. Remainder. For a designated remainder parcel, the fulfillment of construction
requirements for improvements is not required until the city is ready to issue a
permit or other grant of approval for development of the remainder parcel or until
the construction of the improvements is required under an agreement between the
subdivider and the city. In the absence of an agreement, the city may require
fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following
approval of the final map and before the issuance of a permit or other grant of
approval for the development of a remainder parcel upon a finding by the city that
46
fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: (GC
§66424.6)
1. The public health and safety; or
2. The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly
development of the surrounding area.
If a designated remainder is subsequently sold, the owner must obtain a certificate of
compliance or conditional certificate of compliance from the department before
development occurs.
19.49 IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
A. General. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by
a registered civil engineer and shall conform to the conditions of approval and to
the standard engineering details of the city. Improvement plans shall include those
improvements specified in Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.46. (GC §66456.2)
B. Form and Contents. The form and contents of the improvement plans shall conform
to the Subdivision Manual .
C. Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and
calculations, bond or other security estimates and any structural calculations as may
be required shall be submitted with the improvement plans. All calculations shall
be legible, systematic, signed and dated by a registered civil engineer and in a form
approved by the city engineer.
D. Filing – Review by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit copies of the
preliminary improvement plans and all computations to the city engineer for
review. Upon completion of the review, one set of the preliminary plans, with any
required revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider. If any revisions are
necessary, the subdivider shall submit the corrected improvement plans and
computations to the city engineer. The city engineer shall act on the improvement
plans within 60 working days of its submittal, plus extensions agreed to or
necessitated by corrections, as provided in Government Code section 66456.2. (GC
§66456.2)
E. Approval by the City Engineer.
1. After the subdivider has completed all required revisions, the subdivider
shall transmit the corrected originals of the improvement plans to the city
engineer for signature.
47
2. Upon finding that the required revisions have been made and that the plans
conform to all applicable city ordinances and plans, design requirements
and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign
and date the plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider.
Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of
the gas, electric, telephone, and cable television service construction plans.
3. Approval by the city engineer in no way relieves the subdivider or the
subdivider’s engineer from responsibility for the design of the
improvements or for deficiencies resulting from the design or from any
required conditions of approval of the tentative map.
4. The approval of the improvement plans by the city engineer, or the city
engineer’s certification that no improvements are required, is a condition
precedent to the approval of the final or parcel map of the subdivision.
F. Revision to Approved Plans.
1. By Subdivider. A request by the subdivider for a revision to the approved
plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be
submitted in writing to the city engineer and shall be accompanied by
revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is
acceptable to the city engineer and is consistent with the tentative map, the
original shall be submitted to the city engineer’s office for initialing. The
original shall be returned to the subdivider, and the revised plans shall be
immediately transmitted to the city engineer. Construction of any proposed
revision may not begin until the city engineer receives and approves revised
plans.
2. Plan Checking and Insertion Costs for Revisions. Costs incurred by the city
for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of
revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider in accord
with the schedule of fees adopted in accord with Piedmont Municipal Code
section 19.25. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised
plans and applied toward the costs. (GC §66456.2)
SEC. 19.50 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT.
Before a final map or parcel map is approved by the city council, the subdivider
shall submit a signed subdivision improvement agreement assuring the completion of
improvements within a specified time and payment for them. The agreement will be based
on the city’s standard form of subdivision improvement agreement and shall include (but is
not limited to): the developer’s promise to complete certain improvements and to perform
repairs or corrective work for one year after acceptance by the city; the time of completion;
special conditions; insurance requirements and improvement security requirements for
48
faithful performance, labor and materials and warranty period; and a promise to pay the
city’s legal fees if the subdivision approval is challenged. (GC §§66462, 66474.9)
The subdivision improvement agreement must be approved as to form by the city
attorney. The executed improvement agreement shall be recorded in the office of the
county recorder and shall bind the subdivider’s successors-in-interest.
SEC. 19.51 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY.
A. General. An improvement agreement, contract, or act required or authorized by the
Subdivision Map Act or this chapter for which security is required shall be secured
in accord with Section 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in
this section, and subject to city attorney approval.
B. Amount of Security.
1. The subdivider shall provide a bond or other security in the amounts set
forth. In all cases, “improvements” are those defined at Section 19.11.27:
a. 100% of the total estimated construction costs to guarantee the
construction or installation of all improvements;
b. 100% of the estimated construction cost to guarantee payment to
subdivider’s contractor, and to subcontractors and to persons
furnishing labor, materials, or equipment for the construction or
installation of improvements; and
c. 15% of the cost of the improvements to guarantee the improvements
against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials used
in the performance of the improvements for the warranty period of
one year following completion and acceptance of the improvements
warranty security. The security for this warranty period may be
provided either (a) at the time of signing the subdivision
improvement agreement or (b) when the construction is completed,
before the city accepts the improvements or releases the
performance security, at the subdivider’s option. (GC §66499.3(d))
d. a cash deposit in an amount determined by the city engineer, not to
exceed 1% of the total construction cost. The deposit may be used
at the discretion of the city to correct deficiencies and conditions
caused by the subdivider, contractor or subcontractors that may arise
during or after construction of the subdivision. Any unexpended
amount will be returned to the subdivider when all bonds and other
security are released.
49
2. As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security, and in addition to the
full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable
expenses and fees, including attorneys’ fees, incurred by the city in
enforcing the obligations secured. (GC §§66499.3, 66499.4)
3. The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the city
engineer and shall provide for:
a. Total construction costs;
b. 10% of the total construction cost for contingencies;
c. Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated end of
construction;
d. All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the city
engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been
deposited to ensure installation; and
e. Enforcement costs calculated as $25,000 or five percent of the
estimated construction cost, whichever is greater. These
enforcement costs are not added if the bond language includes
enforcement costs in addition to the face amount of the bond.
C. Forms of Security. The form of security shall be one or a combination of the
following at the option of and subject to the approval of the city attorney:
1. A bond by an insurer admitted to transact surety insurance in the state of
California. The form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with
Sections 66499.1, 66499.2, 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the Subdivision Map
Act;
2. A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust
company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind
approved for securing deposits of public moneys;
3. An irrevocable letter of credit from one or more financial institutions
regulated by the state or federal government pledging that the funds
necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed
for payment and will be released only upon receipt of written instructions
from the city. (The form of the letter must be approved by the city attorney);
4. An instrument of credit from an agency of the state, federal or local
government when any agency of the state, federal or local government
50
provides at least 20 percent of the financing of the portion of the project
requiring security; (GC §66499(a))
5. A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the
owner and the city, if the city finds that it would not be in the public interest
to require the installation of the required improvement sooner than two
years after the recordation of the map; the lien shall conform to Government
Code Section 66499(b);
6. A deed of trust which shall be recorded in the Alameda County recorder’s
office and which conforms to Government Code Section 66499(b); or
7. Any other comparable form of security, acceptable to the city, as provided
in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act.
D. Release of Improvement Security.
1. Performance Security. The city shall release performance security only
upon acceptance of all improvements by the city. (GC §§66499.7 (a),
66499.8)
2. Material and Labor Security. The city shall reduce security given to secure
payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor,
materials or equipment, six months after the completion and acceptance of
improvements by the city, to an amount equal to the amount of all claims
filed and of which notice has been given to the city. The city shall release
the balance of the security upon the settlement of all claims and obligations
for which the security was given. (GC §66499.7(b))
3. Warranty Security. The city shall release the warranty security upon
satisfactory completion of the warranty period; provided:
a. All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the
subdivision have been corrected; and
b. Not less than 12 months has elapsed since the acceptance of the
improvements by the city. (GC §§66499.3(d), 66499.7, 66499.9)
SEC. 19.52 CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION.
A. The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the
conditions of approval, standard engineering details and are subject to inspection
and approval by the city engineer. Construction shall not begin until all required
improvement plans are approved by the city engineer. Grading plans must conform
to submitted improvement plans.
51
B. A final report acceptable to the city engineer shall be prepared for each preliminary
soil engineering report and for each preliminary engineering geology report. Each
final report shall be submitted at the completion of the grading work, prior to the
release of grading bonds, and prior to issuance of building permits. Each final
report shall contain complete field data to indicate full compliance with the
preliminary report and subsequent recommendations based on new information
acquired during construction. The soil engineer shall provide written approval as to
the adequacy of the site for the intended use based on soil engineering factors. The
engineering geologist shall provide written approval as to the adequacy of the site
for the intended use as affected by geologic factors. (GC §§66490, 66491)
C. The subdivider shall notify the city engineer two full working day before beginning
any work. All work done in constructing the improvements and all materials
furnished shall be subject to the inspection of the city engineer. The city engineer
shall have access to the work at all times during its construction and shall be
furnished with every reasonable facility for ascertaining that the materials used and
the workmanship are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. If any of
the work on improvements is done by the divider before the inspection of the
improvements as required by the city engineer, the city engineer may reject that
work, and it is deemed to have been done at the risk of the subdivider.
D. The subdivider shall prosecute the work to completion without undue delay except
for inclement weather or other reasonable cause. If there is a delay in completion of
the work beyond the period stated in the subdivision agreement, unless an
extension is approved by the city council and the surety company, the city council
may take appropriate steps to use the security to complete the work.
E. The city engineer shall also inspect private streets and the utility systems
improvements for conformance with this code, the Piedmont Zoning Code, and the
city’s standard engineering details.
SEC. 19.53 TIME OF COMPLETION.
A. Completion.
1. The subdivider shall complete the improvements for a subdivision within 12
months from the recording of the final or parcel map, unless (1) an
extension is granted by the city council, or (2) Government Code section
66411.1 applies.
2. If the subdivider fails to complete the improvements within the specified
time, the city may, by resolution of the city council, cause the uncompleted
improvements to be completed, and the parties executing the performance
security shall be firmly bound for the payment of all costs.
52
3. The city may not issue a certificate of occupancy until all of the public
improvements have been completed.
B. Extensions.
1. The city council may extend the completion date upon written request by
the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the
extension. The extension shall not exceed 12 months. The request shall be
made at least 30 days before expiration of the subdivision improvement
agreement. No extension shall be granted if any lot within the subdivision
has been sold.
2. The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement
extension with the city. The agreement shall be prepared by the city
engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by the
subdivider and surety and transmitted to the city council for its
consideration. If approved by the city council, the mayor shall execute the
agreement on behalf of the city.
3. In passing upon a request for a subdivision improvement agreement
extension, the city may require the following:
a. Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and
construction standards when required by the city engineer;
b. Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current
improvement costs as approved by the city engineer;
c. Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised
construction estimates;
d. Increase of inspection fees to reflect current construction costs;
however, inspection fees are not subject to decrease or refund; and
e. The city council as a condition to approving a time extension for the
completion of improvements may impose additional requirements
relating to the physical improvements, considered necessary to bring
the project into compliance with current ordinances, standards and
policies.
4. The subdivider shall pay the costs incurred by the city in processing the
extension request and extension agreement.
53
SEC. 19.54 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
When the subdivider has completed all improvements, corrected all deficiencies,
and submitted record drawings of the improvements, the city shall consider the subdivision
improvements for acceptance. With the recommendation of the city engineer, the city
council shall act by resolution accepting the improvements for maintenance and also
accepting the public streets and easements (which were previously rejected) for these
improvements. When dedications of rights-of-way, dedications of easements or
improvements are accepted for public purposes, the city clerk shall file a notice with the
county recorder.
ARTICLE VIII RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS
SEC. 19.55 PURPOSE.
Residential condominium projects differ from other residential subdivisions in
numerous respects, particularly as to development standards and ownership of individual
units and jointly held common areas. The purpose of this article is to address the special
attributes of condominium subdivisions and to adopt development standards which will
protect both the community and the purchasers of condominium dwelling units.
If a commercial condominium is proposed in combination with a residential
condominium, the requirements of this article and Piedmont Municipal Code article IX
shall be read together, with the relevant requirements applying to the portions of the
project.
SEC. 19.56 CONDOMINIUM DEFINED.
“Condominium” is defined, in accordance with Civil Code section 783, to be an
estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a
parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial
or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A
condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real
property.
SEC. 19.57 STANDARDS – GENERAL.
In addition to standards applicable to regular subdivisions, no new condominium
project or portion thereof shall be approved unless the following items have been
submitted with the tentative map and approved by the city:
A. Concurrent applications for variance and design review under the Piedmont
Municipal Code prepared in accordance with the criteria set forth in the
54
subdivision manual, including a development site plan of the project
including location and sizes of structures, parking layout, access areas, floor
plans and exterior elevations; a preliminary landscaping plan of the project
indicating types and sizes of landscaping materials and permanent irrigation
facilities, prepared by a person licensed to prepare such plans by the state of
California; and a preliminary lighting plan of the project indicating location
and nature of lighting and lighting fixtures in common areas;
B. The proposed condominium documents, including those portions of the
covenants, conditions and restrictions that apply to the conveyance of units,
the assignment of parking and the management and maintenance of
common areas and improvements; and
C. Such other information which the department determines is necessary to
evaluate the proposed project to ensure consistency with the general plan,
Piedmont Zoning Code, and any other applicable city regulations which are
identified in the subdivision manual.
SEC. 19.58 SITE REQUIREMENTS.
A condominium subdivision map may be approved, conditionally approved, or
denied, based upon compliance with design review (Piedmont Municipal Code chapter 17).
The design review shall be based upon compliance with city codes, the residential design
guidelines adopted by the city council, and the residential condominium site and design
requirements in the condominium manual.
SEC. 19.59 STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
A condominium project shall be subject to the structural requirements contained in
the latest council-approved edition of the California Building Codes.
SEC. 19.60 INSPECTION AND FEES.
Building inspection and fees shall be in accordance with Piedmont Municipal Code
section Title 15. Inspection and fees for required public and private street and utility
improvements shall be in accordance with other applicable sections of this chapter.
SEC. 19.61 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS – PURPOSE.
The purpose of these condominium conversion sectiont is to: establish criteria for
the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to a condominium; ensure that
converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety and is
consistent with the goals of the city; maintain a supply of rental housing for very low
income, low income, and moderate income persons; reduce the impact of conversion on
residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of
55
apartments to condominiums by providing procedures for notification and adequate time
and assistance for such relocation; and assure that purchasers of converted housing have
been properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure which is offered for
purchase.
SEC. 19.62 CONDOMIUIUM CONVERSIONS – APPLICATION; PROCEDURES;
STANDARDS.
The application requirements, procedures for approval, and standards are set forth
in the city’s Subdivision Manual. This also includes the required notification of existing
tenants as required by the Subdivision Map Act.
SEC. 19.63 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS – FINDINGS.
The city council may not approve an application for condominium conversion
unless it finds in the approving resolution that the proposed conversion:
A. Conforms to the requirements of sections 19.55 through 19.62 and the Subdivision
Manual;
B. Is consistent with the general plan and current zoning regulations;
C. Will provide an equivalent number of very low, low moderate and/or abovemoderate
income rental units (as defined in the Housing Element of the General
Plan) elsewhere in the city, with a requirements that the units remain as restricted
rental units for at least 55 years; and
D. Satisfies the requirements of Government Code Section 66427.1 (regarding notice
to tenants).
ARTICLE IX COMMERCIAL CONDOMINIUMS
SEC. 19.64 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
Commercial condominium projects differ from other commercial subdivisions in
numerous respects, particularly as to development standards and ownership of individual
units and jointly held common areas. The purpose of this article is to address the special
attributes of condominium subdivisions and to adopt development standards which will
protect both the community and the purchasers of condominium units. This article applies
to commercial condominiums. (GC §66427) If a commercial condominium is proposed in
combination with a residential condominium, the requirements of this article and Article
VIII shall be read together, with the relevant requirements applying to the portions of the
project.
56
SEC. 19.65 DEFINITIONS.
In this Article:
19.65.1 “Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association
created for the purpose of managing a condominium or other common interest
development. (Civil Code section 1351)
19.65.2 “Condominium” means (in accordance with Civil Code section 783) an
estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a
parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial
or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A
condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real
property.
19.65.3 “Declaration” means the document (covenants, conditions and restrictions
(CC&Rs)), or however titled) which contains the restrictive covenants of the development,
consistent with California Civil Code section 1353.
SEC. 19.66 STANDARDS.
In addition to the standards applicable to regular subdivisions, a commercial
condominium project must conform to the commercial condomium standards in the city’s
Subdivision Manual.
SEC. 19.67 INSPECTION AND FEES.
Building inspection and fees shall be in accordance with Piedmont Municipal Code
Title 15. Inspection and fees for required public and private street and utility
improvements shall be in accordance with other applicable sections of this chapter.
SEC. 19.68 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.
A. Purpose. Commercial and industrial condominium projects differ from other
commercial and industrial subdivisions in numerous respects, particularly as to
development standards and ownership of individual units and jointly held common
areas. The purpose of these condominium conversion sections is to address the
special attributes of condominium conversions and to apply development standards
which will protect both the community and the purchasers of condominium units.
(GC §66427)
B. Applications; Procedures; Standards. The application requirements, procedures
and standards for a commercial condominium conversion are set forth in the
Subdivision Manual.
57
C. Findings. The city council may not approve an application for condominium
conversion unless it finds in the approving resolution that the proposed conversion:
1. Conforms to the requirements of this section and the Subdivision Manual;
2. Is consistent with the general plan and the Piedmont Zoning Code.
ARTICLE X CITY-INITIATED PARCEL MERGER
SEC. 19.69 PURPOSE.
This article implements the procedures and prescribes the standards authorized by
Government Code Section 66451.10 through 66451.302 pertaining to the merger and
unmerger of parcels of land.
SEC. 19.70 CRITERIA FOR MERGER OF CONTIGUOUS PARCELS.
A parcel of land may be merged with a contiguous parcel held by the same owner if
all of the following requirements are satisfied:
A. The affected parcels are held by the same owner as of the date the notice of
intention to determine status is recorded, as provided by Government Code section
66451.13;
B. One of the affected parcels does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size
under the applicable zoning;
C. One of the affected parcels is (a) undeveloped by a structure, or (b) developed only
with an accessory structure, or (c) developed with a single structure (other than an
accessory structure) that is partially sited on the contiguous parcel with which it is
proposed to be merged (i.e., straddles a lot line); and
D. With respect to each affected parcel, one or more of the conditions set forth in
Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.71 is met. (GC §66451.11)
SEC. 19.71 CONDITIONS OF CONTIGUOUS PARCELS PERMITTING MERGER.
In addition to the requirements of Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.70, in order
for affected parcels to be merged, one or more of the following conditions must exist as to
an affected parcel:
A. Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time the merger is determined;
58
B. Was not created in compliance with applicable laws or ordinances in effect at the
time of its creation;
C. Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;
D. Does not meet slope stability standards in that soils investigation indicates the
presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected,
would lead to structural defects;
E. Does not have legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment
access and maneuverability;
F. Its development would create health or safety hazards;
G. Is inconsistent with the general plan or applicable specific plan, other than
minimum lot size or density standards. (GC §66451.11)
SEC. 19.72 PROCEDURE.
A. Notice of Intention to Determine Status of Affected Parcels. The department shall
mail a notice of intention to determine the status of the affected parcels by certified
mail to the then current owner of record. The notice shall advise the owner that the
affected parcels may be merged under the standards specified in this Article and
advise the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on the determination of
status and to present evidence at the hearing that the affected parcels do not meet
the criteria for merger. (GC §66451.13)
B. Recordation of Notice of Intention. The department shall file the notice of intention
to determine status for record with the recorder of Alameda County on the date that
the notice is mailed to the property owner. (GC §66451.13)
C. Hearing. If the property owner exhibits to the department a request for a hearing on
determination of status within 30 days after recordation of the notice of intention to
determine status, the department shall fix the time, date and place for a hearing to
be conducted by the planning commission. The department shall notify the property
owner by certified mail of the hearing. The planning commission shall conduct a
hearing not less than 30 days after the city has received the property owner’s
request for a hearing. The hearing date may be postponed or continued with the
mutual consent of the planning commission and the property owner. (GC
§§66451.14, 66451.15)
D. Determination of Status Following Hearing. At the hearing, the property owner
may present evidence that the affected parcels do not meet the standards for merger
specified in this Article. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission
59
shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be
merged, and shall notify the owner of its determination. (GC §66451.16)
E. Recordation of Notice of Merger. The city shall cause a notice of merger specifying
the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property to be
recorded within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing. (GC §66451.16)
F. Determination of Merger Where No Hearing Requested. If, within the 30-day
period after recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of
the affected parcel does not file a request for a hearing, the planning commission
may make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to
be merged. A notice of merger shall be recorded not later than 90 days after the
date when the department mailed the notice of intention to determine status. (GC
§66451.17)
G. Determination Not to Merge. If the planning commission determines that the
affected parcels are not to be merged, the city shall have recorded a release of the
notice of intention to determine status and shall mail a clearance letter to the then
current owner of record. If a property owner initiates or consents in writing to a lot
merger, the department may cause the merger of the affected lots without referring
the proposed merger to the planning commission for a public hearing. (GC
§66451.18)
SEC. 19.73 UNMERGER.
A property owner may apply to the city for a determination that affected parcels be
deemed not to have been merged under Government Code section 66451.30. Upon a
determination that the parcels meet the standards in section 66451.30, the city shall issue to
the owner and record with the county recorder a notice of the status of the parcels and a
declaration that the parcels are unmerged. (GC §§66451.31 through 66451.302)
SEC. 19.74 APPEAL.
The decision of the planning commission made under this Article may be appealed
to the city council in the manner provided for the appeal of a decision of the planning
commission, as provided in Piedmont Municipal Code Section 19.24.
SEC. 19.75 OWNER-INITIATED ACTION. (See section 19.7.)
SEC. 19.76 EFFECT OF NONPREJUDICIAL ERROR.
The failure, neglect, informality or omission as to a matter pertaining to notices,
findings, reports, recommendations or any other matter of procedure does not affect the
validity of the action taken, unless after the examination of the entire process, it is found
the complaining party suffered substantial prejudice.
60
ARTICLE XI ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIAL REVIEW
SEC. 19.77 PROHIBITION.
No person shall sell, lease or finance a parcel of real property or begin construction
of a building for sale, lease or financing thereon (except for model homes) or allow
occupancy thereof, for which a final or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act
or this chapter, until the map complies with the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and
is recorded with the county recorder. (GC §66499.30). This subsection does not prohibit
an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements
where the sale, lease or financing or the beginning of construction is expressly conditioned
upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map.
The conveyance of part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel
map is required shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation
until the map is recorded with the county recorder.
This section does not apply to a parcel of a subdivision offered for sale or lease,
contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law,
including this chapter, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at
the time the subdivision was established.
SEC. 19.78 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
A violation of this chapter by a person who is the subdivider or an owner of record,
at the time of the violation, of property involved in the violation is punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the state prison, by a fine not
exceeding $10,000, or by both that fine and imprisonment. Every other violation of this
chapter is a misdemeanor. (GC §66499.31)
SEC. 19.79 REMEDIES.
A. Conveyance Voidable. A deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property
which has been divided or which results from a division in violation of the
Subdivision Map Act or this chapter is voidable at the sole option of the grantee,
buyer or person contracting to purchase, or the heirs, personal representative, or
trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of
the violation. However, the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding
upon a successor-in-interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase,
other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person
contracting to sell, or their assignee, heir or devisee. (GC §66499.32)
B. Other Legal Action. This chapter does not bar any legal, equitable or summary
remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person may otherwise be
entitled. The city or other public agency or person may file a suit in the superior
61
court to restrain or enjoin an attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease or
financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter. (GC §66499.33)
C. Denial of Permits and Approvals. The city shall not issue a permit or grant any
approval necessary to develop real property which has been divided or which has
resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter if it
finds that development of the property is contrary to the public health or safety. The
authority to deny or approve such a permit applies whether the applicant was the
owner of record at the time of the violation or whether the applicant is either the
current owner of record or a vendee of the current owner with, or without, actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest
in the property. (GC §66499.34)
D. Permit or Approval Subject to Conditions. If the city issues a permit or grants
approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may
impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the
division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the
property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial
violation, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the
property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in
accordance with the provision of Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.80, only the
conditions stipulated in that certificate are applicable. (GC §66499.34)
SEC. 19.80 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
A. A person owning real property or a vendee of such person under a contract of sale
may request the department to determine whether the real property complies with
the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. A written application
for a certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by a current preliminary title
report showing the legal owner of the property. (GC §66499.35)
B. If the department determines that the real property complies with the provisions of
the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, the city shall file a certificate of
compliance for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall
identify the real property and shall state that the division of the real property
complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.
C. If the department determines that the real property does not comply with the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, the department may, as a
condition to granting a conditional certificate of compliance, impose conditions in
accordance with Piedmont Municipal Code section 19.79(D) except that where the
applicant was the owner of record at the time of the initial violation and the current
owner of record of one or more parcels which were created as a result of the
violation, then the city may impose any conditions that would be applicable to a
current division of the property. Upon the department’s making such a
62
determination and establishing such conditions, the city shall file a conditional
certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. The certificate shall
serve as notice to the property owner and any successor that the fulfillment and
implementation of such conditions shall be required before subsequent issuance of
a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property.
Compliance with such conditions is not required until the city issues a permit or
other grant of approval for development of the property.
D. A recorded final map, parcel map or official map (prepared in accordance with
Government Code Section 66499.35(e)) constitutes a certificate of compliance with
respect to the parcels of real property described on the map.
E. The applicant for a certificate of compliance shall pay the city a fee to cover the
reasonable cost of processing the application.
SEC. 19.81 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
A. Notice of Intention to Record Notice of Violation. If it is determined that real
property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter,
the department shall mail by certified mail to the then current owner a notice of
intention to record a notice of violation. The notice shall describe the property in
detail, name the owners, describe the violation, why the subject parcel is not lawful
under Section 66412.6(a) or (b) of the Subdivision Map Act and state that the
owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall specify
the date, time and place for a planning commission meeting at which the owner
may present evidence to the city why a notice of violation should not be recorded.
(GC §66499.36)
B. Meeting. The meeting shall be held no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60
days from that date of mailing of the notice of intention to record a notice of
violation.
C. Clearance if No Violation. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the city
determines that there has been no violation, the department shall mail a clearance
letter to the then current owner of record.
D. Recording Notice of Violation. The city shall record the notice of violation with the
county recorder if:
1. Within 15 days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to file with the
department a written objection to recording the notice of violation; or
2. After the owner has presented evidence, the city determines that the
property has in fact been illegally divided.
63
E. Effect of Recording. The notice of violation, when recorded, is constructive notice
of the violation to all successors-in-interest in the property.
SEC. 19.82 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
An action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul a decision of the
city under this chapter must be commenced and served on the city within 90 days after the
date of the decision. After 90 days, all persons are barred from any such action. (GC
§66499.37) The issues raised in an action may be limited to those raised in the public
hearing or in written correspondence presented before or at the hearing. (GC §65009)
(Ord 657 N.S. 8/05)
9/5/08
Taxation
Chapter 20
Taxation1
ARTICLE I. UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAXES
§20.1 Citation
§20.2 Purpose
§20.3 Operative dates; contract with the state
§20.4 Sales tax generally
§20.5 Use tax generally
§20.6 Amendments to state law
§20.6-1 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions
§20.7 Suits to enjoin collection
ARTICLE II. PERSONAL AND REAL PROPERTY TAXES
Division 1. Assessment and Levy
§20.8 Assessor or deputy may administer oaths
§20.9 Property to be assessed in accordance with state law; exemptions from
assessment
§20.10 Assessment to be made annually; list
§20.11 Certification of assessment list; deposit with clerk; form of oath
§20.12 Lands to be assessed in parcels or subdivisions; owners; mistake in name
of owner not to invalidate assessment
§20.13 Statement of ownership-Assessor may require; contents
§20.14 Same-Form
§20.15 Same-Same-Affidavit of firm or corporation
§20.16 Same-Time for completing
§20.17 Same-Power of assessor to enforce; penalty
§20.18 Same-Refusal to submit
§20.19 List of those refusing to submit; contents
§20.20 Notice of completion of assessment list and time of meeting of Council as
board of equalization
§20.21 Meeting of Council as board of equalization; powers and duties generally;
assessment roll
§20.22 Reduction in valuation-Must be requested in writing under oath
§20.23 Same-Hearing; procedure
1 As to providing a system for the assessment, levy, collection and equalization of taxes, see char.,
§4.07. As to tax limit, see char., §4.08.
For state law as to transfer of City tax functions to county, see Gov. C., §§51500 to 51521.
As to special gas tax street improvement fund, see §§2.20 to 2.22 of this Code.
20-1
Taxation
§20.24 Clerk to make record of meeting of board of equalization; correction
assessment list
§20.25 Certification of corrected assessment roll
§20.26 Council to fix levy; rate limitation
§20.27 Duty of clerk upon completion of levy
§20.27A Alternative assessment and board of equalization procedures
Division 2. Collection
§20.28 Tax collector to collect all taxes
§20.29 Delivery of assessment roll to tax collector-Time
§20.30 Same-Tax collector charged with full amount of levy
§20.31 Time for payment; delinquency; penalty
§20.32 Entire tax may be paid when first installment is due
§20.33 Additional charge for preparing delinquent roll, etc.
§20.34 Time for payment of unsecured personal property taxes;
collection by seizure and sales permitted
§20.35 Receipt for payment; contents
§20.36 Tax collector to enter payment in assessment roll
§20.37 Tax collector to account for collections
§20.38 Settlement of tax collector with clerk’s office-Second roll
§20.39 Same-Secured roll and delinquent roll; final settlement
§20.40 Lien on property
§20.41 Publication of delinquent list; information to be shown; penalty; sale, etc.
§20.42 Copy of publication of delinquent list to be filed with clerk; affidavit
required
§20.43 Property to be sold to City
§20.44 Entries on delinquent list; tax collector to be credited
§20.45 Suit may be brought to enforce collection
§20.46 Certificate of sale; information to be shown; where filed
§20.47 Right of owner or possessor to pay taxes, etc., on day of sale
§20.48 Redemption of property may be made within five years from date of sale;
payment made to clerk; disposition of moneys collected
§20.49 Failure to redeem; deed to be made to City; form of deed
§20.50 Further provisions concerning deed to City; force and effect of deed
§20.51 Assessment roll, delinquent list or certified copies thereof prima facie
evidence of assessment, etc.
§20.52 Redemption of property after sale to City-Amount to be paid
§20.53 Same-Redemption penalties
§20.53-1 Same-Property not on current roll
§20.53-2 Same-Certificate of redemption
§20.53-3 Same-Destruction of redemption certificates more than twelve years old
§20.54 Effect of mistake, invalid assessment, etc., on sale
§20.55 Seizure and sale of personal property for taxes; sale to be at public
auction; notice
§20.56 Final settlement of tax collector with clerk; procedure
20-2
Taxation
§20.57 Refund of taxes
§20.58 Double assessments
§20.59 Discovery of error in assessment, etc., before sale; transferred to next
year’s assessment list
§20.60 When assessor is to collect taxes on personal property; procedure
ARTICLE III. CIGARETTE TAX
§§20.61 to 20.82 REPEALED
ARTICLE IV. REAL PROPERTY CONVEYANCE TAX
§20.83 Title and purpose
§20.84 Imposition of tax
§20.85 Liability for payment
§20.86 Exemption-Written security instrument
§20.87 Same-United States, state or political subdivision
§20.88 Same-Bankruptcy proceedings
§20.89 Same-Instruments pursuant to S.E.C. order
§20.90 Same-Partnerships
§20.91 Instruments in lieu of foreclosure
§20.92 Administration of tax
§20.93 Due dates; delinquency; penalties; interest
§20.94 Declaration required
§20.95 Determination of deficiency
§20.96 Notice of determination
§20.97 Manner of giving notice
§20.98 Petition for redetermination
§20.99 Consideration of petition
ARTICLE I. UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAXES2
SEC. 20.1 CITATION
This article shall constitute the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of
the City, and may be cited as such. (Ord. No. 182 N.S., §1)
SEC. 20.2 PURPOSE
The City Council hereby declares that this article is adopted to achieve the
following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in
order to accomplish these purposes:
2 For state law as to sales and use taxes generally, see Rev. & Tax. C., §6001 et seq.
20-3
Taxation
(a) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the state.
(b) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state, insofar as those provisions
are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
(c) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a ninety-five
hundredths percent tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and
collected the by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering
and collecting the state sales and use taxes.
(d) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales
and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this article.
SEC. 20.3 OPERATIVE DATES; CONTRACT WITH STATE
This article shall become operative on July 1, 1956, and prior thereto this City
shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the
administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, however, that
if this City shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization, as above set
forth, prior to July 1, 1956, this article shall not be operative until the first day of the first
calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the City and by the state
board of equalization; provided, further, that this article shall not become operative prior
to the operative date of the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the County of
Alameda. (Ord. No. 182 N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.4 SALES TAX GENERALLY
(A) (1) For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax
is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate of ninety five hundredths
percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property
sold at retail in the City on and after the operative date of this article.
(2) For the purposes of this article all retail sales are consummated at
the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered
by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for
delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include
delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless
20-4
Taxation
of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business in the state or had more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the board of equalization.
(B) (1) Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of such code, as amended and in force
and effect on July 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes are hereby adopted and made a part
of this article as though fully set forth herein.
(2) Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
City shall be substituted therefore. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require
the substitution of the name if the City for the word “state” when that word is used as part
of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state
board of equalization, or the name of the state treasury, or of the constitution of the state;
nor shall the name of the City be substituted for that of the state in any section when the
result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the state board of equalization in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; and neither shall the
substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not
necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the
result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to
certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those
gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division
2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or to impose this tax with respect to certain gross
receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code;
and, in addition, the name of the City shall not be substituted for that of the state in
sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, and
6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as adopted.
(3) If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067
of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by
reason of this section.
(4) There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
(i) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by
the state upon a retailer or consumer.
(ii) The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the
city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such
20-5
Taxation
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws
of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. No. 454 12/5/83)
(4.5) There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
(i) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of
California upon a retailer or consumer.
(ii) The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally
outside of the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the
carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.
(iii) The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the
city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws
of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. No. 182 N.S.,
§4; Ord. No. 224 N.S., §§2 to 4; Ord. No. 313 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 454 N.S., §1, 3,
eff. 3/1/84)
SEC. 20.5 USE TAX GENERALLY
(A) An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption
in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the
operative date of this article for storage, use or other consumption in the City at the rate
of ninety-five hundredths percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall
include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax,
regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(B) (1) Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of such code, as amended and in force
and effect on July 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of
this article as though fully set forth herein.
(2) Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of this City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subdivision shall be
deemed to require the substitution of the name of this City for the word “state” when that
word is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board
of equalization, or the name of the state treasury, or of the constitution of the state; nor
shall the name of the City be substituted for that of the state in any section when the
result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the state board of equalization in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; and neither shall the
substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not
20-6
Taxation
necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the
result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to
certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains
subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state
under the provisions of that Code; and in addition, the name of the City shall not be
substituted for that of the state in sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted
and the name of the City shall not be substituted for the word “state” in section 6203 nor
in the definition of that phrase in section 6203 (Ord. No. 224 N.S., §5)
(3) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
(i) The amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer.
(ii) The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax
under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or
city in this state.
(iii) The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in
such vessels for commercial purposes. (Ord. No. 454 12/3/83)
(iv) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and
6366.1 of the Revenue & Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption
of tangible personal property purchased by operators or aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as
common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this
state, the United States, or any foreign government.
(3.5) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
(i) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of
California upon a retailer or consumer.
(ii) The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax
under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of
20-7
Taxation
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or
city in this state.
(iii) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the
Revenue & Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the
United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. No. 182 N.S., §5; Ord. No. 224
N.S., §§5,6; Ord. No. 313 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 454 N.S., §4, eff. 3/1/84)
SEC. 20.6 AMENDMENTS TO STATE LAW
All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the
effective date of this article which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not
inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall
automatically become a part of this article. (Ord. No. 182 N.S., §6)
SEC. 20.6-1 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND
EXEMPTIONS
(a) Sections 20.4(b) (4.5) and 20.5 (b) (3.5) of this article shall become
operative on January 1st of the year following the year in which the state board of
equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to
the ratio which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, at which time sections 20.4 (b) (4) and 20.5 (b) (3) of this ordinance shall
become inoperative.
(b) In the event that sections 20.4 (b) (4.5) and 20.5 (b) (3.5) of this article
become operative and the state board of equalization subsequently adopts an assessment
ratio for state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local
assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, sections 20.4 (b) (4) and
20.5 (b) (3) of this article shall become operative on the first day of the month following
the month in which such higher ration is adopted, at which time sections 20.4 (b) (4.5)
and 20.5 (b) (3.5) of this article shall become inoperative until the first day of the month
following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for the stateassessed
property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by section
401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time sections 20.4 (b) (4.5) and 20.5 (b)
(3.5) shall again become operative and sections 20.4 (b) (4) and 20.5 (b) (3) shall become
inoperative. (Ord. No. 313 N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.7 SUITS TO ENJOIN COLLECTION
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in
any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this City, or against any
20-8
Taxation
officer of the state or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this article, or
part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax
required to be collected. (Ord. No. 182 N.S., §7)
ARTICLE II. PERSONAL AND REAL PROPERTY TAXES3
Division 1. Assessment and Levy
SEC. 20.8 ASSESSOR OR DEPUTY MAY ADMINISTER OATHS
The assessor and his deputy shall have the power to administer all oaths and
affirmations necessary in the performance of the duties of the office of the assessor.
(Ord. No. 63 N.S., §2)
SEC. 20.9 PROPERTY TO BE ASSESSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE
LAW; EXEMPTIONS FROM ASSESSMENT
All taxable property in the City must be assessed in accordance with the laws of
the state. All exemptions to assessments provided by the laws of the state applicable to
assessments in the City shall be granted by the City. Any claim for exemption on
property taxes properly filed with the County of Alameda which is applicable to property
taxable by this City shall be deemed to be a filing of such claim for exemption with this
City. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 272 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 285 N.S., §1)
SEC. 20.10 ASSESSMENT TO BE MADE ANNUALLY; LIST
It shall be the duty of the assessor, between the first day of May and the first day
of August in each year, to make out a true list of all taxable property within the City,
except such as is required to be assessed by the state board of equalization. The mode of
making out of such a list, and proceedings relating thereto, shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this article and any amendments thereto. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §4)
SEC. 20.11 CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT LIST; DEPOSIT WITH CLERK;
FORM OF OATH
The assessor shall certify the assessment list by his oath and shall deposit the
same with the clerk on or before the first Monday of August of each year.
The oath required to be subscribed by him and annexed to such list shall be
substantially as follows:
State of California, )
County of Alameda, ) ss.
City of Piedmont. )
3 For state law as to taxation generally, see Rev. & Tax. C., §1 et seq.
20-9
Taxation
I, ___________________________________________, Assessor of the City of
Piedmont, do swear that between the first day of May, 20____, and the first day of
August, 20____, I have made diligent inquiry and examination to ascertain all property
within the City of Piedmont, subject to assessment by me, and that the same has been
assessed upon the attached assessment list equally and uniformly, according to the best of
my judgment, information and belief, at its full cash value; and that I have faithfully
complied with all the duties imposed upon the Assessor by Ordinance; and that I have not
imposed any unjust or double assessment through malice or ill-will or otherwise nor
allowed anyone to escape a just and equal assessment through favor or regard otherwise.
________________________________
Subscribed and sworn to before
me this ____ day of ____________,
20____.
The assessor shall then deposit the verified list with the clerk on or before the first
Monday of August of each year. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §4)
SEC. 20.12 LANDS TO BE ASSESSED IN PARCELS OR SUBDIVISIONS;
OWNERS; MISTAKES IN NAME OF OWNER NOT TO
INVALIDATE ASSESSMENT
The assessor shall assess lands in parcels or subdivisions, and he shall assess all
property to the person by whom it is owned or claimed, or in whose possession or control
it was at 12:00 noon of the first Monday in March, next preceding; but, no mistake in the
name of the owner or supposed owner of real property shall render the assessment thereof
invalid. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §5)
SEC. 20.13 STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP-ASSESSOR MAY REQUIRE;
CONTENTS
The assessor shall have the power to exact from every person a statement under
oath, setting forth specifically all the real and personal property owned by such person, or
in his possession, or under his control, at 12:00 noon on the first Monday in March. Such
statement shall be in writing and shall show separately:
1. All property belonging to, claimed by, or in the possession or under the
control or management of such person.
2. All property belonging to, claimed by, or in the possession or under the
control or management of any firm or corporation of which such person is the president,
secretary, cashier or managing agent.
20-10
Taxation
3. An exact description of all lands and parcels or subdivisions, all
improvements and all personal property, and all deposits of money or other valuables.
(Ord. No. 63 N.S., §6)
SEC. 20.14 SAME-FORM
The assessor is hereby authorized to provide his office, at the expense of the City,
with necessary blank forms for the statements mentioned in the preceding section and
shall cause to be printed upon each blank form an affidavit form substantially as follows:
State of California, )
County of Alameda, ) ss.
City of Piedmont. )
I, _______________________________________, do swear that I am a resident
of the City of Piedmont _____________________________________, that the within list
contains a full and correct statement of all property subject to taxation which I, or any
firm of which I am a member, or any corporation, association, or company of which I am
president, secretary, cashier, or managing agent, owned, claimed, possessed or controlled
at twelve o’clock noon on the first Monday in March last, and which is not already
assessed this year; and that I have not in any manner whatsoever transferred or disposed
of any property, or placed any property out of the City of Piedmont, or my possession for
the purpose of avoiding any assessments upon the same, or of making this statement.
_______________________________
Subscribed and sworn to before me
this ___________ day of __________,
20____.
_______________________________
(Ord. No. 63 N.S., §6)
SEC. 20.15 SAME-SAME-AFFIDAVIT OF FIRM OR CORPORATION
The affidavit to the statement on behalf of a firm or corporation shall be made by
the president, secretary or the treasurer thereof, shall state the principal place of business
of the firm or corporation, and in other respects, shall conform to the form set out in the
preceding section. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §6)
SEC. 20.16 SAME-TIME FOR COMPLETING
20-11
Taxation
The assessor may fill out the statement of owner-ship at the time when he presents
it, or he may deliver it to the person and require him, within a reasonable, specified time,
to return it to him, properly filled out. (Ord. No. 63, N.S., §7)
SEC. 20.17 SAME-POWER OF ASSESSOR TO ENFORCE; PENALTY
The assessor shall have the power to require any person found within the City to
make and subscribe an affidavit, giving his name and place of residence, and he shall
further have the power to subpoena and examine any person in relation to any statement
furnished to him or which is assessable in the City. Any person who shall refuse to
furnish the statement required by this article, or to make and subscribe such an affidavit
respecting his name and place of residence, or to appear and testify when requested to do
so by the assessor, as above provided, shall, for each and every refusal, and so often as
the same is repeated, forfeit to the City the sum of one hundred dollars to be recovered in
an action brought in its name by the assessor. All moneys recovered by the assessor in
such actions shall be paid by him to the treasurer of the City and by the treasurer placed
in the general fund. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §8)
SEC. 20.18 SAME-REFUSAL TO SUBMIT
If any person, after demand therefor by the assessor, refuses or neglects to give
the statement provided for in this article, or to comply with the other provisions of this
article, the assessor shall note such refusal or neglect upon the assessment book or list,
opposite the name of such person, and must make an estimate of the value of the taxable
property of such person. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §9)
SEC. 20.19 LIST OF THOSE REFUSING TO SUBMIT; CONTENTS
The assessor shall, when required by the Council, transmit to the Council on or
before the first Monday in August of each year, a verified report, separate from the
assessment roll, containing a complete list of all persons who refuse or neglect to furnish
a statement of their property, as in this article provided, or to comply with the provisions
of this article, the amount of the assessment upon the property of such persons, with a
statement of the particular facts, if any, upon which the assessment has been made, and
the valuation of the property so assessed. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §10)
SEC. 20.20 NOTICE OF COMPLETION OF ASSESSMENT LIST AND TIME OF
MEETING OF COUNCIL AS BOARD OF EQUALIZATION
As soon as completed, and on or before the first Monday in August of each year,
the assessor shall deliver his assessment list and statement to the Council to be equalized,
and the Council shall forthwith give notice thereof, and of the time and place when the
Council will meet to equalize assessments by causing notices thereof to be posted in at
least four public places in the City, and in the meantime, the assessment list or book must
remain open for inspection of all persons interested. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §11)
20-12
Taxation
SEC. 20.21 MEETING OF COUNCIL AS BOARD OF EQUALIZATION; POWERS
AND DUTIES GENERALLY; ASSESSMENT ROLL
The Council shall meet at their usual place of holding meetings at any time of the
year to sit as a board of equalization. They shall have the power to hear complaints, and
to correct, modify or strike out any assessment made by the assessor, and may, of their
own motion, raise any assessment, upon notice to the party whose assessment is to be
raised. The corrected list of assessments shall be a part of the assessment roll for such tax
for that year. It shall be certified by the clerk, who shall act as clerk of the board of
equalization, as being the assessment roll for such tax, and shall be the assessment roll
upon which such tax is to be levied in such year. The proceedings of the board of
equalization shall be governed by the provisions of this article. Any taxpayer may
petition such board for a reduction in an assessment and a proportionate reduction of the
taxes extended thereon by filing an application pursuant to section 20.22. (Ord. No. 63
N.S., §12; Ord. No. 230 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 272 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 293 N.S., §1)
SEC. 20.22 REDUCTION IN VALUATION-MUST BE REQUESTED IN WRITING
UNDER OATH
No reduction shall be made by the Council in the assessed valuation of property
unless the party affected thereby or his agent makes and files with the board a written
application therefore, verified by his oath showing the facts upon which it is claimed such
a reduction should be made. A copy of the application made to the board of supervisors
for a reduction of assessment of the same property shall be sufficient compliance with the
requirements of this section. The procedure provided in this section shall also be used for
applying for an increase in the assessed valuation of property, but shall in no way limit
the right of the Council to raise any assessment on its own motion as provided in section
20.21. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §12; Ord. No. 272 N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.23 SAME-HEARING; PROCEDURE
Before the City Council grants the application or makes any reduction or increase
applied for in the preceding section, it may first examine, on oath, the person or the agent
making the application touching the value of the property of such a person.
Upon the hearing of the application, the board may subpoena such witnesses, hear
and take such evidence in relation to the subject, as in its discretion it may deem proper.
During the session of the Council, the assessor and any deputy whose testimony is
needed may be present, and may make any statement, or introduce and examine
witnesses on questions before the Council. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §12; Ord. No. 272 N.S.,
§4; Ord. No. 293 N.S., §2)
SEC. 20.24 CLERK TO MAKE RECORD OF MEETING OF BOARD OF
EQUALIZATION; CORRECTING ASSESSMENT LIST
20-13
Taxation
The clerk as the ex officio clerk of the board of equalization shall keep a full, true
record of all of the proceedings of the board in a book marked, “Records of the Board of
Equalization”, and in the book he shall record all changes, corrections and orders made
by the board, and during the sessions of the board, or as soon as possible after its
adjournment, he shall enter upon the assessment list all changes and corrections made by
the board. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §13)
SEC. 20.25 CERTIFICATION OF CORRECTED ASSESSMENT ROLL
On or before the second Monday in September of each year the assessment list
shall be certified by the clerk as being the assessment roll upon which City taxes are to be
levied for the then current year. Nothing herein stated shall preclude the reduction or
increase of assessed valuation after certification of the assessment list if a timely
application therefor is filed and heard in accordance with sections 20.22 and 20.23. (Ord.
No. 63 N.S., §14; Ord. No. 230 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 272 N.S., §5; Ord. No. 293 N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.26 COUNCIL TO FIX LEVY; RATE LIMITATION
Not later than the second Monday in September of each year the Council shall
levy the tax to provide for raising the necessary revenue of the City for the current fiscal
year, shall by resolution fix the rate of taxes, designate the number of cents upon each
one hundred dollars, using as a basis the value of property as it appears on the assessment
roll for that year, which rate of taxation shall be sufficient to raise sufficient revenue
estimated to be required to carry on all the departments of the City for the current fiscal
year, not to exceed the rate provided in section 4.08 of the Charter of the City, and shall
levy such additional amount as may be necessary and sufficient to pay the bonded
indebtedness of the city for the current fiscal year, and an additional amount as may be
necessary and sufficient for the providing and maintaining of parks in the City for the
current fiscal year, and such additional amount that may be necessary and sufficient to
carry on the recreation department of the City for the current fiscal year, and any
additional amount that may be deemed necessary and permitted by the provisions of the
Charter. Having determined the whole rate to be levied, the Council shall then levy the
tax to provide for raising the necessary revenue of the City for the then current fiscal
year, which fiscal year shall begin with the first day of July of each year and shall end
with the thirtieth day of June the year next following. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §15; Ord. No.
230 N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.27 DUTY OF CLERK UPON COMPLETION OF LEVY
When the assessments have been equalized and the tax has been levied, the clerk
shall enter in the assessment roll in a separate money column the respective sums in
dollars and cents, so levied on each one hundred dollars’ valuation of taxable property to
be paid as a tax levied on the property enumerated, and shall foot up the columns,
showing total value of property in the City as corrected under the direction of the board
of equalization, and the total amount of taxes; all of which shall be done and completed
on or before the first Monday in October of each year. Any changes in assessments made
20-14
Taxation
after the first Monday in October shall be promptly entered in the City assessment
records. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §16; Ord. No. 293 N.S., §4)
SEC. 20.27A ALTERNATIVE ASSESSMENT AND BOARD OF EQUALIZATION
PROCEDURES
(a) As an alternative to the procedure set forth in Division 1 of Article II of
this chapter for the assessment of taxable real property within the City, the Council may
by resolution designate the assessment values established by the county for taxable real
property within the City to be the assessment values adopted for City tax purposes.
(b) As an alternative to the procedure set forth in Division 1 of Article II of
this chapter for the board of equalization, the Council may establish by resolution that
any actions of the county assessment appeals board which apply to taxable real property
within the City shall automatically apply for City tax purposes. (Ord. No. 337 N.S., §1)
Division 2. Collection
SEC. 20.28 TAX COLLECTOR TO COLLECT ALL TAXES
All taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be collected by the
tax collector. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.29 DELIVERY OF ASSESSMENT ROLL TO TAX COLLECTOR-TIME
On or before the first Monday of October of each year, the assessment roll shall
be delivered to the tax collector. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §17; Ord. No. 156 N.S., §17; Ord.
No. 197 N.S., §1)
SEC. 20.30 SAME-TAX COLLECTOR CHARGED WITH FULL AMOUNT OF
LEVY
Upon receiving the assessment roll, the tax collector shall be charged by the clerk
with the full amount of the taxes levied. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §18)
SEC. 20.31 TIME FOR PAYMENT; DELINQUENCY; PENALTY
Half of the taxes on all real and personal property on the secured roll are due and
payable on the first day of November and are delinquent if unpaid on the tenth day of
December next thereafter at 5:00 p.m., and unless paid prior to such delinquency, six
percent will be added to the amount thereof.
The remaining half of the taxes on all real and personal property on the secured
roll will be payable on and after the first day of February and are delinquent if unpaid on
the tenth day of April next thereafter at 5:00 p.m., and unless paid prior to such
20-15
Taxation
delinquency, six percent will be added to the amount thereof. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §17;
Ord. No. 156 N.S., §17; Ord. No. 197 N.S., §1)
SEC. 20.32 ENTIRE TAX MAY BE PAID WHEN FIRST INSTALLMENT DUE
The entire tax may be paid at the time the first installment is due and payable
under the provisions of this article. The second half may be paid separately only if the
first half has been paid. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., 17; Ord. 156 N.S., §17; Ord. No. 197 N.S.,
§1)
SEC. 20.33 ADDITIONAL CHARGES FOR PREPARING DELINQUENT ROLL,
ETC.
After the second installment of taxes on the real property is delinquent, the tax
collector shall collect three dollars for preparing the delinquent roll and published
delinquent list on each separate valuation of the secured roll of real property and of
possessory interests. Proceeds from collections under this section shall be paid into the
general fund of the City. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §22; Ord. No. 156 N.S., §22; Ord. No. 197
N.S., §2; Ord. No. 229 N.S., §1)
SEC. 20.34 TIME FOR PAYMENT OF UNSECURED PERSONA L PROPERTY
TAXES; COLLECTION BY SEIZURE AND SALE PERMITTED
The taxes on all personal property unsecured by real property are due and payable
on the first Monday in March of each year. Taxes due on unsecured property may be
collected by seizure and sale. (Ord. No. 197 N.S., §1)
SEC. 20.35 RECEIPT FOR PAYMENT; CONTENTS
The tax collector shall give a receipt to the person paying any tax or any
installment of any tax, specifying the amount of the assessment and the tax, or installment
of the tax paid, and the amount remaining unpaid, if any, with a description of the
property assessed; provided, however, that the receipt for the second installment of taxes
may refer by number or in any other intelligible manner, to the receipt given for the first
installment of taxes, in lieu of a description of the property assessed. (Ord. No. 63 N.S.,
§19)
SEC. 20.36 TAX COLLECTOR TO ENTER PAYMENT IN ASSESSMENT ROLL
The tax collector shall mark the date of payment of any tax, or any installment of
any tax, in the assessment roll, opposite the name of the person paying the tax. (Ord. No.
63 N.S., §20)
SEC. 20.37 TAX COLLECTOR TO ACCOUNT FOR COLLECTIONS
20-16
Taxation
The tax collector shall settle with the clerk for all moneys collected for the City,
and shall pay the same to the Clerk; and, on the same day, the tax collector shall file a
statement with the clerk, showing an account of all of his transactions and receipts as tax
collector since his last settlement, and showing also that all money collected by him as a
tax collector has been paid to the clerk. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §21)
SEC. 20.38 SETTLEMENT OF TAX COLLECTOR WITH CLERK’S OFFICESECOND
ROLL
Annually or before January tenth, the tax collector shall attend at the clerk’s office
with the second roll. Prior to February first the clerk shall:
(a) Compute and enter the delinquent penalty against all taxes on the secured
roll not marked paid.
(b) Foot the penalties.
(c) Charge the tax collector with the total penalties due on the secured roll.
(d) Deliver the secured roll to the tax collector. After the second half of taxes
on real property is delinquent, the tax collector shall prepare a delinquent roll. In
numerical or alphabetical order, the delinquent roll shall show all information on the
secured roll relating to property the taxes on which are delinquent. (Ord. No. 63 N.S.,
§23; Ord. No. 156, N.S., §23; Ord. No. 197 N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.39 SAME-SECURED ROLL AND DELINQUENT ROLL; FINAL
SETTLEMENT
Annually on May tenth, the tax collector shall attend at the clerk’s office with the
secured roll and the delinquent roll. The clerk shall compare the delinquent roll with the
secured roll. If satisfied the delinquent roll is correct, he shall:
(a) Foot the unpaid taxes and penalties.
(b) Credit the tax collector with the unpaid taxes and penalties on the secured
roll.
(c) Make a final settlement with him of all taxes and penalties charged against
him on the secured roll.
Thereafter, the clerk shall:
(a) Compute and enter the penalties and costs on the delinquent roll.
(b) Charge the tax collector with the amount due on the delinquent roll.
20-17
Taxation
(c) Deliver the delinquent roll to the tax collector.
On or before June thirtieth or immediately after time when real property is sold to
the City for taxes, whichever is later, the tax collector shall attend at the clerk’s office
with the delinquent roll and advise him that all property on the delinquent roll on which
taxes have been paid has been credited with such payment on the delinquent roll. The
clerk shall foot the amount unpaid on the delinquent roll, credit the tax collector with the
amount, and have a final settlement with him. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §24; Ord. No. 197 N.S.,
§4)
SEC. 20.40 LIEN ON PROPERTY
All taxes assessed, together with any percentage imposed for delinquency and the
costs of collection, shall constitute liens upon the property assessed. Every tax upon
personal property shall be a lien upon the real property of the owner thereof. The liens
provided for in this section shall attach as of March first of each year at 12:01 a.m., and
may be enforced by a sale of the real property affected, and the execution and delivery of
all necessary certificates and deeds therefor, under such regulations as are prescribed in
this article, or by action in any court of competent jurisdiction to foreclose such liens;
provided, however, that any property sold for such taxes shall be subject to redemption
within five years and upon the terms provided or that may hereafter be provided by
ordinance. All deeds made upon any sale of property for taxes under the provisions of
this article shall have the same force and effect in evidence as is or may hereafter be
provided by law for deeds for property sold for nonpayment of taxes. (Ord. No. 63 N.S.,
§3; Ord. No. 272 N.S., §6)
SEC. 20.41 PUBLICATION OF DELINQUENT LIST; INFORMATION TO BE
SHOWN; PENALTY; SALE, ETC.
On or within five days before or after the first Monday in June of each year, the
tax collector shall publish the delinquent list, which shall contain the names of the
persons and a description of the property delinquent, and the amount of all taxes and
costs due, opposite each name and description, or the several taxes due from the same
person, the expense of the publication to be a charge against the City; and, the tax
collector must append to, and publish with the delinquent list a notice that, unless the
delinquent taxes, together with the costs and percentage penalties are paid, the real
property upon which such taxes are a lien will be sold to the City. The publication shall
be made once a week, for three successive weeks, in some newspaper circulated in the
City and of general circulation as defined by the state law and so determined by a decree
of the Superior Court of the state, in and for the County of Alameda, and shall designate
the time and the place of sale, which time shall not be less than twenty-one nor more than
twenty-eight days from and after the first publication and the place shall be in the tax
collector’s office in the City. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §25)
SEC 20.42 COPY OF PUBLICATION OF DELINQUENT LIST TO BE FILED
WITH CLERK; AFFIDAVIT REQUIRED
20-18
Taxation
The tax collector shall, as soon as he shall have made and completed the
publication provided for in the preceding section, file with the clerk a copy of the
publication, with an affidavit attached thereto, that it is a true copy of the same, and that
the publication was made in a newspaper, stating its name and place of publication and
the date of each appearance, and such affidavit shall be primary evidence of all of the
facts stated therein. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §26)
SEC. 20.43 PROPERTY TO BE SOLD TO CITY
On the day and hour fixed for the sale, all the property delinquent, upon which the
taxes of all kinds, penalties and costs have not been paid, shall, by operation of law and
the declaration of the tax collector, be sold to the City. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §28)
SEC. 20.44 ENTRIES ON DELINQUENT LIST; TAX COLLECTOR TO BE
CREDITED
Upon sale of the property to the City as provide in the preceding section, the tax
collector shall make an entry, “Sold to the City,” on the delinquent assessment list,
opposite the tax, and he shall be credited with the amount thereof in his settlement made
with the clerk. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §28)
SEC. 20.45 SUIT MAY BE BROUGHT TO ENFORCE COLLECTION
The City may bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction against the owner of
the property for the collection of delinquent taxes, penalties and costs. (Ord. No. 63 N.S.,
§28)
SEC. 20.46 CERTIFICATE OF SALE; INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN; WHERE
FILED
The tax collector shall make out a certificate of delinquent tax sale for each piece
or tract of land sold, dated on the day of the sale, stating (if known) the name of the
person assessed, a description of the land sold, that it was sold for delinquent taxes to the
City and giving the amount and year of the assessment, and specifying when the City will
be entitled to a deed.
Such certificates must be signed by the tax collector and shall be filed in the
office of the clerk. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §29)
SEC. 20.47 RIGHT OF OWNER OR POSSESSOR TO PAY TAXES, ETC., ON
DAY OF SALE
On the day of sale the owner or person in possession of any property offered for
sale for taxes due thereon may pay the taxes, penalties and costs due; provided, further
20-19
Taxation
that the City may bring suit against the owner of such property for the collection of such
taxes, penalties and costs. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §28)
SEC. 20.48 REDEMPTION OF PROPERTY MAY BE MADE WITHIN FIVE
YEARS FROM DATE OF SALE; PAYMENT MADE TO CLERK;
DISPOSITION OF MONEYS COLLECTED
A redemption of the property sold may be made by the owner, or any party in
interest, within five years from the date of the sale to the City, or at any time prior to the
sale of such property to the City. Payment must be made to the clerk upon an estimate
furnished by the clerk, and the clerk shall account to the City for all moneys received
under such redemption, which money shall be distributed to the proper funds in
accordance with the regular tax levy. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §30)
SEC. 20.49 FAILURE TO REDEEM; DEED TO BE MADE TO CITY; FORM OF
DEED
If the property is not redeemed within five years from the date of the sale to the
City, the tax collector, or his successor in office, shall make to the City a deed of the
property. Such deed shall be in substance, and may be in form, as follows:
“This indenture, made the __________ day of _____________, 20_____, between
____________________________, Tax Collector of the City of Piedmont, County of
Alameda, State of California, first party, and the City of Piedmont, second party,
WITNESSETH:
THAT WHEREAS, the real property hereinafter described was duly assessed for
taxation in the year 20____ to _____________________________ (Stating name as on
Assessment Roll) and was thereafter on the ____ day of __________________, 20____,
duly sold to the City of Piedmont by _______________________________, Tax
Collector of said City of Piedmont, for nonpayment of delinquent taxes which had been
legally levied in said year 20____, and were a lien on said real property, the total amount
for which the same was sold being $_____________________.
AND WHEREAS, the period of five years has elapsed since said sale and no
person has redeemed the said property.
NOW, THEREFORE, the said first party in consideration of the premises, and in
pursuance of the Ordinance in such case made and provided does hereby grant to the said
second party that certain real property in the City of Piedmont, County of Alameda, State
of California, more particularly described as follows, to-wit: (Description)
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, said first party has hereunto set his hand the day and
year first above written.
20-20
Taxation
_____________________________________
Tax Collector of the
City of Piedmont”
(Ord. No. 63 N.S., §31)
SEC 20.50 FURTHER PROVISIONS CONCERNING DEED TO THE CITY;
FORCE AND EFFECT OF DEED
No other matters need be recited in the deed than those provided for in the form
set out in the preceding section. No charge shall be made by the tax collector for the
making of any such deed. All such deeds shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder and the expense of acknowledging and recording the same shall be in charge
against the City. All such deeds, after having been duly recorded as herein provided, shall
be transmitted to the clerk and by him filed in his office. Such deed, duly acknowledged
or proved, is prima facie evidence that the property was assessed as required by law; that
the property was equalized as required by law; that the taxes were levied in accordance
with law; that the taxes were not paid; that at a proper time and place the property was
sold as prescribed by law and by the proper officer; that the property was not redeemed;
and, that the person who executed the deed was the proper officer. (Ord. No. 63 N.S.,
§31)
SEC. 20.51 ASSESSMENT ROLL, DELINQUENT LIST OR CERTIFIED COPIES
THEREOF PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF ASSESSMENT, ETC.
The assessment roll or delinquent list, or a copy thereof, certified by the clerk,
showing unpaid taxes against any person or property, is prima facie evidence of the
assessment, the property assessed, the delinquency, the amount of taxes due and unpaid,
and that all the forms of law in relation to the assessment and levy of such taxes have
been complied with. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §33)
SEC. 20.52 REDEMPTION OF PROPERTY AFTER SALE TO CITY-AMOUNT TO
BE PAID
In all cases where real estate has been or may hereafter be sold for delinquent
taxes to the City and the City has not disposed of the same, the person whose estate has
been or may hereafter be sold, his heirs, executors, administrators, or other successors
interest shall, at any time after the same has been sold to the City and before the City
shall have disposed of the same, have the right to redeem such real estate by paying to the
clerk the sum of the following:
(a) The amount of sold taxes
(b) The delinquent penalties and costs which were a lien on the property at the
time of the sale to the City.
20-21
Taxation
(c) Redemption penalties as defined in the following section.
(d) A redemption fee of one dollar and fifty cents on each separately valued
parcel sold to the City. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §32; Ord. No. 197 N.S., §5)
SEC. 20.53 SAME-REDEMPTION PENALTIES
Redemption penalties, as used in the preceding section, shall be the sum of the
following:
(a) Beginning July first of the year of sale to the City, and the amount of sold
taxes at the time of sale, one percent a month for the first year; then, one-half of one
percent a month to the time of redemption.
(b) Beginning July first of each subsequent year, on the unpaid taxes for
which the property would have been sold to the City in that year if there had not been a
previous sale, one percent a month for the first year thereafter; then, one-half of one
percent a month to the time of redemption. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §32; Ord. No. 197 N.S.,
§5)
SEC. 20.53-1 SAME-PROPERTY NOT ON CURRENT ROLL
If the property is not on the current roll, the tax collector may do either of the
following:
(a) Require the the redemptioner pay the current taxes and penalties as if the
property were originally on the current roll.
(b) Require the redemptioner to pay the current taxes, penalties and costs
along with the amount necessary to redeem. The tax collector shall base his computation
of the amount of these taxes on the valuation furnished him by the assessor.
This section is not applicable if the property is not on the current roll because of
having been acquired by the City other than by tax deed. (Ord. No. 256 N.S., §1)
SEC. 20.53-2 SAME-CERTIFICATE OF REDEMPTION
Upon redemption the tax collector shall issue a certificate of redemption which
shall show:
(a) The year of sale and number.
(b) A description of the property.
(c) In detail, the amounts to be paid.
(d) The name of the person making the payment.
20-22
Taxation
(e) The date of redemption. (Ord. No. 256 N.S., §2)
SEC. 20.53-3 SAME-DESTRUCTION OF REDEMPTION CERTIFICATE MORE
THAN TWELVE YEARS OLD
Any redemption certificate more than twelve years old may be destroyed by the
tax collector. Such description shall be approved by the order of the City Council. (Ord.
No. 256 N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.54 EFFECT OF MISTAKE, INVALID ASSESSMENT, ETC., ON SALE
When land shall have been sold as the property of a designated person for tax
correctly imposed, no misnomer of the owner or other mistake relating to the ownership
of such property shall affect the validity of the sale. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §39)
SEC. 20.55 SEIZURE AND SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY FOR TAXES;
SALE TO BE AT PUBLIC AUCTION; NOTICE
The tax collector may, after the first Monday in February in each year, collect the
taxes due on personal property, except when real estate is liable therefor, by seizure and
sale of any personal property owned by the delinquent. The sale must be at public
auction, and of sufficient amount of the property to pay the taxes, percentages and costs.
The sale must be made after one week’s notice of the time and place thereof, given by
posting in three public places. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §34)
SEC. 20.56 FINAL SETTLEMENT OF TAX COLLECTOR WITH CLERK;
PROCEDURE
The tax collector must, on the third Monday in February and on the third Monday
in June each year, attend at the office of the clerk, with the delinquent list, and the clerk
must carefully compare the list with the assessments of persons and property not marked
as paid on the assessment roll; and, when taxes have been paid, must note that fact in the
appropriate column in the assessment roll. The clerk must then administer to the tax
collector an oath, to be written and subscribed in the delinquent list, stating that every
person and all property assessed in the delinquent list, on which taxes have been paid, has
been credited in the list with such payment.
The clerk shall then foot up the amount of taxes remaining unpaid and credit the
tax collector with the amount, and shall have a final settlement with him, and the
delinquent list must then remain on file in the clerk’s office. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §35)
SEC. 20.57 REFUND OF TAXES
A refund of taxes may be ordered by the Council, but only upon those grounds
provided in Article I, Chapter 5, Part 9, Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of
20-23
Taxation
California, and no claim for refund shall be considered unless a verified application
therefore is made in writing, signed by or on behalf of the party who paid the taxes, and
filed within three years after making the tax payment for which the refund is sought.
(Ord. No. 63 N.S., §36; Ord. No. 272 N.S., §7)
SEC. 20.58 DOUBLE ASSESSMENTS
When the tax collector discovers that any property has been assessed more than
once for the same year, he shall collect only the tax justly due, and shall make return of
the facts to the clerk by an affidavit. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §37)
SEC. 20.59 DISCOVERY OF ERROR IN ASSESSMENT, ETC., BEFORE SALE;
TRANSFERRED TO NEXT YEAR’S ASSESSMENT LIST
In case the tax collector shall discover before any sale that by reason of irregular
assessment or any other error, any land ought not to be sold, he shall not offer it for sale,
but the Council shall in such case cause the assessor to enter the uncollected taxes upon
the assessment list of the next succeeding year, to be collected as other taxes entered
thereon. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §38)
SEC. 20.60 WHEN ASSESSOR IS TO COLLECT TAXES ON PERSONAL
PROPERTY; PROCEDURE
The assessor shall collect the taxes on personal property, in all cases in which, in
his opinion, such taxes are not a lien on real property sufficient to secure the payment of
the taxes. He shall pay to the tax collector all personal property taxes collected by him,
and in his hands, and he shall make settlement therefor with the tax collector, and the
assessor shall be governed as to the amount of the taxes to be by him collected on
personal property by the rate of the previous year. (Ord. No. 63 N.S., §40)
ARTICLE III. CIGARETTE TAX
SECS. 20.61 to 20.82 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 286 N.S., §1
ARTICLE IV. REAL PROPERTY CONVEYANCE TAX
SEC. 20.83 TITLE AND PURPOSE
This article may be cited as the “Piedmont Real Property Conveyance Tax
Ordinance”. The tax imposed under this article is solely for the purpose of raising
revenue for the usual and current expenses of the City. This article is not enacted for
regulatory purposes. (Ord. No. 277 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 282 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 364 N.S.,
§1)
20-24
Taxation
SEC. 20.84 IMPOSITION OF TAX
A tax is hereby imposed on each transfer, by deed, instrument or writing, by
which any lands, tenements or other real property sold, located in the City, are or is
granted, assigned transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, a purchaser or
purchasers thereof, or any other person or persons at or by the direction of said purchaser
or purchasers, when the value of the consideration exceeds one hundred dollars, said tax
to be at the rate of thirteen dollars for each one thousand dollars or fractional part of one
thousand dollars of the value of the consideration. Transfers for no consideration are
exempt.
As used herein, “value of the consideration” means the total consideration, valued
in money of the United States, paid or delivered or contracted to be paid or delivered in
return for the transfer of real property, including the amount of any indebtedness, existing
immediately prior to the transfer which is secured by a lien, deed of trust or other
encumbrance on the property conveyed and which continues to be secured by such lien,
deed of trust or encumbrance after said transfer, and also including the amount of any
indebtedness which is secured by a lien, deed of trust or encumbrance given or placed
upon the property in connection with the transfer to secure the payment of the purchase
price or any part thereof which remains unpaid at the time of the transfer. “Value of the
consideration” also includes the amount of any special assessment levied or imposed
upon the property by a public body, district or agency, where said special assessment is a
lien or encumbrance on the property and the purchaser or transferee agrees to pay such a
special assessment or takes the property subject to the lien of such special assessment.
The value of any lien or encumbrance of a type other than those which are hereinabove
specifically included, existing immediately prior to the transfer and remaining after said
transfer, shall not be included in determining the value of the consideration. If the value
of the consideration cannot be definitively determined, or is left open to be fixed by
future contingencies, “value of the consideration” shall be deemed to mean the fair
market value of the property at the time of transfer after deducting the amount of any lien
or encumbrance if any of a type which would be excluded in determining the value of the
consideration pursuant to above provisions of this section. (Ord. No. 277 N.S.; Ord. No.
364 N.S., Ord. 546 N.S.)
SEC. 20.85 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT
Any tax imposed pursuant to section 20.84 hereof shall be paid by any person
who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose
use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. No. 277 N.S., §3; Ord. No. 364
N.S., §3)
SEC. 20.86 EXEMPTION-WRITTEN SECURITY INSTRUMENT
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to any instrument in
writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. No. 277 N.S., §4; Ord. No. 364 N.S., §4)
20-25
Taxation
SEC. 20.87 SAME-UNITED STATES, STATE OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party
shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this article when the exempt agency is
acquiring title. (Ord. No. 277 N.S., §5; Ord. No. 364 N.S., §5)
SEC. 20.88 SAME-BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making, delivering
or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganizing or adjustment:
(a) Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
(b) Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended;
(c) Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States
Code, as amended; or
(d) Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
Subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making,
delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from
the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. No. 277 N.S., §6; Ord. No. 364
N.S., §6)
SEC. 20.89 SAME INSTRUMENTS PURSUANT TO S.E.C. ORDER
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making or delivery
of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission,
as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but
only if:
(a) The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate
to effectuate the provisions of Section 79K of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating
to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
(b) Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
(c) Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. No. 277 N.S.,
§7; Ord. No. 364 N.S., §7)
20-26
Taxation
SEC. 20.90 SAME-PARTNERSHIPS
(a) In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed
pursuant to this article by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or
otherwise if:
(1) Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954; and
(2) Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty
concerned.
(b) If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section
708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this article, such partnership
shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair
market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all
realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.
(c) Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason
of a termination described in subdivision (b) of this section, and any transfer pursuant
thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.
(Ord. No. 277 N.S., §9; Ord. No. 364 N.S., §8)
SEC. 20.91 INSTRUMENTS IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply with respect to any
transfer to a beneficiary or mortgagee which is taken in lieu of a foreclosure. (Ord. No.
277 N.S., §9; Ord. No. 364 N.S., §9)
SEC. 20.92 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX
The tax collector of the City (hereinafter in this article referred to as “tax
collector”) shall collect the tax imposed under this article and shall otherwise administer
this article. He may make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the article, as
he may deem reasonably necessary or desirable to administer this article. In the
administration of this article, the tax collector shall interpret its provisions consistently
with those Documentary Stamp Tax Regulations adopted by the Internal Revenue Service
of the United States Treasury Department which relate to the tax on conveyances and
identified as Sections 47.4361-1, 47.4361-2 and 47.4362-1 of Part 47 of Title 26 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, as the same existed on November 8, 1967, except that for
the purposes of this article:
(a) The term “realty” as used in said regulations, shall be deemed to mean
“real property” as such term is defined by and under the laws of the state;
20-27
Taxation
(b) Those provisions of said regulations providing for deduction of the value
of any lien or encumbrance existing before the sale and not removed thereby shall not
apply;
(c) Those provisions of said regulations relating to the rate of the tax shall not
apply;
(d) Those provisions of said regulations which conflict with the provisions of
this article shall not apply. (Ord. No. 277 N.S., §10; Ord. No. 364 N.S., §10)
SEC. 20.93 DUE DATES; DELINQUENCY; PENALTIES; INTEREST
The tax imposed under this article is due and payable at the time of the deed,
instrument or writing effecting a transfer subject to the tax is delivered, and is delinquent
if unpaid at the time of recordation thereof. In the event that the tax is not paid prior to
becoming delinquent, a delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax shall
accrue.
In the event a portion of the tax is unpaid prior to becoming delinquent, the
penalty shall only accrue as to the portion remaining unpaid. An additional penalty of ten
percent shall accrue if the tax remains unpaid on the ninetieth day following the date of
the original delinquency. Interest shall accrue at the rate of one-half of one percent a
month or fraction thereof, on the amount of tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date the
tax becomes delinquent to the date of payment. Interest and penalty accrued shall become
a part of the tax. (Ord. No. 277 N.S., §11; Ord. No. 364 N.S., §11)
SEC. 20.94 DECLARATION REQUIRED
The tax imposed by this article shall be paid to the tax collector by the persons
referred to in section 20.95. Payment shall be accompanied by a declaration of the
amount of tax due signed by the person paying the tax or by his agent. The declaration
shall include a statement that the value of the consideration on which the tax due was
computed includes all indebtedness secured by liens, deeds of trust, or other
encumbrances remaining or placed on the property transferred at the time of transfer, and
also includes all special assessments on the property which the purchaser or transferee
agrees to pay or which remain a lien on the property at the time of transfer. The
declaration shall identify the deed, instrument or writing effecting the transfer for which
the tax is being paid. The tax collector may require delivery to him of a copy of such
deed, instrument or writing whenever he deems such to be reasonably necessary to
adequately identify such writing or to administer the provisions of this article. The tax
collector may rely on the declaration as to the amount of the tax due, provided he has no
reason to believe that the full amount of the tax due is not shown on the declaration.
Whenever the tax collector has reason to believe that the full amount of tax due is
not shown on the declaration or has not been paid, he may, by notice served upon any
person liable for the tax, require him to furnish a true copy of he records relevant to the
value of the consideration or fair market value of the property transferred. Such notice
20-28
Taxation
may be served at any time within three years after recordation of the deed, instrument or
writing which transfers such property. (Ord. No. 364 N.S., §12)
SEC. 20.95 DETERMINATION OF DEFICIENCY
If on the basis of such information as he receives pursuant to the last paragraph of
section 20.94 and/or on the basis of such other relevant information that comes into his
possession, he determines that the amount of tax due as set forth in the declaration, or as
paid, as insufficient, he may recomputed the tax due on the basis of such information.
If the declaration required by section 20.94 is not submitted, the tax collector may
make an estimate of the value of the consideration for the property conveyed and
determined the amount of tax to be paid on the basis of any information in the possession
or that may come into his possession.
One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due with
respect to any transfer. (Ord. No. 364 N.S., §13)
SEC. 20.96 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION
The tax collector shall give notice to a person liable for payment of the tax
imposed under this article of his determination made under section 20.95. Such notice
shall be given within three years after the recordation of the deed, instrument or writing
effecting the transfer on which the tax deficiency determination was made. (Ord. No. 364
N.S., §14)
SEC. 20.97 MANNER OF GIVING NOTICE
Any notice required to be given by the tax collector under this article may be
served personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made by depositing the notice in
the United States mail, in a sealed envelope with postage paid addressed to the person on
whom it is to be served at his address as it appears in the records of the City or as
ascertained by the tax collector. The service is complete at the time of the deposit of the
notice in the United States mail, without extension of time for any reason. (Ord. No. 364
N.S., §15)
SEC. 20.98 PETITION FOR REDETERMINATION
Any person against whom a determination is made under this article or any person
directly interested may petition for a redetermination within sixty days after service upon
the person of notice thereof. If a petition for redetermination is not filed within the sixtyday
period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the period. (Ord. No. 364
N.S., §16)
SEC. 20.99 CONSIDERATION OF PETITION; HEARING
20-29
Taxation
20-30
If a petition for redetermination is filed within the sixty-day period, the tax
collector shall reconsider the determination and, if the person has so requested in his
petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing, and shall give him ten days’ notice of the
time and place of the hearing. The tax collector may designate one or more deputies for
the purpose of conducting hearings and may continue a hearing from time to time as may
be necessary. (Ord. No. 364 N.S., §17)
Utility Use Taxes
20A-1
Chapter 20A
UTILITY USE TAXES
'20A.1 Definitions
'20A.2 Constitutional exemptions
'20A.3 Telephone users tax
'20A.4 Electricity users tax
'20A.5 Gas users tax
'20A.6 Water users tax
'20A.7 REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 368
'20A.8 Interest and penalty
'20A.9 Actions to collect
'23A.10 Duty to Collect-Procedure
'20A.11 Additional powers and duties of tax administrator
'20A.12 Assessment-Administrative remedy
'20A.13 Records
'20A.14 Refunds
SEC. 20A.1 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in
this section:
(a) "City" means the City of Piedmont.
(b) "Month" means a calendar month.
(c) "Person" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint
stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law
trust, society or individual.
(d) "Service Supplier" means a person required to collect and remit a tax imposed by this
chapter.
(e) "Service User" means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.
(f) "Tax Administrator" means the finance officer of the City of Piedmont
(g) "Telephone Corporation", "Electrical Corporation", "Gas Corporation", "Water
Corporation", and "Cable Television Corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections
Utility Use Taxes
20A-2
234, 218, 222, 241 and 215-5, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California as
said sections existed on January 1, 1975. "Electrical corporation" shall be construed to include any
municipality or franchised agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service
user. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '1)
SEC. 20A.2 CONSTITUTIONAL EXEMPTION
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of
such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the
state. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '2)
SEC. 20A.3 TELEPHONE USERS TAX
(a) There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for intrastate telephone services by every
person in the City using such services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of seven and
one-half percent of the charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such
services.
(b) As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by
inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for
a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic
charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "charges"
include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to public
utility regulation during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available
for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation; nor shall
the words "telephone communication services" include land mobile services or maritime mobile services
as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as said section existed on
January 1, 1970. The term "telephone communication services" refers to that service which provides
access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephonic quality communications with substantially all
persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users tax is
intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone having a situs in the City, irrespective of
whether a particular telephone call originates and/or terminates within the City.
(c) The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person
providing the intrastate telephone communication services. The amount of the tax collected in one
month shall be remitted to the tax collector on or before the last day of the following month.
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the tax imposed under this
section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to
the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed
under Division 2, Part 20 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, as such section existed on the
effective date hereof. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '3)
Utility Use Taxes
20A-3
SEC. 20A.4 ELECTRICITY USERS TAX
(a) There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City using electrical energy in the City.
The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of seven and one-half percent of the charges made
for such energy and shall be paid by the person paying for such energy. "Charges," as used in this
section, shall include charges made for (1) metered energy, and (2) minimum charges for service,
including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly
charges.
(b) As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the
storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or
other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided,
however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the
charging of batteries; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public
utility or governmental agency at a point within the City for resale; or the use of such energy in the
production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency.
(c) The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person
supplying such energy. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax collector
on or before the last day of the following month. Remittance of tax may be predicated on a formula
based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's customers. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '4)
SEC. 20A.5 GAS USERS TAX
(a) There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City, other than a gas corporation or
electrical corporation, using in the City gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed
by this section shall be at the rate of seven and one-half percent of the charges made for such gas and
shall be paid by the person paying for such gas.
(b) There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed:
1. Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains or
pipes;
2. Charges made for gas solely for use in the generation of electrical energy for the
production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency;
and
3. Charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct
of the business of gas public utilities.
(c) The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling
the gas. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax collector on or before the last
Utility Use Taxes
20A-4
day of the following month. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '5)
SEC. 20A.6 WATER USERS TAX
(a) There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City using water which is delivered through
mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of one dollar per month.
(b) The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the property owner by Alameda
County long with property taxes. The amount shall be due semi-annually and shall be remitted to
Alameda County on or before either December 10th or April 10th, whichever is applicable. (Ord. No.
363 N.S., '6; Ord. No. 368 N.S., '1; Ord. No. 459 N.S., '2, eff. 8/1/84)
SEC. 20A.7 REPEALED BY ORD. NO. 368 N.S.
SEC. 20A.8 INTEREST AND PENALTY
(a) Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or
before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent.
(b) In the event payment of any of the taxes provided under this chapter are delinquent, then a
penalty charge of six percent will be added to the amount of the tax due, and in addition thereto, if said
delinquency continues for over fifteen days from the date due, interest will be payable on the amount
due, not including the penalty charge, at the rate of seven percent per year, accruing from the date on
which the tax payment was originally due. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '8)
SEC. 20A.9 ACTIONS TO COLLECT
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which
has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person
required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter
shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for recovery of such amount. (Ord. No. 363
N.S., '9)
SEC. 20A.10 DUTY TO COLLECT-PROCEDURES
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows:
(a) The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the
charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount
paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has
accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to
have been paid except in those cases where a service user pays the full amount of the charges but
Utility Use Taxes
20A-5
notifies the service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on such charges.
(b) The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full
regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular
billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one
or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing
period. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '10)
SEC. 20A.11 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR
(a) The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is directed to enforce each and all
of the provisions of this chapter.
(b) The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection
and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the
tax administrator's office.
(c) The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of
this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing
procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in
conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall
be on file in the tax administrator's office. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '11)
SEC. 20A.12 ASSESSMENT-ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY
(a) The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required
to remit.
(b) Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the
amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that
a service user has refused to pay the amount of the tax to such person, or whenever the tax
administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, he may relieve such person of the obligation to
collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods.
(c) The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused along with the names,
addresses and reasons of the service users refusing to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this
chapter.
Utility Use Taxes
20A-6
(d) The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to
collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be
served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United
States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was
made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed his address, to
his last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen days
from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not
accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice
shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required
to be paid. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '12)
SEC. 20A.13 RECORDS
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the City any tax imposed by
this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the
tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable
times. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '13)
SEC. 20A.14 REFUNDS
(a) Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been
erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be
refunded as provided in this section.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a service supplier may
claim a refund or take a credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than
once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received, when it is established that the service user from
whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the service
user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect
and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax
imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user may refund such amount to the service
user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other
monthly returns, providing such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than three years from the date
of overpayment.
(c) No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes
his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. No. 363 N.S., '14)
20B-1
CHAPTER 20B
MUNICIPAL SERVICES SPECIAL TAX
§20B.1 Authority to Adopt Measure
§20B.2 Authorization to Levy Special Municipal Tax
§20B.3 Determination of Amount to be Raised
§20B.4 Maximum Tax Rate/Method of Assessment
§20B.5 Hearing, Tax Lien and Inclusion in City Taxes
§20B.6 Collection
§20B.7 Increase Appropriations Limit
§20B.8 Funding and Expending Proceeds
§20B.9 Unexpended Residue
§20B.10 Severability
§20B.11 Duration, Amendment, Repeal
§20B.12 Exemptions
SECTION 20B.1 AUTHORITY TO ADOPT MEASURE
This Ordinance and the tax authorized herein is adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Article 3.7 of Chapter 4 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code (Sections
53720-53730) and the California Constitution Articles XI, Section 5, XIII A, Section 4 and XIII
D, Section 3(a)(2). The tax authorized herein is based on use and occupancy of improved real
property.
SECTION 20B.2 AUTHORIZATION TO LEVY SPECIAL MUNICIPAL TAX
If in any fiscal year commencing on or after July 1, 2017, the City Council shall
determine that municipal services, including, but not limited to, police and fire protection, street
maintenance, building regulations, library services, recreation, parks maintenance, planning and
public works and similar services, are necessary for the public good, welfare and safety, and that
the cost of making available such services will exceed the amount of funds generated through
other revenue and income of the City for such services, then it may levy a special tax for such
fiscal year on each parcel of real property within the City in a manner provided herein. This is a
non-ad valorem parcel tax which, pursuant to California Constitution Article XIII D, Section 3,
shall be deemed a special tax as defined pursuant to Section 53721 of the California Government
Code.
SECTION 20B.3 DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT TO BE RAISED
Each year concurrent with the adoption of the annual budget, the City Council will
determine the total amount of expenditures necessary to provide adequate levels of municipal
services as defined in Section 20B.2 and deduct therefrom the projected revenue to be collected
from sources other than this special tax. The difference, if any, shall be the maximum amount of
funds to be derived from the tax authorized by this Ordinance for such year.
20B-2
SECTION 20B.4 MAXIMUM TAX RATE/METHOD OF ASSESSMENT
After determining the amount of tax to be raised under Section 20B.3, the City Council
shall apportion said amount among the parcels of real property within the City not exempted by
law or exempted pursuant to Section 20B.12, as follows:
BASIC MUNICIPAL SERVICES TAX MAXIMUM RATE SCHEDULE
The foregoing tax rate schedule shall apply for the 2017/2018 tax year commencing July
1, 2017, and ending on June 30, 2018. For each tax year thereafter commencing with the
2018/2019 tax year, the foregoing tax rate schedule shall be adjusted as follows:
An amount equal to the percentage increase or decrease in the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) for all Urban Consumers (All items) (Base Year 1984 = 100) (Not Seasonally Adjusted)
for the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, California area, as published by the United States
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the period from December 2016 to
December of the fiscal year immediately prior to the year in which the percentage adjustment
will apply, multiplied by the specific tax rate in the foregoing Maximum Municipal Services Tax
Maximum Rate schedule. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum percentage increase of
this tax as compared to the same tax in the prior fiscal year shall be 4%.
For purposes of example only, if the maximum tax rate in the 2017/2018 fiscal year for a
single family resident parcel of 5,000 square feet is $563.00, and the Consumer Price Index for
December 2016 is 100 and for December 2017 is 103, the increase of 3 is a 3% increase,
meaning an additional maximum tax of $16.89 for the 2018-2019 fiscal year or a total maximum
tax of $579.89 for such fiscal year.
The records of the Alameda County Assessor as of March 1 of the fiscal year
immediately preceding the fiscal year in which the special taxes are payable shall determine
whether or not any particular parcel is unimproved for purposes of this Ordinance. All improved
parcels which are located entirely within the City of Piedmont shall be subject to the special
Per Parcel According to
Size
Single Family
Residence
Developed
Commercial
Properties
Multi-Family
Residence
Parcels Divided
by Tax Code
Area Line
0 to 4,999 sq. ft. $501
5,000 to 9,999 sq. ft. $563
10,000 to 14,999 sq. ft. $650
15,000 to 20,000 sq. ft. $742
Over 20,000 sq. ft. $845
0 to 10,000 sq. ft. $845
Over 10,000 sq. ft. $1,266
Per Dwelling Unit $348
Per Parcel $514
20B-3
taxes assessed pursuant to Chapter 20B. In addition, on improved parcels which are located
partially within the City of Piedmont, all such parcels whose residents are eligible to register to
vote in Piedmont and/or all such parcels which are eligible to receive services from the City of
Piedmont pursuant to the 911 Emergency System as of March 1 of the fiscal year immediately
preceding the fiscal year in which the special taxes are payable shall be subject to the special
taxes assessed pursuant to Chapter 20B. Each parcel shall be taxed pursuant to this Section
20B.4 according to its actual use as of March 1 of the fiscal year immediately preceding the
fiscal year in which any such special tax is payable.
SECTION 20B.5 HEARING, TAX LIEN AND INCLUSION IN CITY TAXES
Prior to levying a tax under this Ordinance in any fiscal year, the City Council shall
conduct a public hearing on the proposed tax. Such hearing may be conducted simultaneously
with a hearing relating to the annual budget for the fiscal year in which the special tax is to
apply. Notice of such hearing shall be posted on the official bulletin board at City Hall at least
10 days prior to the hearing. All of the information and material which the City Council intends
to consider at such hearing and the proposed amount of tax to be raised shall be made available
to the public by being on file in the office of the City Clerk for at least 10 days prior to said
hearing.
Following said hearing, the Council may adopt a resolution fixing the amount of tax to be
raised.
SECTION 20B.6 COLLECTION
Pursuant to Government Code section 53087.4, any special tax authorized under this
chapter shall be collected by the Tax Collector of the County of Alameda. Any charges made by
such Tax Collector shall be paid out of funds deducted from the gross proceeds of the tax.
SECTION 20B.7 INCREASE APPROPRIATIONS LIMIT
Pursuant to California Constitution Article XIIIB, the appropriations limit for the City of
Piedmont will be increased by the aggregate sum collected by levy of this special tax in each of
the years covered by this Ordinance.
SECTION 20B.8 FUNDING AND EXPENDING PROCEEDS
Proceeds of any tax levied under this Ordinance shall be deposited into the General Fund
of the City.
20B-4
SECTION 20B.9 UNEXPENDED RESIDUE
To the extent it has actually determined by an audit of the City’s finances that there is an
unexpended residue (as defined hereafter) of any money raised by the City under this Ordinance
for a particular fiscal year, then the City Council shall use such residue in the next fiscal year for
which the tax under this Ordinance has not been established, and shall reduce the amount of the
tax for such subsequent fiscal year by the amount of the unexpended residue. Unexpended
residue of any money raised by the City under this Ordinance may only be used in the
succeeding year for the purposes stated in this Ordinance or and to the extent there is an
unexpended residue for the 2016-2017 fiscal year ending June 30, 2017, such unexpended
residue shall be returned to the taxpayer on the same pro rata basis as originally levied by a
refund or by a reduction in subsequent taxes. “Unexpended residue” as used in this Section
20B.9 shall mean the amount the General Fund Reserve of the City exceeds twenty-five percent
(25%) of the actual general operating expenses of the City in the fiscal year in question.
“General Fund Reserve” as used in this Section 20B.9 is defined as the unencumbered balance
maintained in the general fund for the purpose of meeting unforeseen expenses, unrealized
revenue estimates, or other emergencies of the City.
SECTION 20B.10 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions or applications,
and to this end the provisions this Ordinance are declared to be severable.
SECTION 20B.11 DURATION, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL
The authorization to levy a tax under this Ordinance shall expire with the fiscal year 2020-2021
ending June 30, 2021. This Ordinance, or any provision thereof, may only be amended or
repealed by approval of a two-thirds majority of the voters voting on the proposition at any
initiative or referendum election.
This Ordinance shall be adopted, if approved by a two-thirds majority of the voters
voting on the proposition at an election to be held on Tuesday, June 7, 2016, and shall be
effective commencing with the fiscal year that begins on July 1, 2017; provided that the
provisions of Chapter 20B in effect on June 7, 2016 shall remain in effect for all purposes
relating to the taxes provided thereunder through the fiscal year ending June 30, 2017.
SECTION 20B.12 EXEMPTIONS
The City Council may from time to time by Council resolution adopt exemptions to the tax
measures set further herein.
Rev. 2017-07-01 (Ord. 721 N.S.)
Chapter 20E
SPECIAL MUNICIPAL SEWER TAX
§20E.1 Authorization to Levy General Municipal Tax
§20E.2 Determination of Amount to be Raised
§20E.3 Maximum Rate/Method of Assessment
§20E.4 Hearing, Tax Lien and Inclusion in City Taxes
§20E.5 Collection
§20E.6 Funding and Expending Proceeds
§20E.7 Severability
§20E.8 Duration, Amendment, Repeal
§20E.9 Exemptions
SECTION 20E.1 AUTHORIZATION TO LEVY SPECIAL MUNICIPAL SEWER
TAX
For any fiscal year commencing on or after July 1, 2001, the City Council shall
determine what the total expenses will be required for the proper maintenance,
construction, reconstruction, repair and operation of all the sewer facilities and
appurtenances within the City, and it may levy a special tax for such fiscal year on each
parcel of real property within the City in a manner provided herein. This is a tax for
special governmental purposes and the funds derived from such special tax shall be
limited to the uses set forth in this Section 20E.1.
SECTION 20E.2 DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT TO BE RAISED
Each year concurrent with the adoption of the annual budget, the City Council
will determine the total amount of expenditures necessary to provide adequate levels of
municipal sewer services as defined in Section 20E. This shall be the maximum amount
of funds to be derived from the tax authorized by this Ordinance for such year.
SECTION 20E.3 MAXIMUM TAX RATE/METHOD OF ASSESSMENT
After determining the total amount of tax to be raised under Section 20E.2, the
City Council shall apportion said amount among the parcels of real property within the
City not exempted by law or exempted pursuant to Section 20B.12, as follows:
(a) Sewer Connection. There shall be an annual sewer tax equal to the
number of sewer connections on each parcel of real property multiplied by an amount to
be determined by the City Council for that fiscal year.
(b) Additional Tax. There shall be an additional annual sewer tax for
each parcel of real property in amount to be determined by the City Council which in no
case shall exceed the maximum amounts set forth hereafter as they may be adjusted for
cost of living purposes as provided hereafter.
MAXIMUM SEWER TAX RATE SCHEDULE
Per Parcel According to
Size
Single Family
Residence
Developed
Commercial
Properties
Multi-Family
Residence
Parcels Divided
by Tax Code
Area Line
0 to 4,999 sq. ft. $379
5,000 to 9,999 sq. ft. $432
10,000 to 14,999 sq. ft. $498
15,000 to 20,000 sq. ft. $581
Over 20,000 sq. ft. $684
0 to 10,000 sq. ft. $684
Over 10,000 sq. ft.
$942
Per Dwelling Unit $316
Per Parcel $379
The foregoing tax rate schedule shall apply for the 2001/2002 tax year
commencing July 1, 2001, and ending on June 30, 2002. For each tax year thereafter
commencing with the 2002/2003 tax year, the foregoing tax rate schedule shall be
adjusted as follows:
An amount equal to the percentage increase or decrease in the Consumer Price
Index for all Urban Consumers (All items) (Base Year 1994 = 100) for San Francisco-
Oakland, California, as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics, for the period from December 1999 to December of the fiscal year
immediately prior to the year in which the percentage adjustment will apply, multiplied
by the specific tax rate in the foregoing Maximum Sewer Tax Rate Schedule. For
purposes of example only, if the maximum tax rate for a single family resident parcel of
4,000 square feet is $379.00, and the Consumer Price Index for December 1999 is 100
and for December 2001 is 106, the increase of 6 is a 6% increase, meaning an additional
maximum tax of $22.74 for the 2002/2003 fiscal year or a total maximum tax of $401.74
for such fiscal year.
The records of the Alameda County Assessor as of March 1 of the fiscal year
immediately preceding the fiscal year in which the special taxes are payable shall
determine whether or not any particular parcel is unimproved for purposes of this
Ordinance. All improved parcels which are located entirely within the City of Piedmont
shall be subject to the special taxes assessed pursuant to this Chapter 20.E. In addition,
on improved parcels which are located partially within the City of Piedmont, all such
parcels whose residents are eligible to register to vote in Piedmont and/or all such parcels
which are eligible to receive services from the City of Piedmont pursuant to the 911
Emergency System as of March 1 of the fiscal year immediately preceding the fiscal year
in which the special sewer taxes are payable shall be subject to the special taxes assessed
pursuant to Chapter 20.E. Each parcel shall be taxed pursuant to this Chapter 20.E
according to its actual use as of March 1 of the fiscal year immediately preceding the
fiscal year in which any such special sewer tax is payable.
SECTION 20E.4 HEARING, TAX LIEN AND INCLUSION IN CITY TAXES
Prior to levying a special tax under this Ordinance in any fiscal year, the City
Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed tax. Such hearing may be
conducted simultaneously with a hearing relating to the annual budget for the fiscal year
in which the general tax is to apply. Notice of such hearing shall be posted on the official
bulletin board at City Hall at least 10 days prior to the hearing. All of the information
and material which the City Council intends to consider at such hearing and the proposed
amount of tax to be raised shall be made available to the public by being on file in the
office of the City Clerk for at least 10 days prior to said hearing.
Following said hearing, the Council may adopt a resolution fixing the total
amount of the special sewer tax to be raised.
SECTION 20E.5 COLLECTION
The City Council may elect to have any special tax authorized under this Chapter
collected either by the City or in the alternative by the Tax Collector of the County of
Alameda. If the services of the Tax Collector of the County of Alameda are elected, the
special tax may only be included on the annual tax bill sent out by such Tax Collector
and charges made by such Tax Collector shall be paid out of general funds deducted from
the gross proceeds of the tax.
SECTION 20E.6 FUNDING AND EXPENDING PROCEEDS
Proceeds of any tax levied under this Ordinance shall be deposited into a special
Municipal Sewer Tax Fund of the City.
SECTION 20E.7 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions or
applications, and to this end the provisions this Ordinance are declared to be severable.
SECTION 20E.8 DURATION, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL
This Ordinance, or any provision thereof, may only be amended or repealed by
approval of a two-thirds majority of the voters voting on the proposition at any initiative
or referendum election.
This Ordinance shall be adopted, if approved by a two-thirds majority of the
voters voting on the proposition at an election to be held on Tuesday, March 7, 2000, and
shall be effective commencing with the fiscal year that begins on July 1, 2001; provided
that the provisions of Chapter 20B in effect on March 7, 2000 shall remain in effect for
all purposes relating to the taxes provided thereunder through the fiscal year ending June
30, 2001.
SECTION 20E.9 EXEMPTIONS
The City Council may from time to time by Council resolution adopt exemptions
to the tax measures set further herein.
Trailer & Commercial Vehicles
21-1
Chapter 21
TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
ARTICLE I. Trailers
§21.1 REPEALED BY ORD. 373 N.S.
§21.2 Unlawful to locate or use as sleeping quarters in other than auto and trailer park
§21.3 Parking in garage or rear yard of owner's premises permitted
ARTICLE II. Utility Vehicles
§21.4 Definitions
§21.5 Parking restrictions-Ten p.m. to six a.m.
§21.6 Parking permits
§21.7 Parking restrictions-Residential district
ARTICLE I. Trailers
SEC. 21.1 REPEALED BY ORD. NO. 373 N.S.
SEC. 21.2 UNLAWFUL TO LOCATE OR USE AS SLEEPING QUARTERS IN OTHER
THAN AUTO AND TRAILER PARK
It shall be unlawful to locate or use as living or sleeping quarters any house trailer on any
premises other than those contained within an auto and trailer park duly permitted by the City, or
to permit the same to be done on any premises. (Ord. No. 212 N.S., §2)
SEC. 21.3 PARKING IN GARAGE OR REAR YARD OF OWNER'S PREMISES
PERMITTED
The owner of a trailer or trailer coach may park or store it in the garage or in the rear yard
of his property; provided, that the trailer or trailer coach is not used for living or sleeping
quarters while so parked or stored. (Ord. No. 212 N.S., §3)
ARTICLE II. Utility Vehicles
SEC. 21.4 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this article certain words used herein are defined as follows:
(A) Pickup Truck. "Pickup truck" means a four- wheeled motor
vehicle consisting of a passenger compartment and an open cargo bed, the rated load
capacity of which is in excess of one-half ton. For purposes of this definition, "open"
Trailer & Commercial Vehicles
21-2
includes cargo beds to which have been added covers to protect cargo from theft or the
elements.
(b) Camper. "Camper" means a motor vehicle to which any enclosure
designated to accommodate persons or serve as temporary living quarters has been
permanently or temporarily added.
(c) Self-contained Mobile Home. "Self-contained mobile home"
means any motor vehicle, other than a camper, which is primarily designed for human
habitation.
(d) Commercial Vehicle. "Commercial vehicle" means any motor
vehicle which is being used, other than primarily as transportation for its operator, in
connection with the business or occupation of its operator. (Ord. No. 320 N.S., §2(part);
Ord. No. 324 N.S., §1)
SEC. 21.5 PARKING RESTRICTIONS-TEN P.M. TO SIX A.M.
Every vehicle or vehicle and load eighty inches or more in overall width, and every truck
tractor, irrespective of width, shall not park upon any public street between the hours of ten p.m.
and six a.m.
The overall width of a vehicle or load shall be measured at the widest point of the vehicle
or load. It shall be measured from the outside of the outermost part to the opposite outside of the
outermost part.
Appendages of vehicles such as a side view mirror, clearance lights, door handles and
bumper guards are not included in the overall width. (Ord. No. 320 N.S., §2 (part), 1974; Ord.
No. 373 N.S., §2)
SEC. 21.6 PARKING PERMITS
A parking permit for a recreational vehicle or motor home which would otherwise be in
violation of Section 21.5 may be granted by the chief of police or his designee for a single
continuous period not exceeding forty-eight hours, and only one such permit shall be issued in
any continuous thirty-day period. Such a permit shall be in writing, and the chief of police may
establish other reasonable regulations relating to the issuance of such permit. (Ord. No. 320
N.S., §2 (part); Ord. No. 373 N.S., §3.)
Trailer & Commercial Vehicles
21-3
SEC. 21.7 PARKING RESTRICTIONS-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
No person shall park any commercial vehicle more than five hours in any residential
district except:
(a) While loading or unloading property, and time, in addition to such fivehour
period, is necessary to complete such work; or
(b) When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the
performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked,
and time, in addition to such five-hour period, is reasonably necessary to complete such
service. (Ord. No. 324 N.S., §2.)
Underground Utilities
22-1
Chapter 22
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
'22.1 Definitions
'22.2 Public hearing by Council
'22.3 Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution
'22.4 Unlawful acts
'22.5 Exceptions-Emergency or unusual circumstances
'22.6 Same-Other exceptions
'22.7 Notice to property owners and utility companies
'22.8 Responsibility of utility companies
'22.9 Responsibility of property owners
'22.10 Responsibility of City
'22.11 Extension of time
'22.12 Chapter not in lieu of other laws
SEC. 22.1 DEFINITIONS
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are
used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:
Commission. The public utilities commission of the state.
Person. Includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and
employees.
Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures. Poles, towers, supports,
wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platform, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts,
switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above
ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service.
Underground Utility District or District. That area in the City within which poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 22.3.
Utility. Includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. No. 279 N.S., '1)
SEC. 22.2 PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL
The City Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the
public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground
Underground Utilities
22-2
installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated
service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least
twenty days prior to the date thereof; provided that if the address of such property owner is not
the same as that of the property affected, the city clerk shall also mail an additional notice to the
occupant of the property. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued
from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to
be heard. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. No. 279 N.S. '2)
SEC. 22.3 COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS BY
RESOLUTION
If, after any such public hearing the City Council finds by the affirmative vote of four
councilmen that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area, the City Council shall, by resolution, declare
such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground
installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and
shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished
and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A
reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due
regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for
the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. No. 279
N.S., '3)
SEC. 22.4 UNLAWFUL ACTS
Whenever the City Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal
of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 22.3,
it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue,
employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after
the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as
such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property
prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such
owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 22.9, and for such
reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. No. 279 N.S., '4)
SEC. 22.5 EXCEPTIONS-EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and
maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, or the date of the next Council meeting,
whichever is later, without authority of the City Council in order to provide emergency service.
The City Council may grant special permission, on such terms as the City Council may deem
appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility,
to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated
overhead structures. (Ord. No. 279 N.S., '5)
Underground Utilities
22-3
SEC. 22.6 SAME-OTHER EXCEPTIONS
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 22.3 shall, unless otherwise
provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:
(a) Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the
satisfaction of the city engineer.
(b) Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.
(c) Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a
district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the
perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires
and associated overhead structures are not prohibited.
(d) Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty four thousand, five
hundred volts.
(e) Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a
bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on
the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.
(f) Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for
furnishing communication services.
(g) Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted
transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.
(h) Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be
used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. No. 279 N.S., '6)
SEC. 22.7 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 22.3,
the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning and in possession of real
property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk
shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person
occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their
premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new
location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities
on file with the commission.
Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted
Underground Utilities
22-4
pursuant to Section 22.3, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as
such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to the affected persons in possession of
such premises at such premises, and to the affected utilities. (Ord. No. 279 N.S., '7)
SEC. 22.8 RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district
created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 22.3, the supplying utility shall furnish
that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. No. 279
N.S., '8)
SEC. 22.9 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS
(A) Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or
structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his
property between the facilities referred to in Section 22.8 and the termination facility on or
within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.
(B) In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such
property does not comply with the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section within the time
provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 22.3, the City Council shall have the
power to authorize the city engineer to proceed in any of the following ways:
1. The city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served
and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and
removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying
utility service to such property.
2. The city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession
of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within
thirty days after receipt of such notice.
(a) The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be
given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on
either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States
mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in
possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be
addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be
addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the
last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General
Delivery, City of Piedmont, California. If notice is given by mail, such
notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has
been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is
Underground Utilities
22-5
given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city
engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a
copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in
size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises.
(b) The notice given by the city engineer to provide the require
underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to
be done, and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty
days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such
required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof
will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon
such property.
(c) If upon the expiration of the thirty day period, the required
underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall
forthwith proceed to do to work; provided, however, if such premises are
unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being
furnished thereto, the city engineer shall in lieu of providing the required
underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and
removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities
supplying utility service to such property. Upon completion of the work
by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the City Council
setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been
provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the
property against which such cost is to be assessed. The City Council shall
thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment
of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less
than ten days thereafter.
(d) The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such
protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
City Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.
(e) Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the City
Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any,
and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
(f) If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation
by the City Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city
engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and
Underground Utilities
22-6
tax collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the
assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add
the amount of such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied
against the premises upon which such assessment was not paid. The
assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes
are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear
interest at the rate of six percent per annum. (Ord. No. 279 N.S., '9)
SEC. 22.10 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles
required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to
remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 22.3.
(Ord. No. 279 N.S., '10)
SEC. 22.11 EXTENSION OF TIME
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to
Section 22.3 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials,
war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other
circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be
accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time for such limitation. (Ord. No.
279 N.S., '11)
SEC. 22.12 CHAPTER NOT IN LIEU OF OTHER LAWS
The references in Sections 22.7, 22.8 and 22.9 to the rules, regulations, and tariffs on file
with the commission shall in no way limit the police power, power of home rule, or any other
powers of the City or prevent the City from making additional requirements of the utilities as
may be legal under the laws of the state. (Ord. No. 279 N.S., '12)
Chapter 23
STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
§ 23.1 Findings
§ 23.2 Purposes and Implementation
§ 23.3 Definitions
§ 23.4 Franchise Fee for State Franchise Holders
§ 23.5 PEG Channels
§ 23.6 PEG Channel Facilities Fee and Payments
§ 23.7 Customer Service and Protection
§ 23.8 Penalties
SEC. 23.1 FINDINGS
(a) The Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“Act”), codified at
Public Utilities Code sections 5800 et seq., established a state video franchising system to govern
video franchises.
(b) Under the Act, only the State of California has the authority to grant franchises,
regulate build-out and non-discrimination standards, impose user and application fees and
establish franchise fees.
(c) Under the Act the City has the authority to manage the rights of way, regulate the
payment of Public, Education and Government (“PEG”) fees, require the provision of PEG
channels and enforce federal and state customer service standards.
SEC. 23.2 PURPOSES AND IMPLEMENTATION
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations for the provision of video service by state
franchise holders, in accordance with the Act. This chapter applies to video service providers
operating within the City pursuant to a valid state franchise.
SEC. 23.3 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section have the following meanings:
(a) “Act” means the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006,
codified at Public Utilities Code sections 5800 et seq.
(b) “City” means the City of Piedmont.
(c) “Franchise fee” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5830 or
its successor.
(d) “Gross revenues” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5860
or its successor.
1
(e) “Holder” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5830 or its
successor.
(f) “Material breach” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5900
or its successor.
(g) “Network” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5830 or its
successor.
(h) “PEG channels” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5870 or
its successor.
(i) “State franchise” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5830
or its successor.
(j) “Video service” has the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5830 or
its successor.
SEC. 23.4 FRANCHISE FEE FOR STATE FRANCHISE HOLDERS
(a) The franchise fee established within the city for cable franchises is five percent of
gross revenues. Every state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay a franchise fee to
the city in the amount of five percent of that state franchise holder’s gross revenues.
(b) Each state franchise holder shall remit the franchise fee to the City quarterly,
within 45 days after the end of the quarter for that calendar quarter. Each payment shall be
accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the franchise fee. If the
state franchise holder does not pay the franchise fee when due, the state franchise holder shall
pay a late payment charge at a rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the
period of delinquency, plus one percent. If the state franchise holder has overpaid the franchise
fee, it may deduct the overpayment from its next quarterly payment.
SEC. 23.5 PEG CHANNELS
(a) State franchise holders shall provide three PEG channels.
(b) All state franchise holders shall comply with the provisions of the Act related to
PEG channels. Without limiting the foregoing, the PEG channels shall all be carried on the basic
service tier. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from
other channels carried on the basic service tier and the channel numbers for the PEG channels
shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by
federal law and shall provide picture and sound quality and channel accessibility and location
equal to, or substantially equal to, that provided by the incumbent cable providers. After the
initial designation of PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without
the agreement of the local entity unless the change is required by federal law.
2
(c) A state franchise holder shall have three months from the date City requests the
PEG channels to designate the capacity. However, the three-month period shall be tolled by any
period during which the designation or provision of PEG channel capacity is technically
infeasible. Any state franchise holder who believes that the designation or provision of PEG
channel capacity is technically infeasible, shall provide to City, in writing, its reasons therefore
and its plan for correcting or solving the infeasibility. City may hold a hearing on the claim of
infeasibility and, thereafter, take such action as City deems proper to require the designation and
provision of the PEG channels on the state franchise holder’s system.
SEC. 23.6 PEG CHANNEL FACILITIES FEE AND PAYMENTS
In accordance with Public Utilities Code section 5870(n), upon termination of all incumbent
cable provider franchises, state franchise holders must pay one percent of gross revenues to the
City to support PEG channel facilities. State franchise holders shall remit PEG fees in the same
manner as franchise fees as set forth in Section 23.4 above. The PEG fee may be shown as a
separate line item on the regular bill of each subscriber.
SEC. 23.7 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PROTECTION
(a) A state franchise holder shall comply with Sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2 and
53088.2 of the California Government Code; the FCC customer service and notice standards set
forth in Sections 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603 and 76.1619 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal
Regulations; Section 637.5 of the California Penal Code; the privacy standards of Section 551 of
Title 47 of the United States Code; and all other applicable state and federal customer service
and consumer protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, including any
such standards hereafter adopted. In case of a conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. All
customer service and consumer protection standards under this paragraph shall be interpreted
and applied to accommodate newer or different technologies while meeting or exceeding the
goals of the standards.
(b) City shall enforce, in the manner set forth in the Act, all customer service and
protection standards contained in section 5900 of the Act, including without limitation those
standards set forth in section 5900(c).
SEC. 23.8 PENALTIES
The following monetary penalties, as set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5900, are hereby
adopted as the applicable schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Act, by a state
franchisee, as follows:
(a) $500 per day for each material breach, not to exceed $1500 per occurrence of a
material breach.
(b) If a material breach has occurred and notice has been provided and a fine or
penalty has been assessed, for any subsequent breach of the same nature within twelve months,
3
4
shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed
$3,000 per occurrence of the material breach.
(c) If a third or further material breach of the same nature occurs within those same
twelve months, and notice has provided and a fine or penalty has been assessed; the penalties
shall be increased to a maximum of $2,500 per day for each material breach, not to exceed
$7,500 per occurrence of the material breach.
Rev. 2012-09-18 (Ord. 706 N.S.)
Bingo
24-1
Chapter 24
BINGO
'24.1 Limited authorization of bingo.
'24.2 Penal Code section 326.5 incorporated.
'24.3 Permit required.
'24.4 Application-Contents.
'24.5 Term of permit and fee.
'24.6 Investigation.
'24.7 Issuance or denial.
'24.8 Separate permit required.
'24.9 Contents of permit.
'24.10 Display of permit.
'24.11 Hours.
'24.12 Alcoholic beverages.
'24.13 Profits-Separate fund or account-Misdemeanor.
'24.14 Reservations.
'24.15 Limitation on frequency of bingo games.
'24.16 Inspection.
'24.17 Tax-exempt status-Loss.
'24.18 Revocation.
'24.19 Notice of intent to revoke-Immediate suspension-Hearing.
'24.20 Appeal procedure.
'24.21 Criminal prosecution.
SEC. 24.1 LIMITED AUTHORIZATION OF BINGO
Bingo games are authorized pursuant to and as restricted by Penal Code section 326.5
(including future amendments thereto), and the provisions of this chapter, but may only be
conducted by a charitable organization. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '1)
SEC. 24.2 PENAL CODE SECTION 326.5 INCORPORATED
The provisions of Penal Code section 326.5 (including future amendments) are
incorporated herein by this reference; and "charitable organizations" herein means an organization
referred to therein. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '2)
SEC. 24.3 PERMIT REQUIRED
Bingo
24-2
No charitable organization shall conduct a bingo game without a currently valid,
unrevoked, unsuspended permit as provided for by this article. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '3)
SEC. 24.4 APPLICATION-CONTENTS
Application for a permit shall be made to the police chief on forms provided by him.
The application shall be accompanied by certificates or letters of exemption from the Franchise
Tax Board and the U.S. Internal Revenue Service which establish that the applicant is currently
exempted from payment of the Bank and Corporation Tax by section 23701(d) of the State
Revenue and Taxation Code and that a contribution or gift to the organization would be a
charitable contribution under section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and shall
contain the following:
(a) The name of the applicant organization;
(b) The name, address and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding
officer of the organization;
(c) The property, and the room or designated area thereon, where bingo games will be
conducted, including the street number, the occupancy capacity and whether the property is
owned or leased;
(d) The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury;
(e) The occupancy capacity of any room in which bingo games are to be conducted;
(f) A diagram showing the number of off-street parking spaces available on the
property on which the bingo games are to be conducted;
(g) Such other information as the police chief may require. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '4)
SEC. 24.5 TERM OF PERMIT AND FEE
(a) A permit shall be valid for a one-year period; provided, that any permit issued
prior to March 1, 1978, shall expire on February 28, 1978; provided, further, that the City
Council may at any time shorten the permit period to no less than one week nor more than one
year by Council resolution, which resolution shall apply to all permits issued hereafter and until
a different permit period is set by a later Council resolution.
(b) The amount of the annual permit fee shall be fixed by resolution of the City
Council and shall accompany the application. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '5; Ord. No. 358 N.S., '1)
Bingo
24-3
SEC. 24.6 INVESTIGATION
Upon receiving a completed application with fee, the police chief shall investigate to
determine whether the permit shall be issued. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '6)
SEC. 24.7 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL
Within fourteen days after receipt of a completed application, the police chief shall either
issue the permit or deny it with a written statement of reason(s) therefor. (Ord. No. 350 N.S.,
'7)
SEC. 24.8 SEPARATE PERMIT REQUIRED
A separate application, permit, and permit fee shall be required for each location at which
bingo games are conducted. Permits shall not be transferable from one location to another or from
one organization to another. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '8)
SEC. 24.9 CONTENTS OF PERMIT
The permit shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and nature of the organization;
(b) The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;
(c) The occupancy capacity of any room in which bingo games are to be conducted;
(d) The date of the expiration of the permit;
(e) Such other information deemed necessary by the police chief. (Ord. No. 350 N.S.,
'9)
SEC. 24.10 DISPLAY OF PERMIT
Each permit shall be prominently displayed at the authorized location at all times during
the conduct of the game. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '10)
SEC. 24.11 HOURS
No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of eleven p.m. and ten a.m. (Ord.
No. 350 N.S., '11)
Bingo
24-4
SEC. 24.12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed, sold, or given away, served or delivered to any
person within the room or designated area where any bingo games are being conducted. No
person who is intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Ord. No. 350 N.S.,
'12)
SEC. 24.13 PROFITS-SEPARATE FUND OR ACCOUNT-MISDEMEANOR
(a) All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept by the permittee in a special
fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account.
(b) The permittee shall keep detailed and accurate records of the income and expenses
received and disbursed in connection with the operation, conduct, promotion and supervision of
bingo games authorized hereunder.
(c) The City, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine
and audit such records at any reasonable time and the permittee shall keep such records open to
inspection by the City.
(d) Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of subdivisions (a), (b)
or (c) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months in the County jail, or
by both. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '13)
SEC. 24.14 RESERVATIONS
The permittee shall not reserve seats or space for any person or persons, except the
handicapped. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '14)
SEC. 24.15 LIMITATION ON FREQUENCY OF BINGO GAMES
No permittee shall be allowed to conduct bingo games more frequently than one calendar
day in a consecutive seven-day period. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '15)
SEC. 24.16 INSPECTION
All bingo games and the property on which they are located may be inspected by City
officials, including but not limited to officials of the fire department, police department and
Bingo
24-5
building department, at any time during the course of the bingo games and at other times with at
least twelve hours' prior notice from the City. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '16)
SEC. 24.17 TAX-EXEMPT STATUS-LOSS
Whenever the permittee is notified by the Internal Revenue Service or the Franchise Tax
Board of the loss of the tax-exempt status described in Section 24.4 above, the permit issued
hereunder shall be automatically revoked and the permittee shall forthwith return the permit to
the police chief. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '17)
SEC. 24.18 REVOCATION
The police chief may revoke a permit for any violation of the provisions of this chapter
or of any applicable law or regulation, or for any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in the application for the permit, or upon evidence that the bingo games being
conducted pursuant to such permit are causing undue parking or traffic problems, undue noise,
disturbance or nuisance in the area of the location where the bingo games are conducted, or are
causing other problems detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. No. 350 N.S.,
'18)
SEC. 24.19 NOTICE OF INTENT TO REVOKE-IMMEDIATE SUSPENSION
SUSPENSION-HEARING
If the police chief determines that a permit should be revoked, he shall serve on the
permittee a notice of his intent with his reasons therefor. The notice shall provide for revocation
of the permit seven days after service of the notice upon the permittee, unless the permittee
requests a hearing before the police chief or his designee prior to revocation. The notice may
contain a statement that the permit is immediately suspended and such suspension shall remain
in effect during the pendency of the revocation and appeal procedures. The police chief shall give
the permittee at least five days' prior written notice of the time and place of the hearing which
shall be held within fourteen days of the receipt by the police chief of the request therefor, and
shall issue his written decision within seven days after the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord. No.
350 N.S., '19)
SEC. 24.20 APPEAL PROCEDURE
The applicant shall have the right to appeal any action of the police chief in denying an
application for a permit or revoking a permit to the City Council of the City of Piedmont. The
appeal shall be made in writing, specifying the grounds therefor, and filed with the city clerk of
the City Council within ten days after the action of the police chief. The City Council may hear
additional evidence and may sustain, reverse, or modify the decision of the police chief. The
decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '20)
Bingo
24-6
SEC. 24.21 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing criminal prosecution under
Chapters 9 and 10, Title 9 of Part 1 of the Penal Code, whenever bingo games are conducted with
a suspended or revoked permit or with a permit fraudulently obtained. (Ord. No. 350 N.S., '21)
Chapter 25
COMMISSIONS
§25.1 Regulations governing commissions
§25.2 Planning commission composition; regular meetings
§25.3 Powers and duties of the planning commission
§25.4 Park commission composition; regular meetings
§25.5 Powers and duties of the park commission
§25.6 Recreation commission composition; regular meetings
§25.7 Powers and duties of recreation commission
§25.8 Qualifications and appointment of commission members
§25.9 Compensation
§25.10 Organization
§25.11 Public record
§25.12 City staff assistance
§25.13 Reports
§25.14 Absolute Majority Vote Required
SEC. 25.1 REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMMISSIONS
All commissions shall act in conformance with Article VI of the City Charter,
which this Chapter 25 is intended to implement. Unless otherwise indicated, the regulations set
forth in this Chapter 25 of the City Code shall govern all commissions which are created under
this Chapter 25. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §2)
SEC. 25.2 PLANNING COMMISSION COMPOSITION; REGULAR MEETINGS
There is hereby established a planning commission consisting of five (5)
members. The commission shall meet on the second Monday of each month. (Ord. No. 395
N.S., §3)
SEC. 25.3 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
It shall be the duty of the planning commission to investigate and make
recommendations to the City Council concerning real property, subdivisions, lot building
restrictions, planning and zoning matters as may be in the best interest of the City, and to grant
or disapprove design review and variance applications. In addition, the commission shall have
the following powers and duties:
(a) To consider and make recommendations to the Council on matters affecting
the design and aesthetics of buildings, structures and other improvements within the City;
(b) To consider and make recommendations to the Council regarding methods of
Rev. 5/17/93 25-1
Commissions
encouraging and promoting good design in construction within the City in order to maintain the
high quality of aesthetic values which make the City unique. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §4)
SEC. 25.4 PARK COMMISSION COMPOSITION; REGULAR MEETINGS
There is hereby established a park commission consisting of seven (7) members.
The commission shall meet at regular times normally once each month. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §5)
SEC. 25.5 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PARK COMMISSION
The park commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) To consider and make recommendations to the Council on matters affecting
the beautification, planting, litter control, development, uses, acquisition and disposal and
maintenance of all parks, park improvements, park memorials, street trees, parking strips (i.e.,
the portion of the street right-of-way between the sidewalk and curb) and other planted areas
owned or controlled by the City.
(b) To consider and make recommendations to the Council concerning proposed
solutions to those additional matters which appropriately may be referred to the commission by
the Council; or which, relating to the beautification of the matters referred to in subsection (a)
hereof, may be investigated by the commission on its own motion. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §6)
SEC. 25.6 RECREATION COMMISSION COMPOSITION; REGULAR MEETINGS
There is hereby established a recreation commission consisting of seven (7)
members. The commission shall meet at regular times, normally once each month. (Ord. No.
395 N.S., §7)
SEC. 25.7 POWERS AND DUTIES OF RECREATION COMMISSION
The recreation commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) To consider and make recommendations to the City Council on the planning,
development and administration of programs and activities relative to public recreation and those
facilities and public property under the control of the City for such purposes.
(b) To consider and make recommendations to the Council on the development
and implementation of rules of conduct, procedures, resolutions, ordinances or other pertinent
matters relating to recreation in the City.
(c) To assist in the execution of any plan, project, program or proposal relating
to recreation in the City as approved or designated by the Council. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §8)
SEC. 25.8 QUALIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENT OF COMMISSION MEMBERS
Rev. 5/17/93 25-2
Commissions
Commission members shall be qualified electors of the City and not otherwise
serving the City in an elective or salaried capacity.
Members of commissions shall be appointed by majority vote of the Council to
serve three-year (3-year) terms, and until their respective successors are appointed, with no
person seving more than two consecutive terms of office. Terms of office shall commence on
April 1 and terminate on March 31, and will be staggered by resolution of the Council.
Commission members may be removed after hearing by the affirmative vote of four (4) members
of the Council. If a member of a commission is absent from three (3) consecutive regular
meetings of such commission, unless by permission of such body expressed in its official
meeting record or by permission of the Council, that office shall become vacant and shall be so
declared by the Council. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term in the same manner as
the original appointments were made. Any person who serves as a member of a commission for
more than eighteen (18) months of an unexpired term shall be considered to have served a full
term of office. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §11)
SEC. 25.9 COMPENSATION
Commissioners shall serve without compensation for their services to the City,
but may receive reimbursement for necessary traveling and other expenses incurred on official
duty when such expenditures have received authorization by the Council. (Ord. No. 395 N.S.,
§12)
SEC. 25.10 ORGANIZATION
Each commission shall prescribe its own rules, which shall be consistent with
City Council ordinances and resolutions. Each year on a date set by its respective rules, each
commission shall meet to organize by electing one of its members to serve as presiding officer at
the pleasure of such body. Each commission established by the City Council shall hold
meetings at such regular intervals as the proper transaction of business shall require or as
established by ordinance. All meetings shall be public except as otherwise provided by law.
Special meetings of each commission may be held at the call of its chairman, at the call of a
majority the members of that commission, or at the call of the Council. Any such special
meeting shall require at least forty-eight (48) hours prior notice to all commission members
before being held. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §13)
SEC. 25.11 PUBLIC RECORD
Minutes of each commission meeting shall be kept on file with the city clerk as a
public record of its proceedings and transactions. A copy of the rules of each commission shall
be kept on file with the city clerk. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §14)
SEC. 25.12 CITY STAFF ASSISTANCE
Rev. 5/17/93 25-3
Commissions
Rev. 5/17/93 25-4
The City Council may direct City staff members to attend meetings of a particular
commission either on a regular or special basis to assist that commission in its work. (Ord. No.
395 N.S., §15)
SEC. 25.13 REPORTS
Annually, on or before the first day of May, each commission shall submit in
writing to the City Council a report assessing those programs and activities concerning its
respective areas of responsibility, including the submission of programmatic and fiscal
recommendations as appropriate. Each body shall also be responsible for submitting such
additional reports as necessary or as requested by the Council. (Ord. No. 395 N.S., §16)
SEC. 25.14 ABSOLUTE MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter 25, except for actions which
are strictly advisory in nature, any action taken by a commission shall not be valid or binding
unless adopted by an affirmative vote of an absolute majority of the commission members, such
absolute majority consisting of the smallest number of members constituting in excess of fifty
(50%) percent of the total membership of that commission. (Ord. No. 429 N.S., §2)
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-1
Chapter 26
PIEDMONT POLICE AND FIRE PENSION PLAN
§26.1 Pension board.
§26.2 Definitions.
§26.3 Pension Fund.
§26.4 Contributions to pension fund.
§26.5 Eligibility for retirement.
§26.6 Industrial death or disability.
§26.7 Ordinary death; Termination of employment; Death before eligibility.
§26.8 Military service.
§26.9 Consideration of other pension.
§26.10 Amount of pension; Joint and survivor pension.
§26.11 Disability-Nonoccupational.
§26.12 Application by survivor.
§26.13 Hearings.
§26.14 Social security.
§26.15 Cost of living adjustments.
§26.16 Actuarial calculations.
§26.17 Amendments.
§26.18 Authorization to Enter PERS
§26.19 Compliance with Internal Revenue Code
SEC. 26.1 PENSION BOARD
A board is hereby created whose duty it shall be to handle and administer pensions for
retired members and benefits for members, their nominees and the widows and minor children of
deceased members of the police and fire departments of the City of Piedmont. The Pension
Board shall be comprised of the mayor, one member of the City Council, one member of the
police department, one member of the fire department, and one community representative
appointed by the Council for a three-year term of office commencing April l. Each said
department member shall be selected from the rank and file of each respective department. The
Council member and the community representative shall be selected by the members of the
Council of the City of Piedmont.
The pension board shall select its own chairman and secretary and shall administer all
matters pertaining to pensions in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 26.
The pension board shall have power, by resolution, to provide rules and regulations for
the administration of all matters pertaining to pensions and benefits hereunder, and shall invest
the pension fund, or direct that their investments be made by or through investment counsel, trust
companies, or trust departments of banks, or any combination thereof, in accordance with City
ordinances applicable to the investment of funds of municipal retirement systems, and if there be
none, in accordance with state law. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 42l N.S., §l)
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-2
SEC. 26.2 DEFINITIONS
The term "board" shall mean the "pension board"; the term "member" shall mean every
person including probationary employees in full-time active service in either the police or fire
departments of the City of Piedmont, excluding temporary employees of every character; the
term "fund" shall mean the "pension fund"; the term "widow" shall include "widowers," and the
masculine, feminine or neuter gender shall be deemed to include the others whenever the context
so indicates. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 441 N.S., §2, eff. 5/18/83)
SEC. 26.3 PENSION FUND
There is hereby established a pension fund for retired members, and for benefits for
eligible members, their nominees and the eligible widows and minor children of deceased
members of the police and fire departments of the City of Piedmont, as hereinafter defined. The
fund shall receive its funds as provided in Section 26.4 of this section and no payment shall be
made from such fund except as provided in this Chapter 26.
The balance of money on hand in that certain fund heretofore created by Section 47 of
the Charter of the City of Piedmont, as passed on the 29th of April 1944, herein amended, and
any and all investments made from cash from said fund, either United States Government Bonds
or otherwise, shall be transferred and/or credited to the pension fund created by Section 26.3
hereunder. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §3)
SEC. 26.4 CONTRIBUTIONS TO PENSION FUND
There shall be paid to the fund of the City of Piedmont such sums as may be determined
by the City Council of the City of Piedmont from time to time by tax levy or otherwise and the
City Council, if necessary, shall levy a tax to provide extra revenue for maintaining such pension
fund.
Each member shall pay to the fund a monthly payment of a sum equal to nine (9) percent
of the salary of said member, which payment shall be deducted from the monthly salary of said
member, and each member shall be deemed to consent and agree to such deduction.
The City shall pay to such fund each year an amount of money which, in the aggregate
shall equal the total of 15.23% of said member's salaries for each said year until July 1, 1957,
and thereafter in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth, irrespective of whether any
portion of such deductions from said salaries shall have been paid from said fund to any member,
his heirs, representatives, or nominees, pursuant to any provisions of this Chapter 26.
Interest earned and received on cash balances and income on investments shall be paid
into the fund.
The board shall be empowered and authorized to receive and accept all donations, gifts or
bequests for said fund.
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-3
The pension board shall obtain an actuarial study of the actuarial solvency of the fund,
which study shall be conducted by accredited actuarial consultants as of January 1 of every third
year commencing January 1, 1982, and at such additional time or times as the board shall deem
necessary.
The City Council shall adjust the City of Piedmont's percentage of salary contribution on
July 1, 1985, and on July 1 of every third year thereafter in order to assure adequate funding in
accordance with the actuarial study herein referred to.
There shall be levied and collected at the time and place and in the same manner as other
property taxes for municipal purposes are levied and collected, if no other provision for payment
is made, a tax sufficient to meet all the obligations of the City for the creation, establishment,
and maintenance of the pension plan herein provided for, which tax shall not be subject to any
limitation or provision of Section 4.08 of the City Charter as the same now exists or may
hereafter be amended. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §4; Ord. No. 424 N.S., §1; Ord. No. 450 N.S., §2,
eff. 12/7/83)
SEC. 26.5 ELIGIBILITY FOR RETIREMENT
Any person who was a member either at the time of the adoption of this section or who
shall thereafter become a member and who shall have been in active service for a period of at
least twenty-five (25) years and shall have attained the age of fifty-five (55) years shall be
eligible for retirement. The board, upon satisfactory proof to it of such facts by order of such
board shall, upon written request retire and relieve from service such member, and from the
effective date of said order the services of such member shall cease and such member so retired
shall thereafter be paid from the fund, and not otherwise, during the remainder of his lifetime
such amount as is provided and set forth in Section 26.10 of this Chapter 26.
Compulsory retirement. Any member who reaches the age of sixty-five (65) years shall
retire from active service, unless the City Council extends the active service of such member on
a year to year basis. Any member who reaches the age of seventy (70) years shall retire from
active service and there may not be any extended active service. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §5)
SEC. 26.6 INDUSTRIAL DEATH OR DISABILITY
Whenever a member shall lose his life due to an injury, disability or disease caused by
and received in the course of his employment and in the performance of his duty, then upon
satisfactory proof of such facts made to it, said board shall order and direct a sum equal to 50
percent (50%) of the sum provided for in the last paragraph of this article, said sum to be paid
monthly from said fund, to the widow of said deceased member as long as she lives, or until she
shall earlier remarry.
Should said deceased member leave no widow but should leave an orphan child or
children under the age of eighteen (18) years, or should the deceased member leave a widow and
child or children under the age of eighteen (18) years and the widow die without remarrying
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-4
while such child or children are yet under the age of eighteen (18) years, said monthly amount
shall be paid in equal shares to such child or children of the deceased member who are then
under the age of eighteen (18) years and such payment shall cease when the youngest such child
attains the age of eighteen (18) years; provided that no child shall receive any payment or
portion thereof after attaining the age of eighteen (18) years or after marrying before attaining
the age of eighteen (18) years.
Whenever a member, as a result of accident, injury, disability or disease, directly caused
by and received in the course of employment and in the performance of his duty, is sufficiently
disabled that he is no longer able to perform his regular duties, then upon satisfactory proof of
such fact made to it, the City shall pay such member from the City general fund a monthly sum
sufficient to make up the difference between the workman's compensation and social security
payments to which such member is otherwise entitled, and the monthly salary he was receiving
at the time of his disability, such monthly sum to be paid for a period not to exceed one year or
for such lesser time as such member's disability shall continue. If such period of disability
extends beyond one year, then the board shall order and direct the monthly payment from the
pension fund to such member of an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the sum provided for
in the last paragraph of this article, said payments to continue until such member's disability
terminates or until such member's death; provided, however, that should the City continue to pay
the salary of such disabled member during the period of disability and at a time during which the
pension plan should be making payments to such member, the City, rather than the disabled
member, shall receive from the pension fund such payments as the disabled member would have
otherwise been entitled to receive from the fund during such period that the City continues to pay
such disabled member's salary; provided, further, that should such period of disability extend
beyond one year, and, at such time such disabled member shall have accrued sick leave due him
from the City, then such disabled member shall first be restored to full salary by the City during
a period equal to his accrued sick leave, and only thereafter shall he be paid the fifty percent
(50%) monthly pension from the pension fund as hereinabove provided. There shall be no right
to payments under this section where the employee has elected to withdraw all contributions and
earned interest from the pension fund pursuant to Section 26.7 of this Chapter. Upon the death
of a former member who is receiving monthly disability pension payments from the pension fund
pursuant to this section, his spouse, as defined in Section 26.12, shall receive from the fund so
long as he shall live, or until he shall earlier remarry, a monthly pension equal to fifty percent
(50%) of the sum to which the former member was entitled immediately prior to his death.
All payments set forth in this Section 26.6 shall be subject to the deductions set forth in
Section 26.9 of this Chapter 26.
In the event the board shall order payments under this Section 26.6, whether because of
death or because of disability which extends beyond one year, if at the time of such death,
accident, injury, disability or disease the member has in excess of twenty-five (25) years of
active service, the monthly sum to be paid out shall, instead of being fifty percent (50%) of the
sum provided for in the last paragraph of this article, be computed upon the following
percentages of the monthly salary as set forth in the last paragraph of this section:
Percentage of Amount of
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-5
Years of Active Service the Monthly Salary
26 53.33
27 56.67
28 60.00
29 63.33
30 or over 66.66
The sum to which reference is hereinabove made is the average monthly salary received
by such member during the period of twelve months immediately preceding the date of the
death, accident, injury, disability or disease of such member; provided, however, that if such
member has advanced in rank at any time during the three (3) years preceding such lastmentioned
date, the sum to which reference is hereinabove made shall be equal to the following
fraction:
The sum of the current monthly salary paid by the City on such date for each rank held
by such member during the preceding thirty-six (36) months with each salary multiplied by the
number of months during which each such rank was held in said thirty-six (36) month period,
divided by thirty-six (36). (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §6; Ord. No. 424 N.S., §2; Ord. No. 450 N.S., §3,
eff. retroactively 12/3/76)
SEC. 26.7 ORDINARY DEATH; TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT; DEATH
BEFORE ELIGIBILITY
Except members who are then eligible for retirement, in the event a member hereafter
dies from natural causes before retirement, (and his death is not due to an injury, disability or
disease received in the course of his employment and in the performance of his duty) a sum
equal to the aggregate amount of payments paid by such member into said fund together with the
pro rata of interest earned by such deceased member's contributions to the fund from the date of
deposit as determined by the pension board, and a sum equal to twice the monthly salary the
deceased member received for his last month of active service shall be paid from said fund, and
not otherwise, to his heirs or legal representatives or to such person said member shall have
nominated by written designation, duly executed and filed with said board; provided, however,
that in the event said member is married, the nomination shall not be considered valid unless the
execution thereof is joined in by his lawful wife.
In the event a member who is then eligible for retirement hereafter dies from natural
causes before retirement, (and his death is not due to an injury, disability, or disease received in
the course of his employment and the performance of his duty) such member shall be considered
as having retired the day before his death, and his widow, as defined in Section 26.12, shall have
the option of receiving either the benefits to which she would be entitled under Section 26.10 as
the survivor of a retired member, or the payments from the fund provided in the first paragraph
of this Section 26.7. Such option may be effectively exercised by the member, prior to his death,
so as to be binding upon his widow under procedures established by the pension board. If there
is no surviving widow, payments shall be made from the fund in accordance with the first
paragraph of this Section 26.7.
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-6
In the event a member hereafter leaves the service before retirement and has rendered
satisfactory service, and the board shall so find, a sum equal to the aggregate amount of the
payments paid by said member into said fund, together with interest earned by such member's
contributions to the fund at an interest rate to be determined from time to time by the Pension
Board shall be paid to said member so leaving the service; provided, however, that the election
to withdraw said contributions and interest shall preclude the employee's rights to any other posttermination
benefits provided by this Chapter. (Ord. No. 424 N.S., §3)
Also in the event a retired member and his widow hereafter die before the member and
his widow collectively have received in pension payments a sum equal in the aggregate to the
aggregate amount paid by said member into said fund, a sum equal to the difference between the
said aggregate sum received in pension payments by said retired member and his widow and the
aggregate sum paid into said fund by said member plus his pro rata of interest earned by his
contributions to the fund from the date of deposit to date of retirement as determined by the
pension board shall be paid from said fund, and not otherwise, to his heirs or legal
representatives or to such person said member shall have nominated by written designation, duly
executed and filed with the said board, provided, however, that in the event said member is
married, the nomination shall not be considered valid unless the execution thereof is joined in by
his lawful wife.
Notwithstanding any payments paid to any member as provided in Section 26.7 herein,
no payments theretofore made to the fund by the City shall be withdrawn by said City except for
the payments made or authorized under the provisions of Section 26.6 and 26.10 hereof. (Ord.
No. 396 N.S., §7; Ord. No. 424 N.S., §3)
SEC. 26.8 MILITARY SERVICE
Any member who leaves the City's employ on or after January 1, 1940 for the purpose of
entering directly into active military service will be re-employed in such member's former job or
in a position of like seniority, status and pay unless circumstances beyond the City's control
make such re-employment impossible or unreasonable in the opinion of the City Council, if (1)
such member is released from active duty within four years after the date he entered active duty
plus any period of additional service involuntarily imposed by law as an enlistee or volunteer, or
as soon after the expiration of said four years as he is able to obtain orders relieving him from
active duty as a reservist, and (2) such member applies for re-employment by the City of
Piedmont within ninety (90) days after he is released from active duty, except that if he is
hospitalized immediately after being released and such hospitalization does not last for more
than one (1) year, he may apply for re-employment within ninety (90) days after release from the
hospital, and (3) such member presents to the City of Piedmont evidence of satisfactory
completion of military service, and (4) such member is at the time of his application for reemployment
qualified in the opinion of the City Council to perform the duties of such position.
The period during which any member is in the active military service shall be considered
as service for the City of Piedmont in computing the years of active service for the purpose of
qualifying and becoming eligible for a pension under the provisions of Section 26.5 of this
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-7
section. The City of Piedmont shall provide for the cost of the pension accruing during such
period of military service by such member based on the salary received from the City of
Piedmont at the time of entering military service. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §8)
SEC. 26.9 CONSIDERATION OF OTHER PENSION
In the event any retired member, widow, minor child or children or nominee are
receiving payments from said fund under the provisions of Section 26.6 or 26.10 of this Chapter
and are also receiving or are eligible to receive a payment or payments from any other public
source pursuant to the provisions of any Federal and/or State Relief Pension Statutes except a
military service pension or payment which accrues during credited service hereunder, said
payment or payments so received shall be deducted from time to time from the amount payable
under the provisions of Section 26.6 or 26.10 of this Chapter; provided, however, the monthly
payments received under the provisions of Section 26.6 or Section 26.10 of this Chapter,
together with the payments from such other public source in the aggregate shall not exceed or be
less than the sum said member, widow, minor child or children would normally be entitled to
receive under the provisions of Sections 26.6 or 26.10 hereof. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §9)
SEC. 26.10 AMOUNT OF PENSION; JOINT AND SURVIVOR PENSION
Whenever any member is retired by the board as provided in article 5, he shall receive
from the fund for the remainder of his life a monthly pension in a sum equal to one-half of the
average monthly salary received by such member during the period of twelve months
immediately preceding the date of his retirement; provided, however, that if said member has
advanced in rank at any time during the three (3) years preceding the date of his retirement, his
monthly pension shall be a sum equal to one-half of the following fraction:
The sum of the current monthly salary paid by the City on the date of retirement for each
rank held by said member during the preceding thirty-six (36) months with each such salary
multiplied by the number of months during which each such rank was held in said thirty-six (36)
month period, divided by thirty-six (36).
By way of illustration, the fraction is as follows:
Current salary for A rank multiplied by x months, plus
Current salary for B rank multiplied by Y months, plus
Current salary for C rank multiplied by Z months;
Divided by thirty-six (36).
Where A, B and C are the ranks held by said member during the said thirty-six (36)
month period, and X plus Y plus Z equal thirty-six (36). In the event such member remains in
service after reaching normal retirement age (having been in active service for twenty-five (25)
years and having attained the age of 55 years) the contributions of both the member and the City
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-8
of Piedmont shall continue until the employee is actually retired from active service, and his
pension shall be based upon his average monthly salary for the last twelve months of active
service by such member; unless he was advanced in rank during the thirty-six (36) month period
immediately preceding his retirement in which case the amount of such pension shall be
computed as provided in the fraction set forth above.
If a member who is retired by the board hereunder has in excess of twenty-five (25) years
of active service, such member shall receive a monthly pension computed upon the following
percentages of average monthly salary:
Percentage of Amount of
Years of Active Service Average Monthly Salary
26 53.33
27 56.67
28 60.00
29 63.33
30 or over 66.66
Upon the death of a retired member who is receiving a monthly pension from the fund,
his widow, as defined in Section 26.12, shall receive from the fund, so long as she shall remain
unmarried and until her death, a monthly pension in a sum equal to one-half of the monthly
pension to be received by the member as hereinabove set forth in this Section.
Subject to such conditions as the pension board may prescribe at the time any member is
retired by the board, as provided in Section 26.5, he shall have the option of electing a joint and
survivor pension with someone other than his wife in lieu of the individual retirement pension as
set forth in the first paragraph above. In the event a member elects to receive a joint and
survivor pension such pension shall have the same actuarial value as the individual pension and
shall provide for monthly payments to the survivor (joint annuitant) of the member for the
remainder of such survivor's life in accordance with such actuarial value. Furthermore, in such
event, the wife of the member, if any, must consent to such election. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §10)
SEC. 26.11 DISABILITY-NONOCCUPATIONAL
In the event a member has completed five (5) or more years of service regardless of age,
if such member becomes totally and permanently disabled due to non-occupational bodily injury
or disease, excluding self-inflicted injury or attempt at suicide, the pension plan shall provide a
pension for such member commencing at the time of disability and such pension shall be the sum
computed as follows: If the member has completed between five (5) and 18.51 years of service,
the pension shall equal 1.8% of the monthly salary at the time of disability multiplied by years of
service, but in no case shall such pension exceed 33-1/3% of monthly salary at the time of
disability; if the member has completed 18.52 or more years of service, the pension shall equal
1.8% of monthly salary at the time of disability multiplied by years of service. In the event a
member ceases to be totally and permanently disabled as set forth in this Section 26.11, the
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-9
pension provided hereunder shall cease immediately. There shall be no right to payments under
this Section where the employee has elected to withdraw all contributions and earned interest
from the pension fund pursuant to Section 26.7 of this Chapter 26.
The term "total and permanent disability", as used in this section, is defined as incapacity
of the member resulting from bodily injury or disease which prevents him from performing
substantially all of the work pertaining to his occupation or any other occupation which requires
similar work or equivalent abilities or training of the member; provided that this shall not
preclude performance of work by the member which is not similar to his occupation with the
City of Piedmont and does not require equivalent abilities or training of the member.
Upon the death of a retired member who is receiving or is entitled to receive a monthly
pension from the fund under the provisions of this section, his widow, as defined in Section
26.12, shall receive from the fund so long as she shall remain unmarried and until her death, a
monthly pension in a sum equal to one-half of the monthly pension to be received or being
received by the member as hereinabove set forth in this section.
SEC. 26.12 APPLICATION BY SURVIVOR
When a spouse, who shall be defined as the wife or husband of a member for at least one
year prior to his retirement, or for at least one year prior to his disability or death while
employed in the police or fire departments of the City of Piedmont, or minor child or children or
a nominee become eligible for a payment or payments under the provisions of this Chapter 26,
application to the board must be filed within ninety days after the date of eligibility, and said
board shall act on said application within ninety days after the filing thereof. The term "widow"
as used in this Chapter 26 shall be deemed to refer to the surviving spouse whether a wife or a
husband. It is intended that all terms used in this Chapter 26 shall apply regardless of gender,
including, but not limited to, "he" or "she", "his" or "her", "wife" or "husband". (Ord. No. 396
N.S., §12; Ord. No. 450 N.S., §4, eff. 12/7/83)
SEC. 26.13 HEARINGS
Before making any order for the payment of any sum or sums from said fund, the board
may call and conduct hearings, and may subpoena such witnesses, hear and take such evidence
in relation to the subject as in its discretion it may deem proper.
(Ord. No. 396 N.S., §13)
SEC. 26.14 SOCIAL SECURITY
In the event that legislation is adopted which would permit the City of Piedmont to place
its policemen and firemen under Federal Social Security, then with the concurrence of two-thirds
of the then active regular members of the police and fire departments, all regular members shall
be obligated to accept Social Security (if such is permitted by the Social Security Law) provided
that the total individual retirement pension set forth under Section 26.10 above including such
Social Security, shall not be less than the individual retirement pension as now provided for
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-10
under Section 26.10 above. In the event two-thirds of the members concur to accept Social
Security as set forth above, the City Council shall be required to place the members under Social
Security provided that the aggregate cost to the City of Piedmont shall not exceed the cost of the
pension plan set forth in this Chapter 26. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §14)
SEC. 26.15 COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS
As of April 1 of each year the computation of the monthly pension benefit of each retired
member shall be adjusted to reflect the change, if any, whether an increase or a decrease, in the
California consumer price index from March of the prior year to March of the year in which the
adjustment is made. The "California consumer price index" as used herein is an index stated as
the average of the separate annual consumer price indexes for the Los Angeles-Long Beach area
and the San Francisco-Oakland area published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United
States Department of Labor.
Should the reference base of said consumer price indexes (presently 1957-59 = 100) be
changed, each of said indexes used to determine the consumer price index as defined in this
Chapter will be the indexes converted to the new base by standard statistical methods. The
adjustment is subject to the following limitations:
(a) No adjustment will be made in years for which the adjustment to the member's
base pension benefit would be less than one (1) percent. "Base pension benefit"
is the member's monthly pension benefit minus accumulated cost of living
increases already granted.
(b) Monthly pension benefits for a member may not be reduced below the base
pension benefit of such member.
(c) Adjustments will commence in the second calendar year following the year of
retirement and may not exceed two (2) percent per year, compounded from the
base year. The "Base year" is the year of retirement.
(d) Adjustments shall apply to all members and beneficiaries receiving a monthly
pension benefit from the fund, whose retirement or pension benefit commenced
after the date this Section 26.15 becomes effective.
(e) The member does not have to apply for these increases; they are calculated and
granted automatically, and appear when applicable, in the May 1st pension
benefit payment. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §15)
SEC. 26.16 ACTUARIAL CALCULATIONS
All actuarial calculations regarding the pension fund created by Section 26 of the Charter
of the City of Piedmont, particularly including those set forth in Section 26.4 hereof, shall be
computed on a 30 year prior service funding basis. (Ord. No. 396 N.S., §16)
Piedmont Police & Fire Pension Plan
26-11
SEC. 26.17 AMENDMENTS
In conformance with Section 5.05 of the City Charter, no amendment may be made to
this Chapter 26 changing the provisions of the pension system for members of the police and fire
department unless by a majority of voters voting thereon at a general or special election. (Ord.
No. 396 N.S., §17)
SEC. 26.18 AUTHORIZATION TO ENTER PERS
The City Council is authorized at any time to enter into a contractual relationship with
the Public Employees Retirement System to provide pension, disability, death and related
benefits for current participants in the Police and Fire Pension Plan as an alternative that may be
elected by such participants after the effective date set forth in the contract with the Public
Employees Retirement System, and to enter into any related agreements with the Public
Employees Retirement System and to take any related actions necessary to further the purposes
set forth herein. Any such contractual relationships with the Public Employees Retirement
System shall not terminate the Police and Fire Pension Plan until all of its funds have been
appropriately paid out according to its terms and provisions. (Ord. No. 492 N.S. 12/7/87)
SEC. 26.19 COMPLIANCE WITH INTERNAL REVENUE CODE
Notwithstanding any other provisions of Chapter 26 of the Piedmont City Code, it is
intended that Chapter 26 shall be implemented in a manner to conform with the requirements of
Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, and to continue the tax-exempt status of the Police
and Fire Pension pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. The election provided pursuant to
Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, specifically pursuant to Section 415 (b)(10) relating
to a "qualified participant" being a participant in the plan prior to January 1, 1990, and
limitations on benefits, are hereby implemented as to any participant in the Piedmont Police and
Fire Pension prior to January 1, 1990, so that the benefit limitations of Section 415 shall not
apply to such participants. To the extent any additional action is required to conform Chapter 26
with the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code or to implement Section 415 of the Internal
Revenue Code or any election pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code, or to revoke any such
election, including that made in the second sentence of this Section 26.19, such additional action
may be taken by resolution of the Piedmont City Council without further amendments or
additions to Chapter 26 of the City Code. (Ord No. 514 N.S., 12/89)
Alarms
27-1
Chapter 27
ALARMS
'27.1 Definitions
'27.1-1 Alarm Agent
'27.1-2 Alarm Business
'27.1-3 Alarm Owner
'27.1-4 Appellant
'27.1-5 Applicant
'27.1-6 Audible Alarm
'27.1-7 City
'27.1-8 Day
'27.1-9 False Alarm
'27.1-10 Fire Alarm System
'27.1-11 Fire Chief
'27.1-12 Fire Emergency
'27.1-13 Notice
'27.1-14 Permit Issuer
'27.1-15 Permit Holder
'27.1-16 Person
'27.1-17 Police Alarm System
'27.1-18 Police Chief
'27.1-19 Police Emergency
'27.1-20 Proprietor Alarm
'27.1-21 Subscriber
'27.2 Alarm System Requirements
'27.3 Alarm System Inspections
'27.4 Alarm Agent Permits
'27.4-1 State Permit
'27.4-2 City Permit
'27.4-3 Permit Approval and Issuance
'27.5 False Alarms
'27.5-1 Notice Required
'27.5-2 Owner Response before Arrival
'27.5-3 Service Charge
'27.5-4 Appeal
'27.6 Violations
'27.6-1 Suspend Service
Alarms
27-2
'27.6-2 Order Removal
'27.6-3 Revoke Permit
'27.7 Judicial Enforcement
'27.8 Severability
'27.9 Fee Exemptions
'27.10 Car Alarms
'27.11 Confidentiality
SEC. 27.1 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meaning, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.
27.1-1 Alarm Agent: means any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing on any building, structure or facility,
an alarm system within the City. Exemption: the provisions of this section do not include a
person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location and who
neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed, nor designs the scheme for
the physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.
27.1-2 Alarm Business: means the business of any individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, service
repair altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building structure, or
facility within the City.
27.1-3 Alarm Owner: person upon whose property the alarm is installed.
27.1-4 Appellant: means a person who appeals a decision made pursuant to this
ordinance.
27.1-5 Applicant: means a person who files an application for a new or renewal
permit as provided in this ordinance.
27.1-6 Audible Alarm: means any mechanical or electrical device designed for the
detection of unauthorized entry on the land, building, structure and/or facility of an alarm owner;
or any mechanical or electrical device designed for the detection of smoke and/or heat therein,
which generates an audible sound outdoors when it is activated.
Alarms
27-3
27.1-7 City: means the City of Piedmont.
27.1-8 Day: means calendar day.
27.1-9 False Alarm: shall mean an alarm signal to which personnel of the Piedmont
police or Piedmont fire department respond where there is no police or fire emergency as defined
in this Chapter.
27.1-10 Fire Alarm System: means any mechanical or electrical device which is
designed or used for the detection of smoke and/or heat within a building, structure, facility or
any portion thereof, which when activated emits a sound, displays a light or transmits a signal or
message outside the protected building for the purpose of alerting occupants or others of the
existence of a fire emergency. Fire alarm systems include, but are not limited to, audible alarms
and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible,
visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility are not included
within this definition.
27.1-11 Fire Chief: means the fire chief of the City.
27.1-12 Fire Emergency: means any incident requiring the immediate response of the
fire department due to danger to life, health, or property.
27.1-13 Notice: means written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee or
given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last
known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service
or upon placing of the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service.
27.1-14 Permit Issuer: means the Department of Public Works.
27.1-15 Permit Holder: means any person who shall be granted a business permit, as
provided in this chapter, and agents and representatives of that person.
27.1-16 Person: means natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal capacity.
27.1-17 Police Alarm System: means any mechanical or electrical device which is
designed or used for the detection of unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility and
for alerting others of an unauthorized entry or other danger to life or health, and which emits a
sound or transmits a signal message outside the protected building when activated. Alarm
systems include, but are not limited to, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are
not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible, or perceptible outside of the
protected building, structure or facility are not included within this definition.
Alarms
27-4
27.1-18 Police Chief: means the police chief of the City.
27.1-19 Police Emergency: means any incident requiring the immediate response of the
police department due to an unauthorized entry of a building or a danger to life, health, or
property.
27.1-20 Proprietor Alarm: means an alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business
or an owner installed alarm system not serviced by an alarm business.
27.1-21 Subscriber: means any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or
otherwise obtains an alarm system from an alarm business. (Ord. No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
SEC. 27.2 ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
The police chief and fire chief may prescribe minimum standards and regulations for the
construction and maintenance of all alarm systems installed within the City. These standards and
regulations shall become effective upon adoption thereof by resolution of the City Council of the
City of Piedmont.
(a) No alarm system shall be installed which protects any outdoor property
perimeter, except locked entry gates may be alarmed.
(b) Any alarm system installed in the City of Piedmont must have posted in a
conspicuous location the emergency twenty-four hour telephone number to be called in order to
reset or turn off an alarm system which has been activated.
(c) No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone
attachment on the primary trunk line of the Piedmont police and fire departments which
reproduces any prerecorded message without permission of the chief of police or the fire chief
respectively.
(d) An audible alarm shall have a timing device that will terminate the alarm within
fifteen (15) minutes of activation.
(e) It shall be unlawful to install such a system which activates a sound similar to
sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil disaster purposes.
(f) For the protection and safety of building inhabitants, an alarm company which
relays a manually operated alarm from a customer of the company to the police communications
center shall notify the police communications center that the alarm was manually operated. (Ord.
No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
SEC. 27.3 ALARM SYSTEM INSPECTIONS
Alarms
27-5
The police chief may require the inspection and approval of all police alarm systems
installed within the City and the fire chief may require inspection and approval of all fire alarm
systems installed within the City. (Ord. No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
SEC. 27.4 ALARM AGENT PERMITS
27.4-1 State Permit. Alarm agents shall carry a valid alarm agent permit as issued by
the Bureau of Consumer Affairs of the State of California on his or her person at all times while
so engaged within the City. (Ord. No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
27.4-2 City Permit. Any person engaged in the business of selling or leasing or
installation of alarms in the City of Piedmont shall obtain a yearly business permit from the City
of Piedmont Department of Public Works. The fee for such permit shall be set by Council
resolution.
After the effective date of this chapter, no alarm agent shall install a police or fire alarm
system within the City of Piedmont without first obtaining a Piedmont business permit. (Ord.
No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
27.4-3 Permit Approval and Issuance. A City of Piedmont business permit
application shall be submitted by an alarm agent to the Fire Chief or the Police Chief for
approval. Approval shall not be given unless sufficient proof is submitted that the alarm agent's
alarm system devices to be installed in Piedmont meet or exceed the requirements of Section 27.2.
(Ord. No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
SEC. 27.5 FALSE ALARMS
27.5-1 Notice Required. If a false alarm is activated by any alarm system within the
City of Piedmont, a notice of false alarm shall be issued to the alarm owner by the police
department. This notice of false alarm shall set forth the time and nature of the false alarm and, if
applicable, the fact that a service charge under section 27.5.3 is due and payable within fifteen
(15) days after service of the notice.
27.5-2 Owner Response Before Arrival: Alarm owners who make contact with the
police department before responding units arrive at the location of the alarm shall not be charged
with a false alarm.
27.5-3 Service Charge. A service charge as set by Council resolution from time to
time shall be imposed upon the fourth and all ensuing false alarms occurring within a twelvemonth
period at any one building or premises, except that when ownership of the building or
premises changes completely, the count of false alarms shall begin anew. Notice shall be given as
set forth in Section 27.5-1 above.
Alarms
27-6
27.5-4 Appeal. The determination of the existence of any false alarm and the
imposition of a service charge may be appealed by the alarm owner by a written request to the
police chief. The police chief shall, within five (5) days after receiving such request, set a time
for hearing and give notice to the owner. The owner may appear at such hearing and testify. The
decision of the chief of police shall be final and the alarm owner shall be notified in writing of that
decision. (Ord. No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
SEC. 27.6 VIOLATIONS
Any failure to pay a service charge imposed under Section 27.5 or any failure to comply
with the requirements of Section 27.2 shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. If a violation
has occurred, the chief of police may take any one or more of the following actions:
27.6-1 Suspend Service. The chief of police may suspend the provision of a police or
fire response to an alarm at the building where the violation occurred or whose owner has
otherwise violated this chapter. The suspension of services may be appealed by the property
owner or resident in the manner provided in Section 27.5.4.
27.6-2 Order Removal. The chief of police may order the removal within thirty (30)
days of any device or attachment not operated or maintained in accordance with the provision of
this Chapter, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6 of this Code pertaining to the abatement of
nuisances.
27.6-3 Revoke Permit. The chief of police may revoke any business license permit
issued hereunder for failure to comply with the conditions thereof, after providing (1) a written
notice to the permit holder of the intent to revoke the permit and (2) a reasonable opportunity
for the permit holder to appeal the proposed revocation. (Ord. No. 511, 7/89)
SEC. 27.7 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT
An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent fine. All fines shall be deemed delinquent thirty
(30) days after they are due and payable. (Ord. No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
SEC. 27.8 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections,
Alarms
27-7
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord.
No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
SEC. 27.9 FEE EXEMPTIONS
The United States Government, the State of California, counties, municipal corporations,
departments thereof and other governmental entities are exempt from all fees authorized by this
chapter.
SEC. 27.10 CAR ALARMS
The provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to
automobiles. (Ord. No. 511 N.S., 7/89)
SEC. 27.11 CONFIDENTIALITY
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this ordinance shall be confidential in
character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents
thereof shall not be known except to the persons charged with the administration of this
ordinance. (Ord. No. 511 N.S., 7/89)

Rev. 10/6/88 28-1
Chapter 28
PROTECTION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT CANINES
'28.1 Prohibited conduct
'28.2 Penalties
SEC. 28.1 PROHIBITED CONDUCT
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously tease, taunt, torment, strike,
kick, mutilate, disable or otherwise injure or kill, or to unwarrantably interfere or meddle with
any canine while such animal is being used by the City of Piedmont police department, or any
officer or other employee thereof, in the performance of any function or duty of said department
or of such officer or employee. (Ord. No. 460 N.S., '2, eff. 8/2/84)
SEC. 28.2 PENALTIES
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or
by being both so fined and imprisoned. (Ord. No. 460 N.S., '2, eff. 8/2/84)
Chapter 29
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
§29.1 Definitions.
§29.2 Compliance with County Ordinance Code Required.
§29.3 City Liability.
SEC. 29.1 DEFINITIONS
29.1.1 : For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and
certain provisions shall be construed as herein set out unless it shall be apparent from their
context that a different meaning is intended:
29.1.2: Basic Life Support Ambulance Service or BLS. The service performed in
response to a non-emergency call. Specifically, first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) procedures that, at a minimum, include recognizing respiratory and cardiac arrest and
starting the proper application of an automatic external defibrillator (AED) and CPR to maintain
life without invasive techniques until the victim may be transported or until advanced life
support is available.
29.1.3: Critical Care Transport or CCT. Any emergency or non-emergency
transport of a patient where the skill level required in the care of that patient during transport
requires, or may require, care within the CCT-Paramedic or CCT-RN scope of practice.
SEC. 29.2 COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY ORDINANCE CODE REQUIRED
Every company which provides Basic Life Support Ambulance Service or Critical Care
Transport, within the City of Piedmont shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 6.114 of
Title 6 of the Ordinance Code of the County of Alameda, as it is now and as it may be amended
in the future.
SEC. 29.3 CITY LIABILITY
Unless expressly agreed in writing, the City of Piedmont and its officers and employees
shall not be liable for any costs or charges associated with compliance with this Chapter or the
rules or regulations promulgated hereunder.”
Chapter 29
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
§29.1 Definitions.
§29.2 Compliance with County Ordinance Code Required.
§29.3 City Liability.
SEC. 29.1 DEFINITIONS
29.1.1 : For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and
certain provisions shall be construed as herein set out unless it shall be apparent from their
context that a different meaning is intended:
29.1.2: Basic Life Support Ambulance Service or BLS. The service performed in
response to a non-emergency call. Specifically, first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) procedures that, at a minimum, include recognizing respiratory and cardiac arrest and
starting the proper application of an automatic external defibrillator (AED) and CPR to maintain
life without invasive techniques until the victim may be transported or until advanced life
support is available.
29.1.3: Critical Care Transport or CCT. Any emergency or non-emergency
transport of a patient where the skill level required in the care of that patient during transport
requires, or may require, care within the CCT-Paramedic or CCT-RN scope of practice.
SEC. 29.2 COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY ORDINANCE CODE REQUIRED
Every company which provides Basic Life Support Ambulance Service or Critical Care
Transport, within the City of Piedmont shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 6.114 of
Title 6 of the Ordinance Code of the County of Alameda, as it is now and as it may be amended
in the future.
SEC. 29.3 CITY LIABILITY
Unless expressly agreed in writing, the City of Piedmont and its officers and employees
shall not be liable for any costs or charges associated with compliance with this Chapter or the
rules or regulations promulgated hereunder.”
Trip Reduction
31-1
Chapter 31
TRIP REDUCTION
'31.1 Definitions
'31.2 Program Requirements
'31.3 Responsibility of Local Jurisdictions
'31.4 Responsibilities of Employers
'31.5 Enforcement
SEC. 31.1 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall govern this Chapter:
A. Commute Alternatives shall mean any reasonable method to reduce congestion
and reduce the number of trips made by a single occupant vehicle. Such
alternatives shall include, but are not limited to carpooling, vanpooling, transit,
bicycling, telecommuniting and/or walking as commute modes.
B. Commute Alternatives Information Program shall mean a program to provide
information about any reasonable method or approach for providing,
supporting, subsidizing, and/or encouraging the use of community alternatives,
including but not limited to matching and placement services for carpools and
vanpools; provision of carpool and preferential parking location and/or fees;
fees for Employee parking, provision of and/or placement services for
subscription buses; provision of shuttle services; transit fare subsidies; on-site
paths, parking, and showers and locker for bicyclists and pedestrians;
guaranteed ride home and guaranteed transportation in emergencies for users of
commute alternatives; on-site child care and other service convenience facilities
which lessen the need for a personal vehicle at the place of employment;
telecommuting; and teleconferencing.
C. Commute Alternative Program Advisor shall mean the person employed by the
Jurisdiction to manage the program developed under this Ordinance.
D. Commute Alternatives Program Appeals Board shall mean the political body,
or other body designated by the Jurisdiction, which shall hear appeals for
requirements of this Ordinance.
E. Commute Alternatives Program Coordinator shall mean the person designated
by the Employer who is responsible for carrying out Employer requirements
Trip Reduction
31-2
under the ordinance and day-to-day administration of the Commute
Alternatives Information Program.
F. Employee shall mean any person who regularly works twenty (20) hours or
more per week at a work site and normally travels between 6-10 AM or 3-7:00
PM and who normally works at least twenty-six (26) weeks per year.
G. Employer shall mean any public or private Employer who has a permanent
worksite in the Jurisdiction. "Employer" shall not include contractors with no
permanent place of business in the Jurisdiction and other businesses with no
permanent workplace location.
H. Jurisdiction shall mean the City of Piedmont.
I. Worksite shall mean the place of employment, base of operation, or
predominant work location of any Employee. It includes all of the Employer's
buildings or facilities located within close proximity of each other.
J. TRO is the Trip Reduction Ordinance, meaning this Chapter 31.
K. CMA is the Alameda County Congestion Agency.
(Ord. No. 537 N.S. '1)
SEC. 31.2 PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
A. Phase I of the Ordinance requires an Employer educational program. In the
first program year, the Ordinance shall be applied to all Employers of 100 or
more. When a sufficient number of Employer Coordinators in companies of
100 or more have been trained, the TRO shall be extended to Employers of 50
or more. All employers of 50 or more shall be included in the program no later
than the third year after adoption of the TRO.
B. Phase II of the Ordinance may incorporate Trip Reduction Ordinance
Requirements to be developed by the BAAQMD. (Bay Area Air Quality
Management District). (Ord. No. 537 N.S. '2)
SEC. 31.3 RESPONSIBILITY OF LOCAL JURISDICTIONS
A. The Jurisdiction shall designate a Commute Alternatives Program Advisor to
serve as the point of contact for and provide guidance to Employers subject to
this Ordinance. The Commute Alternatives Program Advisor shall be
responsible for the following:
Trip Reduction
31-3
1. Provide Employers with marketing materials and information about
commute alternatives and how commute alternatives can reduce traffic
congestion and air pollution.
2. Provide training for Employer Commute Alternatives Program
Coordinators in fulfilling their responsibilities.
3. Collaborate with the CMA in a countywide baseline survey of commute
patterns and transportation modes between home and work.
4. Develop a program for monitoring and enforcing compliance with the
ordinance.
B. The Jurisdiction shall specify a Commute Alternatives Appeals Board that will
serve as a forum for petitions brought by Employers who are found to be in
noncompliance with the TRO. (Ord. No. 537 N.S. '3)
SEC. 31.4 RESPONSIBILITIES OF EMPLOYERS
As defined in Section 31.2, Employers shall initiate action on the following within thirty
(30) days of notification by the Jurisdiction that they are subject to the Ordinance:
A. Appoint a Commute Alternatives Program Coordinator following notice from
the Jurisdiction. The Coordinator shall complete a coordinator training course
approved by the Jurisdiction unless it can be demonstrated to the Jurisdiction's
satisfaction that the Coordinator has already completed comparable training
elsewhere.
B. Submit a Detailed Information Campaign Plan to the Jurisdiction at the
beginning of each program year. At the end of the year, the Employer must
verify to the Jurisdiction that the campaign was carried out.
C. Inform All New Employees About Commute Alternatives within two (2)
weeks of hiring.
D. Develop a Commute Alternatives Information Program to inform all
Employees annually of the existence of commute options as defined in Section
31.1 C. Acceptable forms of communication include letters to each Employee,
electronic mail, a substantial article in the company newsletter, and face to face
meetings.
E. Post or Otherwise Distribute Information on commute alternatives supplied by
the Jurisdiction or the CMA.
Trip Reduction
31-4
F. Participate in any Countywide Survey originated by the CMA. Data obtained
in Employer surveys prior to the CMP will be incorporated into the
countywide survey by the CMA. (Ord. No. 537 N.S. '4)
SEC 31.5 ENFORCEMENT
A. Appeals to the Commute Alternatives Appeals Board. If the Commute
Alternative Program Advisor finds that an Employer has failed to fulfill ordinance requirements,
the administrator shall notify the Employer within 30 days. The Employer may, within 10 days
of receipt of such notice, file an appeal with the Commute Alternatives Appeals Board stating
the grounds for the appeal. Upon receiving an appeal, the Appeals Board shall hear the appeal
and render an advisory opinion within 60 days. The opinion shall be filed with the Employer
and Commute Alternatives Program Advisor.
B. Penalties
1. Civil Assessment. An Employer who fails to comply with the provisions of
this Ordinance within ninety (90) days of written notice to comply, shall be
liable to the Jurisdiction for a civil assessment in the amount of two hundred
and fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day of noncompliance,
commencing with the ninety-first (91st) day following notice.
2. Injunction. In addition to any other remedy which may accrue to the
Jurisdiction hereunder, the Jurisdiction may use a civil injunction to enforce
provisions of this ordinance, or any regulation or order promulgated or issued,
or any program approve, pursuant hereto.
3. Operative Date. Enforcement provisions shall be effective from and after one
(1) year following the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 537 N.S. '5)
Trip Reduction
31-5
Rev. 10/5/92 31-4