POMONA CITY CODE 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: July 19, 2004 
Effective: August 19, 2004 
____________ 
  
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
POMONA, CALIFORNIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Edward Cortez 
(Mayor) 
George Hunter 
(District 1) 
Marco Robles 
(District 2) 
Dan Rodriguez 
(District 3) 
Paula Lantz 
(District 4) 
Elliot Rothman 
(District 5) 
Norma J. Torres 
(District 6) 
City Council 
____________ 
Douglas Dunlap 
City Manager 
____________ 
Arnold M. Alvarez-Glasman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Elizabeth Villeral 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
POMONA, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Tim Sandoval 
(Mayor) 
Rubio R. Gonzalez 
(District 1) 
Adriana Robledo 
(District 2) 
Cristina Carrizosa 
(District 3) 
Elizabeth Ontiveros-Cole 
(District 4) 
Ginna E. Escobar 
(District 5) 
Robert Torres 
(District 6) 
City Council 
____________ 
Linda Lowry 
City Manager 
____________ 
Arnold M. Alvarez-Glasman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Eva M. Buice, MMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Pomona, California. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1959 Code, as supplemented through December 31, 2001, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1959 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Elizabeth Villeral, City Clerk, Mr. Richard L. Adams, II, Assistant City Attorney and Mr. Matt Gorman, Deputy City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pomona, California. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pomona, California. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pomona, California. 2004. 
ORDINANCE NO. 4006 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF POMONA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF POMONA, CALIFORNIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the City of Pomona as follows: 
SECTION 1. The publication entitled "Pomona City Code," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 78, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
SECTION 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 2, 2004, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
SECTION 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof, shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
SECTION 4. The provision of the "Pomona City Code," as provided for in Section 1 hereof, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the City Council relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
SECTION 5. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is not specifically declared to be an infraction shall be punished as a misdemeanor, with a fine of not more than $1,000.00, imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than six months or both such fine and imprisonment. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this code or any ordinance, rules or regulations authorized by ordinance that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation authorized by ordinance that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
SECTION 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
SECTION 7. Ordinances adopted after February 2, 2004, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
SECTION 8. The City Clerk shall certify to the passage and adoption of this ordinance, causing it to be posted as required by law, and it shall become effective thirty (30) days after its adoption. 
APPROVED, PASSED AND ADOPTED this 19 th day of July, 2004. 
ATTEST: CITY OF POMONA 
/s/ ELVIRA M. SANTOS 
      Deputy City Clerk 	
 	 
	/s/ EDWARD S. CORTEZ 
      Mayor 
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ ARNOLD M. ALVAREZ-GLASMAN 
      City Attorney 	
 	 
 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "Pomona City Code" and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Pomona, California, City Code." 
(Code 1959, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 511(b). 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances, Government Code § 50022.1 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. This Code shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Pomona, Los Angeles County, California. 
City council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the city council of the City of Pomona, California. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Pomona City Code, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6800. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Los Angeles County, California. 
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision or authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
In the city. The term "in the city" means all territory within the city limits and all territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction. 
Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more persons give such authority to a majority of such persons. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code § 12. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 14. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6804. 
Number. Words in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural include the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 13. 
Oath. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath, and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 15. 
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
Person. The term "person" means any human being; any governmental or political subdivision or public agency; any public or private corporation; any partnership; any firm, association or other organization; any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing; or any other legal entity. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 17. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
Property. The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes land, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription by mark. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 16. 
State. The term "state" means the State of California. 
Street. The term "street" includes any alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, road, highway, viaduct or other public thoroughfare dedicated and open to public use as such. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," as applied to premises, include any person holding a written or oral lease or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 11. 
Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6805. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report or statement is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 68031. 
(Code 1959, §§ 1-2, 1-12)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  A history appearing in parentheses after a section in this Code indicates the legislative history and is a declaration by the city council that the section to which the history note applies is a restatement or reenactment of an original ordinance or amendment thereof. Editor's notes, charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(Code 1959, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any previously repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
(Code 1959, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Pomona City Code is hereby amended to read as follows: …." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Pomona City Code is hereby created to read as follows: …." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Charter reference— Ordinance adoption procedures, § 508 et seq.  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to titles, chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this section" or "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Any person violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of the Pomona Municipal Code for which no punishment is specified or for which punishment is specified as a misdemeanor may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney, City Prosecutor or the District Attorney of Los Angeles County. Any conviction of a misdemeanor violation of this code shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the amount allowable pursuant to California Penal Code Section 19, imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than six months or both fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code that is an infraction shall be punished by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision within one year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. 
(e)  When a person under the age of 18 is charged with a violation of this Code and a peace officer issues a notice to appear in superior court to that minor, the charge shall be deemed an infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 601, 602. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code: 
(1)  That are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  That are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(h)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1959, § 1-8; Ord. No. 3945, § 1(16-48), 2-11-2002; Ord. No. 4165, § 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 4166, § 1, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 4200, § 1, 4-6-2015) 
State Law reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, Government Code § 36900 et seq.  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision or portion of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions or provisions of this Code or their applicability to distinguishable situations or circumstances. In enacting this Code, it is the desire of the city council to validly regulate to the full measure of its legal authority in the public interest, and to that end, the city council declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof might be declared invalid or unconstitutional in whole or in part, as applied to any particular situation or circumstances, and to this end the provisions of this Code are intended to be severable. 
(Code 1959, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1959, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed in this section. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)  Annexing property into the city. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(7)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(9)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations. 
(12)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(13)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan or a master plan of streets. 
(14)  Amending the zoning map or zoning atlas or rezoning specific property. 
(15)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(16)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  The purpose of which has been accomplished.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 10; administration and enforcement of stormwater management, § 18-461 et seq.; library, ch. 26; taxation, ch. 50; regulation and administration of cable communications franchises, § 54-32; administration and enforcement of traffic and vehicles, § 58-41 et seq.; utilities, ch. 62; administration and planning, ch. 70; administration of construction standards, § 74-133. 
State Law reference— Cities generally, Government Code § 34000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Holidays. 
Legal holidays, for purposes of this Code, shall be as established by resolution. For purposes of personnel regulations, holidays shall be as established in collective bargaining agreements or in personnel rules. 
(Code 1959, § 2-3.1; Ord. No. 2665, § 1; Ord. No. 2755, §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. No. 3480, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-2. - Office hours generally. 
City hall offices shall be open to serve the public as set forth by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-4; Ord. No. 1265, § 3; Ord. No. 3480, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-3. - Offices closed on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
All city hall offices shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays and such legal holidays as are established by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-3; Ord. No. 1265, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4. - Waiver of application fees. 
Whenever this Code or any other ordinance adopted by the city council requires that a fee be paid as a condition for obtaining a permit, change of zone, variance, conditional use permit, minor deviation, building permit or any other privilege subject to approval of any officer, commission, board or the city council, such fee may be waived by the city council if such applicant presents evidence sufficient to satisfy the city council that the payment of such fee would work an extreme hardship on the applicant and that the waiving of the fee would be in the best interest of the public in order to permit the applicant to proceed in the processing of the application. 
(Code 1959, § 1-15; Ord. No. 2392, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5. - City seal, flag, emblem and public library logo. 
The common seal of the city, city flag, emblem and Pomona Public Library Logo described below are adopted as the official seal, flag, emblem and public library logo of the City of Pomona as follows:   
City Seal 
  
City Flag 
  
City Emblem 
  
Pomona Public Library Logo 
(1)  Official custodian. The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the seal, flag and emblem of the City of Pomona. 
(2)  Adoption and description. The existing seal, flag, and emblem of the City of Pomona, the impresses of which are on file with the city clerk's office, and descriptions of which are shown below, are adopted as the official seal, flag and emblem of the City of Pomona. The official seal of the City of Pomona is also registered as a trademark with the State of California. The existing Pomona Public Library logo, the impress of which is on file with the city clerk's office, and description of which is shown below, is adopted as the official logo of the Pomona Public Library. The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the Pomona Public Library logo and the seal, flag and emblem of the City of Pomona. 
a.  Seal. The city seal is a design used to identify documents as an official act of the city council, or to identify certain real or personal property as the official real or personal property of the City of Pomona. The seal of the city shall be circular in form, approximately two inches in diameter, and shall bear upon its face the following design: In the center thereof, stands the Goddess of Pomona, depicted with green hair and adorned in a blue gown, bearing in her left hand a brown staff that extends just above shoulder length. On her left elbow, hangs a leash attached to a brown canine, which stands facing the right side of the seal to her immediate left. Her right hand rests upon an overturned horn that bears multi-colored fruit and vegetables that pile in front of her feet. Immediately above the Goddess, the seal bears in black writing, "California." In the blue colored circumference encircling the Goddess shall be, in white, two stars, one each to the immediate left and right of the goddess and the words, "City of Pomona" on the upper portion, and, "Incorporated Jan. 1888" on the lower portion. The circumference has a rope-like border, red and white in color, on both the inner and outer circles, the outer border measuring wider than the inner border. The center portion of the seal contains a shading effect that fades from blue to white beginning at the inner portion of the circumference and fading towards the image of the goddess in the center. The seal may be depicted in colored form or a black and/or white rendition of this same description. 
b.  Flag. The city flag is a design used for ceremonial purposes to represent the corporate entity and jurisdiction of the City of Pomona. The flag of the city shall be rectangular in form and proportionate to the measurements of three feet wide by five feet high of the same measuring unit. The flag is royal blue in color, bearing a white bar that measures approximately six-inches wide on a standard three-foot by five-foot flag, spanning from top to bottom on the far left portion of a flag, and a gold bar of equal measurement to the immediate right of the white bar. The center of the flag shall bear a white rendering of the city seal. Immediately above the seal, the flag shall bear, in arched fashion, "POMONA" in gold block lettering. 
c.  Emblem. The city emblem is a design used for the purpose of representing the corporate entity and jurisdiction of the City of Pomona and the capacity of its officers, employees and agents as representatives of the City of Pomona. The general design and the details of the city emblem, excluding colors, shall correspond substantially with the following representation thereof: The emblem of the City of Pomona shall consist of six uppercase letter "P" in a weighted roman style font arranged in a circular fashion, approximately two inches in diameter, in a manner that the base of the letters create a hexagonal shape in the center of the logo. This emblem may be depicted in any color or in the form of an impression. 
d.  Pomona Public Library logo. The Pomona Public Library logo is a design used to identify documents, real or personal property as official documents, real or personal property of the Pomona Public Library. The logo of the Pomona Public Library shall be circular in form, approximately two inches in diameter, and shall bear upon its face the Goddess of Pomona, depicted in a dark red color with white highlights, bearing in her left hand a staff that extends just above shoulder length. On her left elbow hangs a leash attached to a canine, which stands facing the right side of the seal to her immediate left. Her right hand rests upon an overturned horn that bears fruit and vegetables that pile in front of her feet. The circumference of the logo bears the words "Pomona Public Library" in white block letters with black outline. 
(3)  Unauthorized use of logo, seal, flag, and/or emblem—Penalty. 
a.  It is unlawful for any person to make or use the seal of the city, or reproduction thereof, for any purpose other than for the official business of the city, its council, officers or departments. 
b.  No person shall use the city emblem or Pomona Public Library logo, or any facsimile thereof, for purposes of supporting or opposing the nomination or election to any city or other public office of any person, or for purposes of supporting or opposing any ballot measure, nor include such city emblem on any writing distributed for purposes of influencing the action of the electorate, or any part thereof, in any election. This section shall not be applicable to writings issued by the City of Pomona. 
c.  (1)  Whoever knowingly displays any facsimile of the seal, flag, and/or emblem of the City of Pomona, or the Pomona Public Library logo, in connection with, any advertisement, poster or circular, for the purpose of conveying, or in a manner reasonably calculated to convey, a false impression of sponsorship or approval by the City of Pomona or by any department, agency or instrumentality thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(2)  Subdivision (1) shall not be construed to apply to the use of a facsimile of the seal, flag or emblem or Pomona Public Library logo in any newspaper, periodical, book, pamphlet or stationery where the facsimile of the seal is printed for informational purposes only to indicate that any article or printed matter therein originated from authorized sources of the City of Pomona. 
d.  (1)  Whoever, except when authorized in writing by the city council for official use of the city, knowingly manufactures, reproduces, sells or purchases for resale, either separately or appended to any article manufactured or sold, any facsimile of the seal, flag or emblem of the City of Pomona, or the Pomona Public Library logo, or any substantial part thereof, or otherwise displays same for unauthorized purposes or the purpose of personal financial gain shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(2)  As used in this subsection, the term "sell" shall be broadly construed to include transactions involving monetary donations to the seller and/or the seller's agent or representative. 
e.  As used in this subsection, the term "facsimile" shall mean a replica of the seal, flag, emblem or logo as described in subsection 2-5(2) of this article. 
(4)  Manufacture and sale of souvenirs and decorative items. Nothing in this article shall prevent a person from manufacturing or selling non-documentary objects, such as souvenirs or decorative items, bearing the city seal and/or emblem or Pomona Public Library logo as part of the design, provided that such person undertakes such activity pursuant to agreement with the city, approved by the city council or by such officer as the city council may designate, containing such requirements and limitations as the city council or such officer shall deem appropriate to assure that such use of the city seal, Pomona Public Library logo and/or city emblem is in the best interests of the City of Pomona. 
(Code 1959, § 1-11; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, 4-18-2005) 
State Law reference— Clerk to be custodian of seal, Government Code, § 40811.  
Secs. 2-6—2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, §§ 401 et seq., 501 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - CANVASS OF ELECTION RESULTS AND INSTALLATION OF COUNCILMEMBERS 
 
Sec. 2-41. - Purpose. 
This division sets forth the procedure and timeline for the installation of elected city council officials and redirects celebratory activities of elected officials leaving office. Within this division, any reference to officers, council or city councilmembers shall include the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 4252 , § 3, 10-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4252 , § 4, adopted Oct. 2, 2018, renumbered the former § 2-41 as § 2-45 and enacted a new § 2-41 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Sec. 2-42. - Procedure and timeline. 
(a)  The city clerk shall, upon receiving the official canvass of election results from the county registrar of voters for an election pertaining to one or more councilmembers, immediately notify the city council. 
(b)  The meeting for the administration of oaths of office and seating of new councilmembers shall occur no later than 7:30 p.m. on the second Monday in December of each even-numbered year. The actual meeting date shall be specified in the city council resolution setting the annual meeting dates, pursuant to City Charter Section 503. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b), the city council shall receive certification of the official canvass and declare the election results as the first item of business at their next regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
(d)  Immediately after the city council receives and declares the election results, the newly elected and re-elected councilmembers shall take the oath of office. 
(e)  A recess will be placed on the agenda following the swearing-in of new and incumbent councilmembers. Refreshments may be served in the chamber foyer. When the meeting recommences, newly sworn-in councilmembers shall take their respective district seats on the city council dais to conduct any business remaining on the agenda. 
(f)  during the meeting at which the city council receives the certification of the official canvass, there shall be no presentation of awards, proclamations or conduct of other business at any time by city councilmembers who will no longer be seated after the certified election results have been received by the city council. 
(1)  Nothing in subsection (f) shall preclude a special meeting being called for such purposes, provided such special meeting is concluded prior to the time of the regularly scheduled meeting in which the canvass of election is received. 
(g)  In the event that the certification of the official canvass has been received by the council and all newly and re-elected councilmembers have taken the oath of office prior to the second Monday in December, and no other business is required, such meeting may be cancelled by the mayor. 
(h)  In the event a special election is required to fill a vacant council seat, the procedure set forth in this division shall be followed with the certification of the canvass and oath of office to occur at the next scheduled city council meeting, as set by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 4252 , § 3, 10-2-2018)  
Sec. 2-43. - Oath of office. 
(a)  The oath of office shall be administered at the time set forth in this division by the city clerk or other officer duly authorized to administer oaths. If administration of the oaths of office is conducted at the council meeting at which the canvass results are received, the order of the oaths of office shall begin with the mayor, when applicable, and then councilmembers, in ascending order by council district. (Ref. Gov. Code secs. 1225, 1362, 3104, 24000). 
(b)  If a newly elected or re-elected councilmember cannot attend the regularly scheduled meeting established by this article, he/she may make arrangements with the city clerk to take the oath of office no later than the beginning of the next regular council meeting, as set forth in the adopted resolution setting the annual council meeting schedule. 
(c)  A special council meeting shall not be called for the sole purpose of a newly elected or re-elected councilmember taking the oath of office. 
(Ord. No. 4252 , § 3, 10-2-2018)  
Sec. 2-44. - Councilmember-elect information and training. 
(a)  The city manager, city attorney, and city clerk shall jointly prepare and maintain a councilmember handbook to inform and guide, to the most reasonable extent possible, new and/or returning councilmembers as to duties of their office. The handbook will address appointment of commissioners, required and recommended training opportunities, mandated individual reporting and filing requirements, budgetary/finance material, and personal compensation. Pertinent city policies will either be included or referenced in the handbook. 
(b)  Immediately after election of any new councilmember, the city manager shall reserve attendance at an appropriate training session for such newly elected councilmember. Attendance at such training shall be at the discretion of the newly elected councilmember and payment for such training shall be made from the councilmember's expense fund. 
(Ord. No. 4252 , § 3, 10-2-2018)  
DIVISION 2. - VICE MAYOR TERMS AND ORDER OF APPOINTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-45. - Selection of vice-mayor. 
(a)  The city council shall select one of its members as vice-mayor every eight months beginning on the first meeting of September 1992 and continuing thereafter. 
(b)  The order of appointment which shall apply, commencing in September 1992, is as follows: 
(1)  Councilmember from district 2. 
(2)  Councilmember from district 3. 
(3)  Councilmember from district 4. 
(4)  Councilmember from district 5. 
(5)  Councilmember from district 6. 
(6)  Councilmember from district 1. 
(c)  The mayor is ineligible from also serving as the vice-mayor, and the councilmember who has served and completed his term as vice-mayor is also ineligible from serving a consecutive term as vice-mayor. 
(d)  Any member of the city council may decline to serve his term as vice-mayor, but in declining to serve the member's district shall be placed at the bottom of the order of appointment. 
(e)  As members leave the city council, the district order of appointment shall be deemed modified by removing the respective council district number from the list and establishing a new order of appointment by resolution. The new order of appointment of vice-mayor shall be established by adding the district number of the new councilmember to the bottom of the list. If two or more new councilmembers are added to the order at the same time, their positions on the order shall be determined by listing their respective council districts in descending numerical order. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other subsection of this section, by the affirmative vote of at least five or more members of the city council, including the mayor, and not counting abstentions, any or all subsections of this section may be suspended, and any councilmember, excluding the mayor, may be appointed to the position of vice-mayor for a fixed or indeterminate period or term. 
(Code 1959, § 2-1.1; Ord. No. 3662, § 1; Ord. No. 4252 , § 4, 10-2-2018) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to § 2-41. 
Charter reference— Vice-mayor, § 502.  
Secs. 2-46—2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Elected officers, § 401 et seq.; city manager, § 601 et seq.; other officers and employees, § 701 et seq. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(7); duties of city clerk, § 10-41; chair and vice-chair, § 70-32. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-71—2-275. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTIVE BARGAINING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Collective bargaining, Government Code § 3500 et seq.; local ordinances on collective bargaining authorized, Government Code § 3507. 
 
Sec. 2-276. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City representative means the city manager or his representative designated to meet and confer with the exclusively recognized employee organizations on behalf of the city council in connection with wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment. 
Consult/consultation in good faith means to communicate orally or in writing with all affected employee organizations, whether exclusively recognized or not, for the purpose of presenting and obtaining views or advising of proposed actions in an effort to reach a consensus; and, as distinguished from meeting and conferring in good faith regarding matters within the required scope of such meet and confer process, does not involve an exchange of proposals and counterproposals with an exclusively recognized employee organization in an endeavor to reach agreement in the form of a memorandum of understanding, nor is it subject to article III of this chapter. 
Employee means any employee in a regular position of the city, except elected officers. 
Employee, confidential means any employee whose duties would give the employee access to decisions concerning city employer-employee relations, or who enters into the decision-making process of the city concerning any matter relating to employer-employee relations. For the purpose of this subsection, personnel in the city manager's office, city attorney's office, and the human resources office are considered to be in this category. 
Employee representative means the authorized representative or representatives of an exclusively recognized employee organization. 
Exclusively recognized employee organization means an employee organization which has been formally acknowledged by the city, as the sole employee organization representing the employees in an appropriate representation unit pursuant to section 2-281, having the exclusive right to meet and confer in good faith concerning statutorily required subjects pertaining to unit employees, and thereby assuming the corresponding obligation of fairly representing such employees. 
Impasse means that the representatives of the city and an exclusively recognized employee organization have reached a point in their meeting and conferring in good faith where their differences on matters to be included in a memorandum of understanding, and concerning which they are required to meet and confer remain so substantial and prolonged that further meeting and conferring would be futile. 
Management employee means an employee having responsibility for formulating, administering or managing the implementation of city policies and programs. 
Mediation and conciliation means effort by an impartial third party to assist in reconciling a dispute regarding wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment between the city and an exclusively recognized employee organization. 
Meet and confer in good faith means that the city representative and the exclusive employee organization representative shall have the mutual obligation personally to meet and confer within a reasonable period of time in order to freely exchange information, opinions, and proposals, and to endeavor to reach agreement on matters within the scope of representation. 
Professional employees means as defined in Government Code § 3507.3, to wit: "Employees engaged in work requiring specialized knowledge and skills attained through completion of a recognized course of instruction, including but not limited to attorneys, physicians, registered nurses, engineers, architects, teachers, and various types of physical, chemical and biological scientists." 
Registered employee organization means an employee organization which has merely filed its name with the city clerk giving notice that some city employees belong to it, and in fact some city employees do belong to such employee organization. 
Regular position means a position into which an employee obtains regular status after successfully completing a probationary period. 
Supervisory employee means any employee having authority, in the interest of the city, to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward, or discipline other employees, or responsibility to direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or to recommend such action if, in connection with the foregoing, the exercise of such authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of independent judgment. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-2; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2877, § 1; Ord. No. 3993, § 2, 7-21-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-277. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this division is to carry out the spirit and intent of chapter 10, division 4, title 1, of the California Government Code (Government Code § 3500 et seq.), known as the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, and implement and supplement it in order to promote full communication between the city as a public employer and its employees by providing reasonable methods of resolving possible disputes regarding wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment should they arise. This division is intended to strengthen the merit system service and other methods of administering fair employer-employee relations through the establishment of a uniform and orderly method of communication between the employees and the city. As a means for accomplishing these purposes, this division provides for the method by which the city shall recognize employee organizations and meet and confer with them in good faith as required by Government Code § 3505. It is also the purpose of this division to promote the improvement of personnel management and employer-employee relations within the city by providing a uniform basis for recognizing the right of public employees to join organizations of their own choice and to be represented by such organizations in their employment relationships with the city. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-1; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 1, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-278. - City's rights. 
The city shall have the exclusive right over any consideration of the merits, necessity or organization of any service or activity provided by the city. In such connection, the city shall have the exclusive right to determine the mission of each of its departments, commissions, boards and agencies, set standards and levels of service to be performed, determine the procedures and standards of selection for employment, direct its employees, exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations, and determine the methods, means, technology and personnel by which the city's operations are to be conducted, and the levels of service met, take disciplinary action for just cause, relieve employees from work for just cause; and subcontract work; provided, however, that prior to the exercise of such rights the city shall meet and confer with the employee and their representatives on the impact of decisions on wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-3; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 3, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-279. - Employees' rights. 
City employees shall have the right, unless otherwise provided by the legislature, to form, join and participate in the activities of employee organizations and shall have the right to represent themselves individually in their employee relations with the city, all as provided for in Government Code § 3502. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-4; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 4, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-280. - Employee units. 
(a)  In order to be exclusively recognized, for the purposes of this division, an employee organization must represent a majority of the employees in an employee unit. 
(b)  Four separate and distinct units exist among the city employees and they are acknowledged as the exclusively recognized employee organizations as follows: 
(1)  All sworn police department employees, of the rank of sergeant or below. 
(2)  All sworn police management employees at the rank of police captain and police lieutenant. 
(3)  All general services employees in regular positions of the city. 
(4)  All group "C" and group "D" (mid-management/confidential) as established by city council resolution. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the employee units established by this chapter, professional employees shall not be denied the right to be represented separately from those employees not designated professional. The determination of the appropriate employee unit for such professional employees shall be decided by the city representative at the time and in the event any professional employee organization should seek recognition to represent any such professional employees or any portion of them separately from other city employees. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-5; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2759, § 1; Ord. No. 2781, § 1; Ord. No. 2782, § 1; Ord. No. 2877, § 2; Ord. No. 3020, § 1; Ord. No. 3027, § 2; Ord. No. 3048, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 3054, § 2; Ord. No. 3074, § 2; Ord. No. 3892, § 1; Ord. No. 3993, § 5, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-281. - Procedure for obtaining recognition by employee organization. 
Any employee organization representing employees which seeks recognition as the majority representative of the employees in one of the acknowledged employee units must file with the city council a petition containing the following information before it will be eligible to be considered for recognition: 
(1)  Name and address of the employee organization. 
(2)  Name and title of its officers. 
(3)  Name of authorized employee representatives and explanation of their authority and responsibility. 
(4)  A statement as to whether the employee organization is a chapter of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner, with a local, regional, state, national or international organization and, if so, the name and address of each such other organization. 
(5)  A designation of those persons, not exceeding two in number, and their addresses, to whom notice sent by regular United States mail will be deemed sufficient notice on the employee organization for any purpose. 
(6)  A statement that the employee organization has no restriction on membership based on race, color, religion, creed, sex, national origin, age, sexual orientation, mental or physical disability or medical condition. 
(7)  The job classifications or position titles of employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate and the approximate number of member employees therein. 
(8)  A copy of the employee organization's articles of incorporation, and its bylaws; and, if not incorporated, a copy of comparable documents by which it is established and is governed. Such documents shall contain a statement that the employee organization has as one of its primary purposes, representation of employees in their employment relations with the city. 
(9)  A statement that the employee organization has in its possession proof of employees support as herein defined to establish that a majority of the employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate have designated the employee organization to represent them in their employment relations with the city. Such written proof shall be submitted for confirmation to the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director or to a mutually agreed upon disinterested third party. 
(10)  A request that the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director formally acknowledge the petitioner as the exclusively recognized employee organization representing the employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate for the purpose of meeting and conferring in good faith. The petition, including the proof of employee support and all accompanying documentation, shall be declared to be true, correct and complete, under penalty of perjury, by the duly authorized officer(s) of the employee organization executing it. 
(11)  Employees shall be given a reasonable opportunity to vote in such election and be excused from their duties for a reasonable time upon a schedule approved by their supervisor if such election is conducted during regular working hours of such employees. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-6; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3892, § 2; Ord. No. 3993, § 6, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-282. - City response to recognition petition. 
Upon receipt of the petition, the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall determine whether: 
(1)  There has been compliance with the requirements of the recognition petition, and 
(2)  The proposed representation unit is an appropriate unit in accordance with section 2-286. 
If an affirmative determination is made by the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director on the foregoing two matters, he shall so inform the petitioning employee organization, shall give written notice of such request for recognition to the employees in the unit and shall take no action on such request for 30 days thereafter. If either of the foregoing matters are not affirmatively determined, the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall offer to consult thereon with such petitioning employee organization and, if such determination thereafter remains unchanged, shall inform that organization of the reasons therefor in writing. The petitioning employee organization may appeal such determination in accordance with section 2-289. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-7), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-283. - Open period for filing challenging petition. 
Within 30 days of the date written notice was given to an affected employee organization that a valid recognition petition for an appropriate unit has been filed, any other employee organization may file for a competing request to be formally acknowledged as the exclusively recognized employee organization of the employees in the same or in an overlapping unit (one which corresponds with respect to some, but not all the classifications or positions set forth in the recognition petition being challenged), by filing a petition evidencing proof of employee support in the unit claimed to be appropriate of at least the majority and otherwise in the same form and manner as set forth in section 2-281. If such challenging petition seeks establishment of an overlapping unit, the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall call for a hearing on such overlapping petitions for the purpose of ascertaining the more appropriate unit, at which time the petitioning employee organizations shall be heard. Thereafter, the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall determine the appropriate unit or units in accordance with the standards in section 2-286. The petitioning employee organizations shall have 15 days from the date notice of such unit determination is communicated to them by the city representative to amend their petitions to conform to such determination or to appeal such determination pursuant to section 2-289. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-8), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-284. - Election procedure. 
(a)  The city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall arrange for a secret ballot election to be conducted by a party agreed to by the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director and the concerned employee organization, in accordance with such party's rules and procedures subject to the provisions of this section. All employee organizations who have duly submitted petitions which have been determined to be in conformance with this resolution shall be included on the ballot. The ballot shall also reserve to employees the choice of representing themselves individually in their employment relations with the city. Employees entitled to vote in such election shall be those persons employed in regular permanent positions within the designated appropriate unit who were employed during the pay period immediately prior to the date which ended at least 15 days before the date the election commences, including those who did not work during such period because of illness, vacation, or other authorized leaves of absence, and who are employed by the city in the same unit on the date of the election. An employee organization shall be formally acknowledged as the exclusively recognized employee organization for the designated appropriate unit following an election or run-off election if it received a numerical majority of all valid votes cast in the election. In an election involving three or more choices, where none of the choices receives a majority of the valid votes cast, a run-off election shall be conducted between the two choices receiving the largest number of valid votes cast: the rules governing an initial election being applicable to a run-off election. There shall be no more than one valid election under this section pursuant to any petition in a 12-month period affecting the same unit. 
(b)  In the event that the parties are unable to agree on a third party to conduct an election, the election shall be conducted by the state mediation and conciliation service. 
(c)  Costs of conducting elections shall be borne in equal shares by the city and by each employee organization appearing on the ballot. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-9), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-285. - Procedure for decertification of exclusively recognized employee organization. 
A decertification petition alleging that the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization no longer represents a majority of the employees in an established appropriate unit may be filed with the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director only during a 30-day period commencing 180 days and ending 150 days prior to the termination date of a memorandum of understanding then in effect. A decertification petition may be filed by two or more employees or their representative, or an employee organization, and shall contain the following information and documentation declared by the duly authorized signatory under penalty of perjury to be true, correct and complete: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the petitioner and a designated representative authorized to receive notices or requests for further information. 
(2)  The name of the established appropriate unit and of the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization sought to be decertified as a representative of that unit. 
(3)  An allegation that the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization no longer represents a majority of the employees in the appropriate unit, and any other relevant and material facts relating thereto. 
(4)  Proof of employee support that at least 40 percent of the employees in the established appropriate unit no longer desire to be represented by the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization. Such proof shall be submitted for confirmation to the human resources/risk management director within the time limits specified in this section and all signatures on a decertification petition shall indicate the date when signed by the employees. All signatures on the petition shall be obtained within a 30-day period prior to filing the decertification petition with the human resources/risk management director. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-10), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-286. - Policy and standards for determination of appropriate units. 
(a)  The policy objectives in determining the appropriateness of units shall be the effect of a proposed unit on the efficient operations of the city and its compatibility with the primary responsibility of the city and its employees to effectively and economically serve the public, and providing employees with effective representation based on recognized community of interest considerations. These policy objectives require that the appropriate unit shall be the broadest feasible grouping of positions that share an identifiable community of interest. Factors to be considered shall be: 
(1)  Similarity of the general kinds of work performed, types of qualifications required, and the general working conditions. 
(2)  History of representation in the city and similar employment; except however, that no unit shall be deemed to be an appropriate unit solely on the basis of the extent to which employees in the proposed unit have organized. 
(3)  Consistency with the organizational patterns of the city. 
(4)  Effect of differing legally mandated impasse resolution procedures. 
(5)  Number of employees and classifications, and the effect on the administration of employer-employee relations created by the fragmentation of classifications and proliferation of units. 
(6)  Effect on the classification structure and impact on the stability of the employer-employee relationship of dividing a single or related classifications among two or more units. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, managerial, supervisory and confidential responsibilities, as defined in section 2-276 are determining factors in establishing appropriate units hereunder, and therefore managerial, supervisory and confidential employees may only be included in a unit consisting solely of managerial, supervisory or confidential employees respectively. 
(c)  Peace officers may be required to be represented in separate units composed solely of such peace officers. These units shall not be represented by an organization that, directly or indirectly, is subordinate to any other employee organization which includes nonpeace officers. 
(d)  The city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall, after notice to and consultation with affected employee organizations, allocate new classifications or positions, delete modified classifications or positions from units in accordance with the provisions of this section. The decision of the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-11), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-287. - Procedure for modification of established appropriate units. 
(a)  Requests by employee organizations for modifications of established appropriate units may be considered by the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director only during the period specified in section 2-285. Such requests shall be submitted in the form of a recognition petition and, in addition to the requirements set forth in section 2-281, shall contain a complete statement of all relevant facts and citations in support of the proposed modified unit in terms of the policies and standards set forth in section 2-286. The city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall process such petitions as other recognition petitions. 
(b)  The city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director may by his/her own motion propose that an established unit be modified. The city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall give written notice of the proposed modification to any affected employee organization and shall hold a meeting concerning the proposed modification, at which time all affected employee organizations shall be heard. Thereafter the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director shall determine the composition of the appropriate unit or units in accordance with section 2-286 and shall give written notice of such determination to the affected employee organizations. The city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director determination may be appealed as provided in section 2-289. If a unit is modified pursuant to the motion of the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director, employee organizations may thereafter file recognition petitions seeking to become the exclusively recognized employee organization for such new appropriate unit or units. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-12), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-288. - Procedure for processing severance requests. 
An employee organization may file a request to become the exclusively recognized employee organization of a unit alleged to be appropriate that consists of a group of employees who are already a part of a large established unit represented by another recognized employee organization. The timing, form and processing of such request shall be as specified in section 2-287 for modification requests. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-13), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-289. - Appeals. 
(a)  An employee organization aggrieved by an appropriate unit determination of the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director; or an employee organization aggrieved by determination of the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director that a recognition petition (section 2-281), challenging petition (section 2-283), decertification petition (section 2-285), unit modification petition (2-287) or employees aggrieved by a determination of the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director that a decertification petition (section 2-285) has not been filed in compliance with the applicable provisions of this section, may, within ten days of notice of the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director's final decision, appeal such determination to the city council for final decision within 15 days notice of the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director determination. 
(b)  Appeals to the city council shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, and a copy thereof served on the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director. The city council shall commence to consider the matter within 30 days of the filing of the appeal. The city council may, in its discretion, refer the dispute to a third party hearing process for a recommended decision. Any decision of the city council on the use of such procedures, and/or any decision of the city council determining the substances of the dispute shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-14), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-290. - Submission of current information by recognized employee organizations. 
All changes in the information filed with the city by an exclusively recognized employee organization under subsections 2-281(1) through (11) shall be submitted in writing to the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director within 14 days of such change. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 7(7.5-15), 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-291. - Notification to employee organizations of proposed rule affecting employees. 
The city shall give reasonable notice to all exclusively recognized employee organizations of any proposed ordinance, rule or regulation concerning employees, prior to their official adoption. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-7; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 8, 7-21-2003) 
State Law reference— Notice to affected employee organizations of ordinance, etc., Government Code § 3504.5.  
Sec. 2-292. - Meet and confer. 
The city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director and the representative of exclusively recognized employee organizations shall meet and confer in good faith within a reasonable time, on all matters requested by such recognized employee organizations relating to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. Normally, the meeting and conferring process on an annual basis shall commence on or about February 15 unless the parties agree to commence at a different date or unusual conditions make commencement on this date impractical. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-8; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2734, § 1; Ord. No. 3993, § 9, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-293. - Memorandum of understanding. 
If, after the city manager, assistant city manager and/or human resources/risk management director and the representatives of the exclusively recognized employee organization have met and conferred, they reach an agreement, such agreement shall be reduced to writing and be signed by all such representatives and shall be designated a memorandum of understanding. Such memorandum of understanding shall be presented to the city council, which at its sole discretion it may or may not ratify as it deems proper, and in the best interest of both the city and the employees. If it ratifies such memorandum of understanding, it shall then proceed to adopt the necessary resolutions or ordinances to implement it. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-9; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 10, 7-21-2003) 
State Law reference— Memoranda of understanding, Government Code § 3505.1.  
Sec. 2-294. - Procedures upon reaching impasse. 
(a)  If after a reasonable period of time, representatives of the city and the recognized employee organization fail to reach agreement, the city and the recognized employee organization or recognized employee organizations together shall agree upon the appointment of a mediator mutually agreeable to the parties. Costs of mediation shall be divided one-half to the city and one-half to the recognized employee organization or recognized employee organizations. (Compare Government Code § 3505.2, permissive mediation process.) 
(b)  Impasse procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in the California Government Code Chapter 10, §§ 3505.4, 3505.5 and 3505.7. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-10; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3933, § 11, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 4-2-2012; Ord. No. 4157, § 1, 4-16-2012)  
Sec. 2-295. - Paid time off for representatives of exclusively recognized employee organizations. 
Reasonable time off without loss of pay or other benefits shall be given to duly authorized representatives of exclusively recognized employee organizations for the purpose of meeting and conferring with the city's representative and for participation in applicable impasse procedures. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-11; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 12, 7-21-2003) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 3505.3.  
Sec. 2-296. - Availability of data. 
(a)  Nonconfidential information. The city shall make available to exclusively recognized employee organizations during reasonable working hours, based upon reasonable requests, nonconfidential information pertaining to employment relations as contained in the public records of the city, subject to the limitations and conditions set forth in this Code and by law. 
(b)  Confidential information. Subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed as requiring disclosure of any matter forbidden by this Code to be disclosed on account of its confidential nature. Such confidential information includes matters such as personnel, medical, and similar records, the disclosure of which would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy or be contrary to the merit system; criminal investigation reports; working papers or memoranda which are not retained in the ordinary course of business or which are in a state of actual preparation so that they cannot be reviewed without interfering with their preparation or where the public interest is served by not making the record available clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosure of the records; and records pertaining to litigation in progress or litigation which is pending to which the city is a party or to claims or appeals that have not been settled. 
(c)  Limitation on city's responsibility. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the city to do research for an inquirer or to do programming or assemble data in a manner other than that which is usually done by the city for the public generally. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-12; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 13, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-297. - Access to work locations. 
Reasonable access to employee work locations shall be granted officers of exclusively recognized employee organizations and their officially designated representatives for the purpose of processing grievances of their members in connection with the scope of the organizations' representation. Access shall be restricted so as to not interfere with the normal operations of the department or with established safety or security requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-13; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 14, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-298. - Use of city facilities. 
Exclusively recognized employee organizations shall be permitted reasonable use of city facilities for meetings with city employees, as long as such meetings do not interfere with city services. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-14; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 15, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-299. - Use of bulletin boards. 
Exclusively recognized employee organizations may use city bulletin boards for matters within the scope of representation of their members in such a manner as not to interfere with other official use of such bulletin boards. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-15; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 16, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-300. - Construction of division. 
(a)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to deny any person or employee the rights granted by federal and state laws. 
(b)  The rights, powers, and authority of the city council in all matters, including the right to maintain any legal action, shall not be modified or restricted by this division. 
(c)  The enactment of this division shall not be construed as making the provisions of Labor Code § 923 applicable to employees of the city. 
(d)  This division is not intended to conflict with the provisions of Chapter 10, Division 4, Title 1, of the Government Code (Government Code § 3500 et seq.). 
(Code 1959, § 7.5-16; Ord. No. 2483, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3993, § 17, 7-21-2003) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 3510.  
Sec. 2-301. - Unfair employee relations practices. 
(a)  It shall be an unfair employee relations practice for management to: 
(1)  Interfere with, retaliate against, restrain, discourage, intimidate, or coerce employees in the exercise of their rights granted in this article; 
(2)  Attempt to dominate or control any employee organization; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to meet and confer in good faith; 
(4)  Fail or refuse to cooperate in impasse procedures involved under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be an unfair employee relations practice for employees, employee organizations, or their representatives to: 
(1)  Interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise of their rights granted in this aricle; 
(2)  Fail or refuse to meet and confer in good faith; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to cooperate in impasse procedures involved under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Claims of unfair employee relations practices under this section may be made by an employee organization, or by a management representative. The city in accordance with section 2-289 shall process such claims. 
(Ord. No. 3993, § 18, 7-21-2003)  
Secs. 2-302—2-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-311. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as, and when cited, referred to, or amended, may be designated as the "Pomona Personnel System Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 3992, § 2, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-312. - Purpose of division. 
The purpose of this division is, first, to establish a system for the selection and promotion of employees of the city, on the basis of merit, experience and record, in order to secure and retain the most efficient and courteous public employees to handle the city's business and administer its affairs; second, to provide worthy officials and employees reasonable security in the retention of their respective positions and afford them an opportunity for advancement according to merit. 
(Ord. No. 3992, § 3, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-313. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city except: 
(1)  Positions on appointive boards, commissions or committees. 
(2)  The head of each department. 
(3)  Elective officials. 
(4)  Temporary employees in an office or department of the city who shall not be entitled to any additional benefits other than legally required. 
(5)  Regular part-time employees who shall not be entitled to any additional benefits other than those legally required. 
(6)  Volunteer personnel. 
(7)  Persons employed under contract to supply expert professional or technical services for a definite period of time or fixed fee. 
(8)  Officers and employees of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health and Welfare engaged in the enforcement of public health and welfare and also engaged in the enforcement of public health regulations in the city. 
(9)  Disaster volunteers appointed pursuant to the Pomona Disaster Ordinance. 
(10)  Emergency employees in any office or department of the city. All such positions and employments shall be for the duration of the emergency and shall terminate immediately thereafter. 
All offices, positions and employments not exempted in this section shall constitute the classified service of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3992, § 4, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-314. - Human resources/risk management director—Created. 
There is hereby created the position of human resources/risk management director who shall serve under the direction of the city manager, who is designated as the chief personnel officer by Section 603(b) of the Charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3992, § 5, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-315. - Same—Duties. 
The human resources/risk management director shall have the responsibility of making effective the purposes of this division and, in addition to other responsibilities, it shall be his/her duty, or the duty of his/her delegated subordinate: 
(1)  To administer all provisions of this division and regulations established hereunder not specifically reserved for the city council. 
(2)  To establish and keep a roster of all officials and employees in the classified service and all personnel records, which records shall show the length of time each officer and employee has been therein, together with a concise statement of all the duties performed and the salary paid. He/She shall keep such additional data in connection therewith as the city council may require. 
(3)  To recommend a plan for the specification and classification of positions to the city council. After the adoption of such classification plan, the human resources/risk management director shall allocate and reallocate the various positions according to the respective classes to which they belong under the direction of the city manager. 
(4)  To prepare and recommend a set of rules and regulations (personnel rules) for the administration of the personnel system, which rules and regulations may be revised or amended from time to time as the occasion demands by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3992, § 6, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-316. - Abolishing and consolidating positions. 
Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary in the interest of economy or more efficiency, or because the need of the position involved no longer exists, the city council may abolish an office or employment in the classified service, and lay off, demote or transfer the employee holding such position or employment. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the city council from combining or consolidating any office or employment with some other position in the interest of economy or greater efficiency. 
(Ord. No. 3992, § 7, 7-21-2003)  
Secs. 2-317—2-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Police department, § 14-111 et seq. 
 
Secs. 2-321—2-520. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Board of library trustees, § 26-31 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 38-31 et seq.; board of parking place commissioners, § 58-381 et seq.; planning commission, § 70-31 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-521. - Maximum number of terms. 
No board or commission member shall be appointed to the same board or commission for consecutive terms so that the total number of years served on such board or commission exceed nine years. 
(Code 1959, § 1-14; Ord. No. 2241, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2955, § 2) 
Charter reference— Terms of members of boards and commissions, § 801.  
Sec. 2-522. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4236 , § 1, adopted July 10, 2017, repealed § 2-522, which pertained to vote required for removal of member and derived from Code 1959, § 1-13.5(d); Ord. No. 2241, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2955, § 1; Ord. No. 3067, § 1; Ord. No. 3499, § 1; Ord. No. 3608, § 1; Ord. No. 3844, § 1; Ord. No. 3916, § 2 (part).  
Sec. 2-523. - Appointment to salaried office. 
No member of any board or commission of the city shall be eligible for appointment to any salaried office in the service of the city unless such board member or commissioner has resigned as a board member or commissioner prior to his appointment to the salaried position. 
(Code 1959, § 1-14.1; Ord. No. 2647, § 2; Ord. No. 3916, § 2 (part)) 
Charter reference— Filling vacancies, § 801(c).  
Sec. 2-524. - Compensation; service limited. 
All commissioners or board members appointed pursuant to this division shall serve without compensation. No individual shall serve on more than one commission at the same time. 
(Code 1959, § 1-13.5(e); Ord. No. 2241, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2955, § 1; Ord. No. 3067, § 1; Ord. No. 3499, § 1; Ord. No. 3608, § 1; Ord. No. 3844, § 1; Ord. No. 3916, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 2-525. - Meetings. 
All boards and commissions of the city, with the exception of the library board, shall hold at least one regular meeting each calendar month at the time and place determined by such board or commission. The library board shall hold no less than one regular meeting each quarter. 
(Code 1959, § 1-13.5(c); Ord. No. 2241, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2955, § 1; Ord. No. 3067, § 1; Ord. No. 3499, § 1; Ord. No. 3608, § 1; Ord. No. 3844, § 1; Ord. No. 3916, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 2-526—2-550. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY LIFE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-551. - Established. 
There is established a commission to be known as the community life commission of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-50; Ord. No. 2516, § 1)  
Sec. 2-552. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The duties and responsibilities of the community life commission shall be to: 
(1)  Promote mutual understanding and respect among various segments of the community and recommend measures which will serve to improve intergroup relations with the city. 
(2)  Foster a city-people relationship and work with both the city government and other agencies and groups to achieve this goal. 
(3)  Consider and recommend solutions to significant intergroup relations problems. 
(4)  Cooperate with any city department in identifying and ameliorating human relations problems with which they may be concerned. 
(5)  Compile current information about human needs, human resources and evaluate community programs and services designated to meet human needs and work toward more effective delivery of services and reduction of duplication of services. 
(6)  Review and make recommendations on human rights and human services issues prior to city council consideration. 
(7)  Provide a forum for discussion of matters of social concern which affect the community. 
(8)  Recommend when necessary means of financial support when prospective new programs or ideas are proposed. 
(9)  Respond to requests by the city council for such recommendations and projects as assigned to it by the city council. 
(10)  Hold joint meetings with the city council and other city commissions involved in the area of human relations at times convenient to the city council and the several commissions. 
(11)  Listen to any complaint presented to it by any citizen concerning the police department or any officer or employee thereof and transmit the complaint without recommendation to the city manager and police chief for investigation. 
(b)  The commission shall not have authority to serve as a police review board. 
(c)  Acting in accordance with the council's community development block grant program strategy, the individual commission members will perform in an advisory manner to the council concerning planning, implementing and assessing the community development block grant program. This will be accomplished through the following tasks: 
(1)  Individual members serving as chair or facilitator of community meetings by disseminating information and materials regarding scheduled public forums with public/private entities and within councilmanic districts; 
(2)  Assist with the collection of input, data and information concerning neighborhood and community meetings; and 
(3)  Review information and status reports provided regarding program progress at midyear and the end of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1959, § 2-53; Ord. No. 2516, § 4; Ord. No. 2609, § 1; Ord. No. 2843, § 1; Ord. No. 3016, § 1; Ord. No. 3796, § 1)  
Sec. 2-553. - Staff liaison. 
The city manager shall designate a member of city staff to serve as the staff liaison of the community life commission. Such liaison facilitator shall have the duties and responsibilities of acting as liaison officer between the community life commission and the city council, the city manager and the various departments of the city and shall assist the commission in carrying out its duties and responsibilities as provided for by this division. He shall make such reports to the city council as it may direct him and to the city manager as the city manager may direct him. He shall, however, attend those meetings of the community life commission as so directed by the commission and attend such committee meetings of the community life commission as he deems appropriate to carry out his functions. He shall provide such advice, information and material available to him to assist the commission and its several committees in conducting their studies and surveys. The various departments of the city are directed to cooperate with the commission and its liaison in supplying such information and material as may be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of this division and the purpose of the community life commission. 
(Code 1959, § 2-54; Ord. No. 2516, § 5; Ord. No. 2843, § 2; Ord. No. 3687, § 1)  
Secs. 2-554—2-580. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-581. - Established; purpose. 
There is established a cultural arts commission which shall be a formal commission charged with the responsibility of promoting the arts and coordinating cultural activity within the city so that all groups may have opportunities to participate in artistic pursuits. The commission shall have available to it the necessary information to do this. 
(Code 1959, § 18-60; Ord. No. 2558, § 1)  
Sec. 2-582. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The cultural arts commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Upon their appointment, the members of the commission shall elect from their number a chair who shall preside at all of their meetings, a vice-chair and a secretary. 
(2)  The commission shall hold regular meetings once each month and shall cause minutes of its meetings to be taken and cause a copy of such minutes to be filed with the city council. 
(b)  Other general responsibilities of the commission are as follows: 
(1)  Relate to the community the artistic and cultural heritage of the city. 
(2)  Disseminate information to the public concerning opportunities to view and participate in cultural and art activities. 
(3)  Conduct and sponsor cultural and art events. 
(4)  Coordinate cultural and art programs within the city and seek to bring into the city new programs and activities. 
(5)  Assist the planning commission when called upon to provide artistic and cultural elements in connection with plans of development of the city such as the master plan and specific development plans. 
(6)  Seek and promote scholarships for promising students of the arts. 
(7)  Conduct an annual cultural art program at such location as approved by the city council that will focus public attention upon the arts and will tend to attract people to the city from all over southern California and beyond. 
(8)  Work with businessmen and leaders of industry to assist them with ideas in making the environment more artistically and culturally pleasing. 
(9)  Such other activities that will generally promote the cultural and artistic growth and betterment of the city. 
(10)  Designate historical monuments pursuant to the procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 18-62; Ord. No. 2558, § 1; Ord. No. 2637, § 1)  
Secs. 2-583—2-610. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-611. - Created. 
There is hereby created and established an historic preservation commission to lead in the application, enforcement and education of the historic preservation regulations set forth in section .5809-13 of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 21-1; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Sec. 2-612. - Guiding mission. 
The protection, appreciation and preservation of the historic and cultural resources of the city shall be the guiding mission and fundamental purpose of the historic preservation commission. The commission shall work in partnership with property owners and residents, the business sector and the community at large to retain and protect those historic and cultural resources which will preserve and enhance the city's uniquely built environment. 
(Code 1959, § 21-2; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Sec. 2-613. - Membership, composition and qualifications. 
(a)  Officers or employees of the city shall be prohibited from serving on the historic preservation commission. All members of the commission shall be residents of the city and should have demonstrated interest and knowledge of historic preservation and the historic and cultural resources of the city. 
(b)  Commission members should possess an expertise and experience in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning or other historic preservation-related disciplines, such as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography, or cultural anthropology, to the extent that such professionals are available in the community. Commission membership should also include other persons who have demonstrated competence, knowledge, or experience in the history, architecture or cultural heritage of the city as will provide for an adequate and qualified commission. 
(Code 1959, § 21-3; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Sec. 2-614. - Rules, regulations and records. 
(a)  Officers. The historic preservation commission shall elect its chair from among the appointed members for a term of one year and, subject to other provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. 
(b)  Rules. The commission/city council may adopt rules for the transaction of business, but unless so adopted the procedures set forth in the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings, decisions, findings and resolutions of the commission, which records shall be public and at all times available in the city hall. 
(c)  Committees. The commission may, as it deems necessary, appoint subcommittees from its members to perform designated functions. 
(Code 1959, § 21-5; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Sec. 2-615. - Meetings and quorum. 
(a)  The historic preservation commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. Until such time as otherwise fixed by resolution of the commission, the time of such meetings shall be the first Wednesday of each month at the hour of 6:30 p.m. 
(b)  Commission meetings shall be held in the boards and commissions room. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called at any time by the chair or any four members of the commission by a written notice served upon each member of the commission not less than 24 hours before the time specified for the proposed special meeting. Public hearing items shall not be considered during special meetings. 
(d)  Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business. 
(Code 1959, § 21-6; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Sec. 2-616. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Subject to state law and procedures prescribed in this division, the historic preservation commission shall have and may exercise the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Aid the city in applying for a certified local government program and advise the city on how to conform with the federal preservation program. Further, the commission shall assist in the annual application process for preservation grants for which certified local government programs are eligible. 
(2)  Periodically update historic survey results and publicize the findings. 
(3)  Recommend to the city council that certain areas, places, buildings, structures, natural features, works of art or similar objects having significant historical, cultural, architectural, community or aesthetic value as part of the heritage of the city be designated as historic landmarks or that an area be designated an historic district. 
(4)  Compile and maintain a current register of all sites, natural features, buildings and structures designated and approved as historic landmarks, historic districts or contributors by the city council. A description of the historic landmark or historic district and its reason for inclusion shall be contained therein. Copies of the register and list shall be transmitted to the city clerk, the departments of community development, community services, public works, and other appropriate departments and governmental agencies. 
(5)  Encourage public understanding and involvement in historic, architectural, archaeological and cultural heritage through educational programs such as lectures, tours, walks, reports or publications, films, open houses, and special events. 
(6)  Explore means for the protection, retention and use of any designated or potential historic landmark and historic district, including, but not limited to, appropriate legislation; tax incentives; and financing, such as encouraging independent funding organizations or private, local, state or federal assistance. 
(7)  Approve, conditionally approve or disapprove in whole or in part an application for a certificate of appropriateness regarding the demolition, alteration, or removal of a landmark or the improvement of a natural feature within an historic district consistent with the provisions of the city's zoning code. 
(8)  Recommend and encourage the protection, enhancement, appreciation and use of historic and cultural resources which have not been designated as historic landmarks or landmark districts and take such steps as it deems desirable to recognize such resources, including, but not limited to, listing, certificates, letters or plaques. 
(9)  Render advice and guidance, upon request of the property owners, on the restoration, alteration, decoration, landscaping or maintenance of any historic landmark or contributor to an historic district. 
(10)  Recommend for adoption written design standards to be used by the commission in reviewing applications for permits to construct, change, alter, modify, remodel, remove, demolish or affect any historic landmark or historic district. 
(11)  Advise and assist the city council and property owners regarding the identification of appropriate government agencies or private parties to accept the grant of interests, such as conservation easements, that further the purpose of historic preservation in the city. 
(12)  Research and report to the city council on the use of various federal, state, local or private finding sources and mechanisms available to promote historic preservation in the city. 
(13)  Investigate the feasibility of participating in making application to the certified local government program and make recommendations to the city council; make recommendations to the city council regarding uses for the funding available through the certified local government program. 
(14)  Render advice and guidance, upon the request of property owners, on procedures for inclusion of a building, structure, improvement or site on the local or state register of historic places or the National Register of Historic Places. 
(15)  Confer recognition upon the owners of designated historic landmarks or historic districts by means of certificates, plaques or markers and from time to time recommend that the city council issue commendations to such owners who have rehabilitated their property in an exemplary manner. 
(b)  The commission shall be charged with maintaining an information system capable of tracking the following: 
(1)  The processing time from the application to a determination of certificates of appropriateness; 
(2)  The number and percentage of rejected applications for certificates of appropriateness; 
(3)  The number of applications for economic hardship; and 
(4)  Recommendations from property owners or professions in the building trades to improve the process. 
The commission shall collect other information it deems useful in evaluating the effectiveness of the historic preservation ordinance. On an annual basis at a minimum, the commission shall submit a report to the city council as to the effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction with the historic preservation procedures. This report shall include any recommendations for changes to the ordinance or changes in the procedures of the commission. 
(c)  The commission shall submit an annual report of its activities to the state office of historic preservation at the end of each calendar year. The report shall include but not be limited to such information as appointments to the commission, resumes of commission members and staff, attendance records of members, official minutes of the commission meetings, revisions in the enabling ordinance if applicable, sponsorship of special workshops and conferences, summaries of environmental review cases requiring commission comments, new landmarks and historic districts designated, review of National Registrar nominations, cultural resources survey updates, and other pertinent activities performed by the commission. 
(Code 1959, § 21-7; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Sec. 2-617. - Staff. 
The historic preservation commission shall be supported by staff from the planning division of the community development department or other staff as designated by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 21-8; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Sec. 2-618. - Administrative support. 
Subject to budget availability, the city council will provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the work and the expenditures of the historic preservation commission, which will be within the amounts appropriated for the respective purposes. All departments of the city shall cooperate and render all reasonable and necessary assistance to the commission. 
(Code 1959, § 21-9; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Sec. 2-619. - Rules of procedure. 
The historic preservation commission shall adopt a set of rules of procedure. Such rules of procedure shall contain the following: 
(1)  Required conduct of commission members; 
(2)  The duties of officers and city staff; 
(3)  The manner in which commission meetings and business shall be conducted; 
(4)  Agenda preparation; and 
(5)  Recordkeeping procedures. 
(Code 1959, § 21-10; Ord. No. 3790, § 1)  
Secs. 2-620—2-820. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, § 1001 et seq.; city treasurer, § 704; department and director of finance, § 705. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-11(5); taxation, ch. 50. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-821. - Deposit of moneys for payment of disability benefits. 
The city may deposit, pursuant to a contract to administer a self-insured workers' compensation program, moneys in an account to be held in trust by the contractor to pay disability benefits under Labor Code div. 4 (Labor Code § 3200 et seq.), and such funds may be disbursed and checks signed under a procedure agreed upon by the contractor and the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 9-5; Ord. No. 3225, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-822. - Deposit of moneys for payment of claims for tort liability. 
The city may deposit, pursuant to a contract to administer a self-insured municipal liability program, moneys in an account to be held in trust by the contractor to pay claims for tort liability, and such funds may be disbursed and checks signed under a procedure agreed upon by the contractor and the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 9-6; Ord. No. 3225, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-823. - Claims settlement authority. 
Pursuant to Government Code § 935.4, the city manager shall perform the functions of the city council in allowing, compromising, settling or rejecting any claim against the city up to the maximum amount specified in Government Code § 935.4. The city manager shall notify the council in writing at least five working days prior to his proposed action. Upon the written order of the city manager, the city shall cause a warrant to be issued in the amount for which a claim has been allowed, compromised or settled. 
(Code 1959, § 2-4.2; Ord. No. 3303, § 1)  
Secs. 2-824—2-845. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CLAIMS AGAINST CITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances governing claims procedures authorized, Government Code § 935. 
 
Sec. 2-846. - Claims required. 
All claims against the city for money damages not otherwise governed by Government Code title 1, div. 3.6, pt. 3 (Government Code § 900 et seq.) or another state law (in this division referred to as "claims") shall be presented within the time and in the manner prescribed by such part for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as amended, and as further provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. 3982, § 2(9-501), 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-847. - Form of claim. 
All claims against the city shall be made in the manner provided by Charter § 1014 and shall be verified by the claimant or by his guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by Government Code § 910. 
(Ord. No. 3982, § 2(9-502), 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-848. - Claim prerequisite to suit. 
In accordance with Government Code §§ 935(b) and 945.6, all claims against the city shall be presented as provided in this division and Charter § 1014 and acted upon by the city council prior to the filing of any action on such claims, and no such action may be maintained by that person who has not complied with the requirements of section 2-847 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3982, § 2(9-503), 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-849. - Suit. 
Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand against the city shall conform to the requirements of title 1, div. 3.6, pt. 4, chs. 1 and 2 (Government Code § 940 et seq.). Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the requirements of Government Code §§ 950, 951. 
(Ord. No. 3982, § 2(9-504), 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-850. - Application of division. 
This division shall supersede any and all inconsistent provisions of other sections of this Code which were adopted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. This division shall apply to claims that arose prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. No. 3982, § 2(9-505), 4-21-2003)  
Secs. 2-851—2-870. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - IN-LIEU FRANCHISE FEES 
 
Sec. 2-871. - Imposed. 
There is hereby imposed upon the utility services department an in-lieu franchise fee of five percent of the total operating revenue plus interest income of each enterprise fund. The fee for each fiscal year under this division shall be based on the audit of the prior fiscal year, and the fee shall commence with the 1989-1990 year. 
(Code 1959, § 9-290; Ord. No. 3537, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-872. - Additional fee for utility services department. 
There is hereby imposed upon the utility services department an additional in-lieu franchise fee of $600,000.00 annually for the life of the retirement schedule for the 1995 series P capital improvement bonds. 
(Code 1959, § 9-291; Ord. No. 3537, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 2-873—2-895. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INDEXING AND ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT OF CERTAIN FEES, CHARGES, LICENSES AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 2-896. - Annual adjustment by Consumer Price Index. 
(a)  All applicable fees, charges, licenses and permit fees provided in this Code and the zoning code, except those relating to water or sewer service charges, as designated by a resolution adopted by the city council, after a duly noticed public hearing, shall be adjusted effective July 1, 1993, and annually thereafter on July 1 of each succeeding year in a percentage amount equal to the change in the Consumer Price Index for all urban wage earners and clerical workers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Metropolitan Area (CPI-W) or the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Metropolitan Area (CPI-U) as set forth in the resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The base index shall be the applicable CPI-W or CPI-U index published for the month of April 1993. The new index shall be the applicable CPI-W or CPI-U index published for the month of April in the year the adjustment is due. The adjustment for 1993 shall be calculated by multiplying the fees charged at the time the ordinance codified in this section is adopted, and for each succeeding year the fees charged after calculating the preceding year's adjustment (collectively referred to as "existing fees") by a fraction, the numerator being the new index and the denominator being the base index. Upon establishing the adjustment and adding the adjustment to the existing fees, such sum shall be established as the new fee for that year and used as the multiplier for succeeding years. The formula shall be as follows: 
(New Index) / (Base Index) × Existing Fee = Adjustment 
Adjustment + Existing Fee = New Fee for the following fiscal year 
(c)  The CPI-W and CPI-U shall be the indexes published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
(Code 1959, § 9-300; Ord. No. 3691, § 1; Ord. No. 3973, § 2, 1-27-2003)  
Secs. 2-897—2-920. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FIXING OF CERTAIN REGULATORY FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Procedures for changing or fixing fees on service charges, Government Code § 66016 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-921. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  Pursuant to article XIIIB of the state constitution, it is the intent of the city council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services enumerated in this division. 
(b)  The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set forth in this division provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the city for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged. 
(c)  The adoption of this division is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq.), because it approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operating expenses of city departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code § 21080(b)(8)(A) and Guidelines § 15273, and is not for capital improvements. 
(Code 1959, § 9-400; Ord. No. 3780, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-922. - Delegation of authority and direction to manager. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby delegated the authority and is directed to provide documents to the city council to implement its policy enumerated in this division to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne as established by this division in providing the regulation, product or service enumerated in this division in the percentage of costs reasonably borne and on the schedule of rate review and revision as established in this division. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby delegated authority to issue executive orders defining terms; setting out administrative, fee collection, and financial procedures and definitions; and establishing effective dates of all fees set by the city council by resolution. All executive orders shall be originated and signed by the affected department head, shall be signed by the director of finance certifying that the financial requirements of this division are complied with, and shall be signed by the city manager connoting the effective date of the executive order and new or revised rate structure, procedure or definition. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in section 2-923. In adjusting fees and charges, the city manager shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this division and the procedures set by this division and by applicable state law. All executive orders issued under this section shall comply in all respects with this division and the several schedules of fees and rates as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 9-401; Ord. No. 3780, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-923. - Costs reasonably borne defined. 
The term "costs reasonably borne," as used and ordered to be applied in this division, are to consist of the following elements: 
(1)  All applicable direct costs, including' but not limited to, salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred. 
(2)  All applicable indirect costs, including but not restricted to building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance debt service, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system. 
(3)  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset. 
(4)  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city attorney, city manager, city clerk, city treasurer, economic development, finance department, personnel office and city promotion, and all other staff and support service provided to the entire city organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of such percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs. 
(5)  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections (1), (2), (3), and (6) of this section. 
(6)  Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate, or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9-402; Ord. No. 3780, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-924. - Schedule of fees and service charges. 
(a)  The city manager, director of finance and each city department head, under the direction of the city manager, shall review annually the following fees and service charges and provide an adjusted fee or charge schedule to the city council for its consideration so as to recover the listed percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the listed regulation, product or service: 
	Regulation, Product or Service 
I. 	Community development services: 
	S-001 	Building plan check 
	S-002 	Building inspection 
	S-003 	Fire alarm plan check and inspection 
	S-004 	Sprinkler plan check and inspection 
	S-005 	Grading plan check 
	S-006 	Grading inspection 
	S-007 	Landscape plan check 
	S-008 	Landscape inspection 
	S-009 	Preoccupancy inspection review 
	S-010 	Building supplemental plan check and inspection 
	S-011 	Building plan check and permit extension review 
	S-012 	Building relocation review and inspection 
	S-013 	Building demolition review and inspection 
	S-014 	Special inspection 
	S-015 	Vacant/abandoned property abatement 
	S-016 	Conditional use review 
	S-017 	Conditional use review (single-family) 
	S-017.1 	Designation of historical landmark 
	S-017.15 	Designation of historical district 
	S-017.2 	Certificate of appropriateness—minor project 
	S-017.3 	Certificate of appropriateness—major project 
	S-017.4 	Finding of economic hardship 
	S-017.4a 	Mills Act Historic Preservation Tax Abatement Program Application 
	S-017.5 	Designated parking area permits 
	S-018 	Variance review 
	S-019 	Variance review (single-family) 
	S-020 	Minor deviation variance review 
	S-021 	Zone change review 
	S-022 	Zoning code amendment review 
	S-023 	General plan amendment 
	S-024 	General plan maintenance 
	S-025 	Specific plan amendment 
	S-026 	Specific plan modification 
	S-027 	Lot line adjustment review 
	S-028 	Tentative tract map processing 
	S-029 	Tentative parcel map processing 
	S-030 	Initial study and negative declaration 
	S-031 	Environmental impact report review 
	S-032 	Mitigation monitoring 
	S-033 	Home occupation review 
	S-034 	Determination of similarity 
	S-035 	Processing of appeal to planning commission 
	S-036 	Processing of appeal to city council 
	S-037 	Time extension review 
	S-038 	Development review 
	S-039 	Conceptual plan review 
	S-040 	Final development plan review 
	S-041 	Amendments to precise alignments 
	S-042 	New development street name review 
	S-043 	Development agreement review 
	S-044 	Public use review 
	S-045 	Temporary use review 
	S-045.1 	Oak tree permits 
	S-046 	Annexation/deannexation processing 
	S-047 	Zoning letter 
	S-048 	Temporary sign review and inspection 
	S-049 	Final parcel map check 
	S-050 	Final tract map check 
	S-051 	Engineering site plan review 
	S-052 	Subdivision improvement plan check and inspection 
	S-053 	Engineering plan revision checking 
	S-054 	Easement processing (public right-of-way) 
	S-055 	Certificate of compliance processing 
	S-056 	Street and alley vacation processing 
	S-057 	Street cut review and inspection 
	S-058 	Encroachment permit processing 
	S-058.1 	Newsrack permits and related fees 
	S-059 	Utility construction permit processing 
	S-060 	Nonsafety curb painting service 
	S-061 	Street name change review 
	S-062 	Street address change review 
	S-063 	Traffic impact/parking review 
	S-064 	Site assessment survey report 
	S-064.1 	Outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand permit 
	S-064.2 	Wireless communication permit 
	S-064.3 	Adult-oriented business regulatory permit 
	S-064.4 	Adult-oriented business employee permit 
II. 	Public safety services: 
	S-065 	Special business license regulation 
	S-066 	Regulation of newsrack 
	S-067 	Taxi permit application review 
	S-068 	Alcoholic beverage permit 
	S-069 	ABC license annual renewal and inspection 
	S-070 	Vendor pushcart regulation 
	S-071 	Yard sale permit and inspection 
	S-072 	Oversized vehicles transportation review 
	S-073 	General municipal ordinance enforcement 
	S-074 	Vehicle code enforcement 
	S-0744.5 	Vehicle citation sign-off inspection 
	S-075 	Parking enforcement 
	S-076 	Noise disturbance response call-back 
	S-077 	L.A. County fair services 
	S-078 	Special police services 
	S-079 	Police false alarm response 
	S-080 	Burglar alarm regulation 
	S-081 	Stored/abandoned vehicle release 
	S-082 	Private property vehicle abatement 
	S-083 	Fingerprinting service 
	S-084 	Police crime report reproduction 
	S-085 	Optional accident investigation report 
	S-086 	Police photo reproduction 
	S-087 	"Red light" abatement 
	S-088 	DUI accident response investigation 
	S-089 	DUI arrest and report 
	S-090 	Crosswalk protection 
	S-091 	Animal license/control (Humane Society) 
	S-091.1 	Animal control dispatch 
	S-092 	Concealed weapon background investigation 
	S-093 	Fire false alarm response 
	S-094 	Hazardous materials disclosure program 
	S-095 	Hazardous materials cleanup 
	S-096 	Spilled load cleanup 
	S-097 	Fire incident report copying 
	S-098 	Fire code permit review 
	S-099 	Annual fire inspection program 
	S-100 	Flood pumping and cleanup 
	S-101 	Emergency medical service 
	S-102 	Nonmedical emergency public assistance 
	S-103 	Underground tank install/removal inspection 
	S-104 	Fire protection standby 
	S-105 	Fire prevention standby 
	S-106 	Special fire service 
	S-107 	Master alarm box service 
	S-108 	Stagnant pool abatement 
III. 	Community services: 
	S-109 	Adult sports programs 
	S-110 	Youth sports programs 
	S-111 	Private youth sports field usage 
	S-112 	Private adult sports field usage 
	S-113 	Lawn bowling field and lighting usage 
	S-114 	Adult sports field lighting usage 
	S-115 	Youth sports field lighting usage 
	S-116 	Youth contract recreation classes 
	S-117 	Teen/adult contract recreation classes 
	S-118 	Playground programs 
	S-119 	Family trips/excursions 
	S-120 	City special events 
	S-121 	Noncity special events 
	S-122 	Swimming lessons—Ganesha Pool 
	S-123 	Recreation swimming—Ganesha Pool 
	S-124 	Ganesha Pool rental 
	S-125 	Recreation swimming—Washington Pool 
	S-126 	Washington Pool rental 
	S-127 	Senior citizen programs 
	S-128 	Senior citizen tour administration 
	S-129 	Senior citizen nutrition 
	S-130 	Fourth of July celebration 
	S-131 	Services to historical society 
	S-132 	Pomona concert band support 
	S-133 	Cultural arts activities 
	S-134 	Palomares Park concession stand use 
	S-135 	Palm Lake Golf Course lease 
	S-136 	Founder's Day parade/fiesta 
	S-137 	Christmas parade 
	S-138 	Recreation equipment rental service 
	S-139 	Overdue book/audio processing 
	S-140 	Overdue videocassette processing 
	S-141 	Reservation of library material 
	S-142 	Interlibrary loan service 
	S-143 	Replacement of lost/damaged library items 
	S-144 	Replacement of lost library card 
	S-145 	Repair of damaged items 
	S-146 	Video rental 
	S-147 	Library copying of microfilmed material 
	S-148 	Library photograph/print reproduction 
	S-149 	Exam monitoring 
IV. 	Water and sanitation services: 
	S-150 	Water service 
	S-151 	Water main extension 
	S-152 	Water meter installation 
	S-153 	Water delinquent turn off/on 
	S-154 	Water meter testing 
	S-155 	Private backflow device monitoring 
	S-156 	New water customer application process 
	S-157 	Reclaimed water services 
	S-158 	Construction water service 
	S-159 	General sanitation services 
	S-160 	Sewer capping inspection 
	S-161 	Sewer dye testing 
	S-162 	Subdivision sewer line camera inspection 
	S-163 	Residential refuse collection service 
	S-164 	Special refuse pickup service 
	S-165 	Refuse call-back 
	S-166 	Recycling service 
	S-167 	Street sweeping sign request 
	S-168 	Storm drainage maintenance 
	S-169 	Abandoned shopping cart prevention program 
V. 	Maintenance services: 
	S-169.1 	General utility street usage 
	S-170 	Phillips Range landscaping A.D. 
	S-171 	South Garey/auto center A.D. 
	S-172 	University Corporation Maintenance District 
	S-173 	Street lighting (includes zone C) 
	S-174 	Street tree maintenance 
	S-175 	Private party tree removal investigation 
	S-176 	Private party tree hazard abatement 
	S-177 	State highway maintenance (foothill) 
	S-178 	Street marking replacement 
	S-179 	Vehicle parking district maintenance 
	S-180 	Public street banner service 
	S-181 	Street closures 
	S-182 	Investigation and replacement to damaged city property 
VI. 	Finance and administrative services: 
	S-183 	New/moved business license application review 
	S-183.1 	Duplicate business license certificate 
	S-183.2 	Downtown entertainment permit 
	S-183.3 	Adult oriented business regulatory permit 
	S-183.4 	Adult oriented business employee regulatory permit 
	S-183.5 	Food vendor permit 
	S-183.6 	Food vendor vehicle inspection 
	S-183.7 	Vehicle for hire operator permit 
	S-183.8 	Vehicle for hire driver permit 
	S-184 	Business tax renewal processing 
	S-185 	Returned check (NSF) processing 
	S-186 	Risk management protection plan review (R.M.P.P.) 
	S-187 	Records research service 
	S-188 	Document printing and copying 
	S-189 	Agenda/minute mailing service 
	S-190 	City Code update service 
	S-191 	Document certification 
	S-192 	Audiotape/videotape reproduction 
	S-193 	Council chamber rental 
	S-194 	Fire training facility service 
	S-195 	Community center rental 
	S-196 	Library facilities and equipment rental 
	S-197 	Services to redevelopment agency 
 
Fees for all of the city services mentioned in this subsection shall be established by the city council pursuant to resolution which shall be reviewed on an annual basis. 
(b)  A minimum fee as set by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be charged in all instances. 
(c)  The services as listed in subsection (a) of this section shall be as defined in that certain document entitled "Cost Control System for the City of Pomona, California July, 1992," as produced by Management Services Institute, Inc., of Anaheim, California. 
(d)  All fees and charges set pursuant to this division and section shall take effect ten days after the mayor signs an executive order stipulating that all sections of this division have been complied with and no written appeal has been filed. 
(e)  The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate, or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract, or action under which securities have been issued by the city which contain any coverage factor requirement. 
(f)  The city manager may vary the review schedule listed in subsection (a) of this section if, in the judgment of the city manager and a directly affected and requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by not revising the rate schedule. Any such rate revision which deviates from the review schedule as set shall be reported to the city council at its next succeeding meeting. 
(Code 1959, § 9-403; Ord. No. 3780, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3828, § 3; Ord. No. 3833, § 2; Ord. No. 3840, § 2; Ord. No. 3877, § 2; Ord. No. 3996, § 2, 9-22-2003; Ord. No. 4055, § 6, 2-13-2006; Ord. No. 4076, § 3; Ord. No. 4100, § 1, 4-21-2008; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 4233 , § 3, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 2-925. - Public meeting. 
Pursuant to Government Code title 7, div. 1, ch. 8 (Government Code § 66016 et seq.), the city clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in Government Code title 7, div. 1, ch. 8 (Government Code § 66016 et seq.), and the city council periodically, at least annually, shall receive at a regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations concerning fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and public meeting shall be provided prior to the city council's taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the city annual budget process and hearing. 
(Code 1959, § 9-404; Ord. No. 3780, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-926. - Provision of data. 
Pursuant to Government Code § 66016(a), at least ten days prior to the required public hearing set out in this division, the city manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees or charges imposed. The city manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of such changes also shall be published per the requirements of Government Code § 6062a. 
(Code 1959, § 9-405; Ord. No. 3780, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-927. - Appeal to city council. 
(a)  Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out in this division or that such fee or charge has been reviewed prior to or has not been reviewed within the review schedule as set out in this division may appeal in writing to the city council. 
(b)  No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the city council. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next ensuing council meeting after receipt of such appeal and shall be heard at the next ensuing council meeting. Such appealed fee or charge shall take effect immediately upon hearing by the city council unless ordered otherwise by the city council by ordinance amending this division. 
(Code 1959, § 9-406; Ord. No. 3780, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-928. - Cost of collection. 
Outstanding debts owed to the city, including but not limited to, past due utility charges, fines, assessments, permit and license fees, and other charges may be assigned to a collection agency. 
Persons indebted to the City of Pomona for delinquent accounts or any obligations owing to the city, shall be liable for the underlying obligation and all costs incurred by the city to effectuate collection of those items, including collection agency fees, to the extent allowed by state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 4138, § 1, 10-18-2010)  
Secs. 2-929—2-960. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASING[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4107, § 1, adopted September 8, 2008, amended article VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VII, §§ 2-961—2-977, 2-1001—2-1006, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for history. 
Charter reference— Contracts and purchasing, § 1201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local purchasing procedures required, Government Code § 54201 et seq.; public works contracts, Public Contracts Code § 20160 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-961. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency and using agency means any department, agency, commission, bureau or other unit of the city government which derives its support wholly or in part from the city including the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Pomona and the Housing Authority of the City of Pomona. 
Amendment means an addition or reduction to the cost or extension of the term of a contract for vendor supplies or general or professional services. 
Bidders' list means a current file of sources of supply for each category of repetitively purchased supplies, services and equipment purchased for city use. The purchasing manager may exercise the authority to declare a vendor who defaults on his quotation or contract to be a nonresponsible bidder and to disqualify the vendor from receiving any business from the city for a specified period of time. Vendors may be removed from the list, at the discretion of the purchasing manager, when a formal request for bids or proposals is sent to the vendor and no response is received. 
Change order means an unforeseen need for an addition or reduction to the cost of a construction contract for a capital improvement project. Change orders shall be related to the original request for bids in which the project will remain incomplete without the additional work performed. Change orders cannot include the addition of new work, new projects, or additional project locations not specifically provided for within the original bid award. Change orders shall not be applied to any service contract. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, refurbishing, improving or demolishing any public structure or building, or public improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine operations, routine repair or maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property. 
Contracting officer is an individual designated by the city to be responsible for the project to develop, administer, to recommend renewal or recommend termination of contracts for construction projects. 
Grant funded bid award means a bid that is awarded to the bidder which meets the budgetary constraints of a funding grant and ranks the highest on specific criteria and/or deliverables as stated in the invitation for bids. 
Lowest responsible bidder. In addition to price, the "lowest responsible bidder" will be determined by consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  The quality, availability and suitability of the supplies, equipment or services to the particular use required. 
(2)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the service required. 
(3)  Whether the bidder has the financial resources and facilities to perform or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(4)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(5)  The bidder's record of performance or previous contracts or services, including compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to such contracts or services. 
(6)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the equipment or materials to be purchased. 
(7)  The scope of conditions attached to the bid by the bidder. 
Most qualified bidder. The "most qualified bidder" will be determined by consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  Qualifications, background, and prior experience of the firm in performing services for similar projects. 
(2)  Experience, organization, and technical skills to successfully accomplish the project's scope of services and objectives. 
(3)  Overall project design and methodology. 
(4)  The responsiveness of the RFP to the tasks to be performed as identified in the "scope of services" section. 
(5)  The timeliness and speed with which the consultant can complete the scope of work. 
(6)  The comprehensiveness and rationale of the project work plan. 
(7)  Past performance on contracts with business or government agencies in terms of quality of work and compliance with schedules. This will be evaluated based on a check of references. 
(8)  An evaluation of the approach and related costs. 
Nonresponsible bidder is a bidder that provides a bid but fails to demonstrate their capacity (financial or otherwise) to provide the supplies, equipment or service as specified in the bid. 
Nonresponsive bidder means an offer, submitted by a bidder, to furnish supplies, equipment or services that are not in conformity with the specifications, delivery terms or conditions or other requirements specified in the invitation for bids. 
Professional services means those services provided by an individual, firm, partnership, or corporation as an independent contractor and which are of a technical and/or unique nature which require persons who are exceptionally qualified by education or experience to perform administrative, technical or advisory services which do not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than reports, plans, documents or specifications. By way of illustration but not limitation, the following services are considered as professional: general management consulting, personnel consulting, architecture, accounting, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, medicine, engineering, research, studies of government operations and procedures and training. Services exempt from this definition include various types of testing services, real estate appraisers, equipment repair specialists, janitorial services and security service. 
Public works project means any capital improvement project for the construction or improvement of city real property which is dedicated to public use and benefit, including, but not limited to, public buildings, streets, drains, sewers, utilities, parks, and playgrounds. It is to be site specific and shall be continuous until completion. It does not include ongoing maintenance or repair of such facilities. 
Purchases means the procurement of supplies, services and equipment which shall include leases or rentals as well as transactions by which the city acquires ownership. 
Responsible bidder means a bidder who submits a responsive bid and who is not only financially responsible, but also possesses the resources, judgment, skill, ability, capacity and integrity requisite and necessary to perform the contract according to its terms. 
Responsive bid means a proposal, submitted by a responsible bidder, to furnish supplies, equipment or services in conformity with the specifications, delivery terms and conditions and other requirements specified in the invitation for bids. 
Services means any and all services, including but not limited to the repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other property. This term does not include services rendered by city officers or employees or architectural or other professional services which by their nature do not lend themselves to normal competitive procedures. 
Sole source means the equipment or service is offered by only one supplier, as established by a reasonable search to locate other suppliers across the United States offering similar equipment or services. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-962. - Centralized purchasing system. 
Centralized purchasing shall provide for efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and other property and services; to acquire supplies, materials, equipment and other property and services at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed; to exercise positive financial control over purchases as provided by Charter § 1202; and to ensure the quality of such purchases. Centralized purchasing shall operate as a division of the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-963. - Purchasing manager. 
The purchasing manager is the designated purchasing agent of the city. The purchasing manager shall have authority to: 
(1)  Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by the City Charter and this article; administrative regulations as set forth by the purchasing manager for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division; and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council or city manager. 
(2)  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment. 
(3)  Act to procure for the city the needed quality of supplies, services and equipment at the least expense to the city. 
(4)  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases. 
(5)  Prepare and recommend rules and regulations governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the city. 
(6)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products; recommend purchase of alternative products of a higher quality or lower cost. 
(7)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this division and other rules and regulations. 
(8)  Supervise the receipt and inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications. 
(9)  Supervise the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use. 
(10)  Maintain appropriate records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division. 
(11)  Encourage the standardization of similar equipment, materials, and services used by the various city departments. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-964. - Purchase requisitions. 
Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies, services, and equipment to the purchasing division using the automated purchasing system. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-965. - Purchase order. 
Purchase of supplies, services and equipment shall be made by purchase order issued by the purchasing manager, subject to the provisions of this article. Except in an emergency, as authorized in this article, no officer or employee of the city shall request a supplier to deliver supplies, services, or equipment to the city, or begin work on any assignment, without prior authorization by the purchasing manager. The finance director shall have the authority to set a minimum dollar threshold for which a purchase order is required, however said threshold shall not exceed the minimum bid limit as provided in section 2-969. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-966. - Open orders. 
Notwithstanding other sections of this article, the purchasing manager may issue open purchase orders for supplies, services and equipment as needed to support ongoing city operations and support various city departmental functions. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-967. - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in an emergency, the purchasing manager shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services or equipment unless the finance director has determined there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-967.1. - Contract management. 
Department directors shall be responsible for managing supplies and service contracts under the authority of their respective departments. Contract management shall include, but not be limited to, ensuring that vendors and service providers comply with the terms of the agreements, contracts, purchase orders, including insurance, pricing and maximum dollar limits. Department directors shall contact the purchasing manager to initiate the bidding process no less than three months prior to the expiration date of any vendor or service contract. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-967.2. - Responsibility. 
Every employee involved in any aspect of purchasing goods or services is responsible for following current purchase practices, policies, and procedures as established by the finance department and as may be amended from time to time. Department directors are responsible for ensuring that all employees in their department who conduct purchasing activities possess a thorough understanding of all purchasing practices, policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-968. - Emergency purchases. 
The purchasing manager may authorize emergency purchases free of all sections of this division upon showing by any agency or officer that the purchase required is for the immediate preservation of health, safety and welfare of the people; the purchase is for the immediate repair to existing city equipment which impacts ongoing city operations; or the purchase is for the protection of property; and that there is a present, immediate and existing emergency which could not reasonably be foreseen. The city manager, public works director, finance director or purchasing manager may authorize emergency purchases free of all sections of this division upon a local emergency being declared pursuant to section 14-76 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-969. - Open market procedure. 
Generally. Purchasing of supplies, services and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of $30,000.00 or less; the purchase of supplies, services, construction and equipment for public works improvements and repair projects of an estimated value in the amount of $30,000.00 or less; and repairs to existing city equipment of an estimated value in the amount of $30,000.00 or less may be made by the purchasing manager in the open market, with the approval of the department director and finance director, in compliance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Minimum number of quotations. Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three quotations when the total purchase exceeds $3,000 and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(2)  Solicitation of quotations. The purchasing manager may solicit and receive quotations by written request to prospective suppliers or by telephone. Such contracts may be awarded for three consecutive one-year terms, provided the $30,000 informal bid limit is not exceeded during any one-year term. 
(3)  Record of quotations. The purchasing manager shall keep a record of all open market procurements and quotations for a period of one year after the placing of the order. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
(4)  Exceptions. When the supplies, services and equipment are available from only one source, including equipment maintenance agreements (Sole source purchases for supplies, equipment and general services, with the exception of maintenance agreements, that exceed $5,000.00 but are less than $30,000.00 shall be approved by the city manager); when the purchase is for highly perishable material or medical supplies; when prices for supplies, services and equipment are established by law; purchases from government agencies; when supplies, services and equipment require the repair, standardization or interchange ability of parts with existing equipment; for small purchases (under $3,000.00) that do not warrant the time and cost for obtaining competitive quotations; or for the purchase of motor vehicle fuels and/or oil products, the procurement may be made in the most efficient method available consistent with the intent of this section and the best interest of the city. Books, journals, and publications peculiar to the operation of the library shall also be excluded. Durable medical equipment or physician prescribed supplies necessitated under Workers Compensations law shall also be excluded. 
(5)  The city manager and finance director may waive minor defects in bid documents, provided the defect has no effect on the bid price recommended for award. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-970. - Formal bid procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, purchases for supplies, services and equipment of an estimated value greater than $30,000.00 shall be by written bid with award by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder, excluding professional services, pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the supplies, services or equipment to be purchased and shall state where bid plans and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
a.  Public notice. The notice inviting bids or proposals shall be posted at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids on the city's website, and it shall be posted in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices. 
b.  Bidders' list. The purchasing manager shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders' list or who have requested their names to be added thereto. 
c.  Exceptions. An award of purchase may be made without competitive bidding after conducting a good faith review of all available alternatives and sources which result in a finding that there is only one practical source available for the required supplies, services or equipment and that there is no other practical option or alternative available (sole source). The finding shall be in writing and shall document the basis and reason for the selection under the following circumstances: 
1.  The needed product or service is only available from one source (sole-source). 
2.  A particular product or service is requested for experimental or trial purposes. 
3.  Additional products or services are required to complete a budgeted project, and compatibility or uniformity with existing product or service is a requirement. 
4.  A purchase that is made from or a sale that is made to another government agency. 
5.  The purchase of an in-demand item is advantageous, and availability of the item is limited in supply and subject to prior sale. 
6.  When supplies, services or equipment can be produced from a supplier who offers the same or better price, terms and/or conditions as the supplier previously offered as the lowest responsible bidder under competitive procurement conducted by another city or public agency, provided that the competitive procurement process of the other agency meets or exceeds the standards of the city, is for like or greater quantities, includes all known bidders and that, in the opinion of the purchasing manager, it is in the best interest of the city. 
(2)  Bidders' security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing manager, bidders' security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to a return of bid security, provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of the contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest bidder; the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid; and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
(3)  Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing manager and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. In its discretion, the city may reject any and all bids and readvertise for bids. Low bid(s) may be rejected based on the non-responsible or non-responsive bid criteria. Software bids may be rejected based on functionality of the software. Bids shall not be rejected on the basis of brand name alone. 
(5)  Award of bids. Bids shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in this section. Each award and/or amendment or extension to an award, subject to city council approval, shall be put forth in separate city council actions requesting the award. The city council may waive minor defects contained in bid documents, provided the defect has no effect on the bid price recommended for award. 
(6)  Tie bids. If two or more bids received are the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. 
(7)  Performance bonds. The purchasing manager shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract in such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the purchasing manager requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(8)  Right of negotiation. The purchasing manager shall have authority to negotiate contractual provisions, performance requirements, price and trade-off considerations as part of the bidder selection process. 
(9)  Procurement of motor vehicle fuels and/or oil products. The purchasing manager, with the approval of the finance director, may procure motor vehicle fuels and/or oil products in the most efficient and least costly method available consistent with the operation needs of the city without recourse to the formal bid procedure 
(10)  Equipment maintenance agreements. The city manager shall have the authority to approve maintenance agreements over $30,000.00 for equipment procurements approved by the city council, provided the maintenance agreement is awarded to the same company for the same equipment as approved by the city council. Any other maintenance agreement shall be subject to the provisions of section 2-969. 
(11)  Splitting purchases. It shall be expressly forbidden to split or separate into smaller projects or procurements any request for supplies, service and/or equipment for the purpose of evading the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-970.1. - Two step formal bid process for purchase of equipment or services. 
This section shall allow a two-step formal bid process which includes a pre-qualification component. The two step process is primarily used to purchase equipment, services, and software that exceed $30,000.00 with specifications that are so complex or so indeterminate that a formal bid specification is impractical. 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall describe the two-step bid process to include: 
a.  Technical prequalification— The technical specifications shall describe minimum requirements for specific equipment, services or supplies but still allowing flexibility and negotiation of minor technical points during the evaluation process and shall state the time and place for opening of the qualifications. Specifications are set up for the bidder to indicate "comply" or "does not comply" regarding its equipment. Bidders are required to respond to each listed specification. 
b.  Notification of prequalification and request for prices— After a complete evaluation of all proposals, the purchasing manager notifies all bidders who have been deemed qualified to submit bid prices at a stated time and place. No less than three bidders shall be invited to submit bid prices. 
(2)  Public notice. The request for qualifications shall be posted at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids on the city's website, and it shall be posted in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices. 
(3)  Bidders' list. The purchasing manager shall solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names be added to the city's bidder's list, and businesses located within Pomona who possess a valid city business license for the product or service requested. 
(4)  Award of bids. Bids shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in section 2-970. The city council may waive minor defects contained in bid documents provided the defect has no effect on the bid price recommended for award. 
(Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-970.2. - Formal bid procedure for revenue-producing procurements. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 2-970, this section shall apply to all procurements in which the bidder generates revenue payable to the city. Procurement shall be by written bid with award by the city council to the highest revenue-generating bidder. 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the procurement and shall state where bids and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
a.  Public notice. The notice inviting bids or proposals shall be posted at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids on the city's website, and it shall be posted in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices. 
b.  Bidders' list. The purchasing manager shall solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names be added to the city's bidder's list, and businesses located within Pomona who possess a valid city business license for the product or service requested. 
(Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-971. - Local preference. 
In order to promote the economic health of the city and to encourage local participation in the procurement process, the city, in determining the lowest responsible bidder, may take into consideration the sales tax which would be returned to the city as a result of the award. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-971.1. - Recycled material preference. 
Whenever possible and reasonably practical, the purchasing manager shall attempt to purchase products manufactured from the maximum recycled content practicable. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-972. - Inspection and testing. 
The purchasing manager shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered and contractual services performed to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing manager shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-973. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The purchasing manager shall be authorized to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans so that the best interest of the city shall be served thereby. The purchasing manager is authorized to recommend a cooperative or "piggyback" purchase on an awarded contract for services or equipment, entered into by other governmental agencies (municipality, county or state) through a competitive bid process, provided all products or equipment requested meet the technical specifications of the awarded bid. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-974. - Gratuities. 
The purchasing manager and all other officers and employees of the city are prohibited from accepting or receiving directly or indirectly from any person to which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift or money, including any rebate or discount in the price of anything of value, or any promise, obligation or contract for future reward or compensation, unless the rebate or discount is made in the regular course of business to members of the public without regard to official status. The offer of such gratuity to an official or employee by any supplier or contractor shall be cause for declaring such individual to be an irresponsible bidder and for preventing vendor from bidding on any open market purchase or service. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-975. - Conflict of interest. 
(1)  No officer or employee of the city may contract with any person related to any officer or employee of the city by blood or marriage within the third degree for supplies, services and equipment unless the purchase is by competitive bid and the person so related submits the lowest responsible bid therein. No officer or principal of the vendor, nor any subcontractor may be employed or have been employed, either full or part time, by the City of Pomona either currently or within the last two years. An exception to this section may be granted by approval of the city council. All successful construction or service bidders must sign and adhere to the city's statement of non-collusion. 
(2)  Any unauthorized contact by the bidder during the bid or proposal process with an official or city employee, other than those shown on the RFP or bid, the finance director, or purchasing manager, shall cause the bidder to be immediately disqualified from consideration of award. 
(3)  City employees and officials shall be prohibited from engaging in and/or awarding procurements when: 
(a)  Having a financial or personal beneficial interest (directly or indirectly) in any contract or purchase order for supplies, equipment, services, or projects furnished to the city. 
(b)  Using information available to officials and employees, solely because of their city position, for personal profit, gain or advantage. 
(c)  Directly or indirectly furnishing or withholding services or information not available to all prospective bidders, or who may reasonably be expected to bid on, a contract with the city. 
(d)  Using a position or status in the city to solicit (directly or indirectly) business of any kind; or to purchase products at special discounts or upon special concessions for personal private use from any person or firm who sells or solicits sales to the city. 
(e)  Serving the interest of any organization which transacts or attempts to transact business with the city for profit when such employee holds a city position of review or control over such business transactions. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-976. - Federal requirements. 
(a)  If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase of this division conflicts with any federal requirements mandated for any grant funded procurement, the applicable federal requirements shall apply to that procurement. 
(b)  The city, as grantee, will not provide federal funds to any party (subgrantee, subrecipient, vendor and/or contractor) that is debarred or suspended or otherwise excluded from or ineligible for participation in federal assistance programs under Executive Order 12549, "Debarment and Suspension". Thus the city will check the Federal Excluded Parties List System website at www.epls.gov to ensure that parties receiving federal funds are not debarred or suspended from receipt of such funds. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-977. - Procurement of professional services, excluding public works projects within the adopted capital improvement plan. 
(a)  Proposals; approval generally. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procurement of professional services, excluding public works projects within the capital improvement plan, regardless of funding source shall be based on a minimum of three written proposals except when the service is only available from one source or when the time and cost for obtaining additional competitive proposals exceeds the probable savings. All professional service procurements shall be made to the most qualified bidder and shall be approved by the director of the requesting department and the finance director. Sole-source requests for professional services less than $5,000.00 may be approved by the director of the requesting department. Sole-source requests for professional services over $5,000.00 and less than $15,000.00 shall require approval by the city manager. Sole-source requests for professional services over $15,000.00 (except as noted in Item (e)(5)) shall require approval by the city council. All professional service procurements over $30,000 shall be subject to a request for proposals/qualifications and shall be posted at least ten days prior to the date set for the opening of proposals on the city's website and in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices opening of proposals and approval of award by the city council. It shall be expressly forbidden to split or separate into smaller projects or job tasks any award for professional services for the purpose of evading this section. If there is a possibility that a contract for services awarded for less than $30,000 may, at any time, be expanded in scope, the service must be formally bid prior to the first award. 
(b)  Approval by council. No person, firm or subsidiary thereof who has been awarded a professional service contract, or a contract which includes a consulting component, may be awarded a contract for the provision of services, delivery of goods or supplies, or any other related action which is required, suggested, or otherwise deemed appropriate as an end product of the consulting services contract unless otherwise approved by the city council. Therefore, any consultant who contracts with the city to develop a feasibility study or provide recommendations for the acquisition of products or services is precluded from contracting for any work recommended in the study or proposed recommendation unless otherwise approved by direct action by the city council designating the design/build project. 
(c)  Selection of professional consultants for continuing services. The procedure for the selection of consultants for continuing professional services shall be as follows: 
(1)  Professional firms providing engineering, land surveying, transit, planning, environmental, auditing, landscape architecture or other like services may be retained to provide professional services on a continuing basis for a three-year term. Retention on a continuing basis means that the firm is retained on either a project-by-project or on a retainer (time and material) basis to handle projects, as assigned, during the term of the agreement. This would allow the department director, with the approval of the city manager, to request services from the firm on specific projects, under $30,000.00, without going through an additional RFP and selection process. The initial selection of a professional firm shall be through a formal RFP process, and every effort shall be made to receive proposals from at least three like firms. At the end of the three-year term, a new RFP and selection process shall be commenced, if there is still a need for said services. For purposes of this section, work performed at a single address is considered a project. 
(d)  Every three years, the purchasing division shall make a written request to each department director to submit a list of consultants currently under contract by their department, setting forth the names of firms, types of services, costs of contracts, length of contracts and date entered into, and the number of years retained by the city. The purchasing manager shall maintain a separate list of active continuing services contracts to compare against the submitted departmental list. 
(e)  Exclusions/exceptions. Exclusions shall be as follows: 
(1)  The process of selecting environmental studies consultants for non-city/agency projects shall be conducted by the community development director due to time restraints with application processing requirements. The final consultant selection and fee shall be reviewed and approved by the city manager. 
(2)  The process of selecting consultants that are providing professional services for which a direct relational fee is charged to a third party (e.g. plan check services) shall be conducted in the same method used for the selection of consultants for professional services for continuing services, pursuant to section 2-977(c)(1), but without regard to cost per site or project as long as the original annual award was made by the city council. 
(3)  Specialized legal services as recommended by the city attorney relating to current or probable litigation are exempt from professional bidding provisions. 
(4)  The city council shall review and approve each bond issue, in concept, with selection of professional consultants, as needed, to be selected by the finance director and approved by the city manager. 
(5)  Sole source procurements for specialty services related to fiscal and/or personnel related matters over $15,000.00 but less than $50,000.00 shall be approved by the city manager. 
(f)  Professional services to temporarily fill vacant class A or B city positions. As a further exemption from the formal bid process, the city manager or his designee is authorized to take the following actions when a vacancy occurs in a class A or B position: 
(1)  Procure the services of a firm to temporarily fill a vacant class A or B position under all of the following conditions: 
a.  The city commences a full recruitment for the position within two months of the occurrence of the vacancy; 
b.  The services of the firm in filling the vacancy shall terminate upon the filling of the position through the recruitment process; and 
c.  The term of the agreement for such services shall not exceed one year, without prior approval by the city council, and provided the recruitment process remains active. 
(2)  Procure the services of a professional recruitment firm to conduct the recruitment for the vacant position by an informal bid process, in which three bids are obtained and the contract is awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4129, § 1, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-978. - Procurement of design/build technology. 
(a)  Design/build technology procurements are procurements in which the services contracted for are primarily consulting services, which may also include any or all of the following: 
(1)  Procurement and/or installation of computer hardware. 
(2)  Procurement and/or installation of computer software. 
(3)  Procurement of software licenses. 
(4)  Procurement of maintenance agreements for hardware and software. 
(5)  Training of city staff in the use of such technology. 
(b)  Regardless of funding source, design/build technology procurements shall be based on a minimum of three written proposals, except when the service is only available from one source, or when the time and cost for obtaining additional competitive proposals exceeds the probable savings. All design/build technology procurements shall be approved by the director of the requesting department and the finance director. Sole-source requests for procurements under this section over $20,000.00 shall require approval by the city council. All procurements under this section over $30,000 shall be subject to a request for proposals/qualifications and shall be posted on the city's website and in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices at least ten days prior to the date set for opening of proposals and approval of award by the city council. It shall be expressly forbidden to split or separate into smaller projects or job tasks any requirements for procurements under this section for the purpose of evading this section. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-979. - Bid protests and appeal process. 
(a)  If the department director or the purchasing manager determines that the lowest bid is either nonresponsive or that the bidder is not a responsible bidder, the purchasing manager shall notify all bidders by posting such determination on the city's website five days prior to the award of the formal bid. During this five-day period, prospective bidders may submit written materials (bid protests) to the purchasing manager regarding their concerns and/or justification why their bid should have been considered for award. Protest materials received by noon on the day the award is scheduled shall receive consideration. 
(b)  The purchasing manager shall forward the bidder's written request to the using department, the finance director, the city attorney and city manager. 
(c)  The matter shall be removed from the city council consent calendar pending review of the matter. 
(d)  A determination shall be made and a written response of said determination shall be sent to the bidder. 
(e)  The award of bid shall be placed on the next available council meeting agenda. 
(f)  Bidders shall not be granted an appeal at the city council meeting if a written request for appeal or bid protest had not been filed during the five-day appeal period. 
(g)  Should the appeal result in a different determination of the lowest responsive bidder, the new staff determination shall be posted for five days before an award is made. 
(Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Secs. 2-980—2-1000. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS 
 
Sec. 2-1001. - Construction of section; designation of contracting officer; procedures generally. 
(a)  This division shall apply to procurements estimated in excess of the amount provided under the Public Contracts Code § 22032(b) for construction contracts or public works projects, which are to be let by contract, and shall be by written bid with council approval, prior to award to the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this division. Procurement for construction or public works projects less than the amount defined under the Public Contracts Code § 22032(b) shall be made in accordance with section 2-969 which pertains to open market procedure for construction $30,000.00 or less, or section 2-1002 which pertains to informal bidding procedure for construction more than $30,000.00 but less than the amount provided under the Public Contracts Code § 22032(b). 
(b)  The city manager shall designate the public works director as city contracting officer who shall function as the contracting agent for all construction and/or public works projects to be let through pubic bidding in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Specifications. All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purpose intended and to encourage open competition in satisfying the city's needs. Specifications shall not be unduly restrictive. 
(2)  Notice inviting bids. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids and distinctly state the nature and scope of the project to be constructed. The notice shall be posted on the city's website and in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices at least ten days before the date of opening the bids. 
(3)  Rejection of bids. At its discretion, the city may reject any or all bids and readvertise as it deems appropriate. If two or more bids are the same total amount, quality and service being equal, the public works director shall award the contract by drawing lots. If no bids are received, the city council may have the work done without further complying with this section. 
(4)  Bidders' list. The contracting officer shall send a notice inviting sealed bids to the following: 
a.  Prospective contractors who possess the appropriate contractor's license for the project; 
b.  Prospective contractors whose names are on the city bidders' list; and 
c.  Those contractors located in the city who have a valid city business license. 
(5)  Bidders' security. All construction bids shall be presented under sealed cover and accompanied by one of the following forms of bidders' security of an amount not less than ten percent of the amount bid: 
a.  Cashier's check made payable to the city; 
b.  Certified check made payable to the city; or 
c.  A bidder's bond, executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the city. 
If the successful bidder fails to execute the contract, the amount of the bidder's security shall be forfeited to the city. 
(6)  Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city and shall be identified as a bid on the submittal package. Bids shall be opened by the purchasing manager, city clerk, or their designee in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. 
(7)  Bid splitting. It shall be expressly forbidden to split or separate into small projects any public works project or construction contract for the purpose of evading this section. 
(8)  Award of bids. Bids shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in this division. Bids containing a base bid and one or more additive alternates shall be totaled and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder for the base bid and any additive alternate recommended. 
(9)  Responsive bid. In order for a bid to be considered, it must be responsive. 
(10)  Award to next lowest bidder. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the second lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder if cash or a check is used or to the surety on the bidder's bond if a bond is used. 
(11)  Record of bids. The city's contracting officer shall keep a record of all public works projects or construction bids, including a copy of all submittals, for a period of one year from the date of opening. Such records shall be open to public inspection during normal working hours. 
(12)  Insurance and bonds. The contractor shall not commence work until he has procured and given satisfactory proof of the following insurance and bonds: 
a.  Workers' compensation insurance in an amount satisfactory to the contracting officer; 
b.  Public liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the contracting officer; 
c.  Faithful performance bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, securing the faithful performance by the contractor of all requirements under the contract. The faithful performance bond shall be in the sum of not less than 100 percent of the estimated aggregate amount of the payments to be made under the contract computed on the basis of the prices stated in the bid; and 
d.  Labor and material bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, securing the payment of claims of material, men and laborers thereunder. The labor and material bond shall be in the sum of not less than 100 percent of the estimated aggregate amount of the payments to be made under the contract computed on the basis of the prices stated in the bid. 
(13)  Bid protests. If the contracting officer determines that a bid is either nonresponsive or that the bidder is not a responsible bidder, the contracting officer shall notify the bidder of this determination prior to the award of the bid and shall give the bidder an opportunity to submit materials, in a manner specified by the contracting officer, concerning the issue of responsiveness or the contractor's qualifications to perform the contract. 
(14)  Change orders. The aggregate of all construction change orders for a single CIP project cannot exceed 15 percent of the total value of the project as outlined in the capital improvement program plan, to a maximum of $100,000.00, without approval by the city council. 
(15)  Encumbrance of funds. Except as provided in section 2-1005 which pertains to calamity or emergency work, the contracting officer shall not issue any contract for any construction or public works project unless the director of finance has determined in writing that there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the contract is to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-1002. - Informal bidding procedure—Public works capital improvement plan construction. 
(a)  Purpose. It is in the public interest for the city to establish informal bidding procedures for public works construction contracts as reflected in the five-year capital improvement plan. Performance of city public works projects in accordance with the procedures referenced in this division to article 3 of the Public Contracts Code (Public Contracts Code § 22030 et seq.) is for the sole purpose of establishing project amounts, which are consistent with the amounts set forth in such article and as may be amended. Such reference to article 3 of the Public Contracts Code (Public Contracts Code § 22030 et seq.) shall not constitute an election by the city because, subject to either the uniform construction cost accounting procedures or the bidding procedures set forth in such article. 
(b)  Limits. Limits for the informal bidding procedure are as follows: 
(1)  Public projects for the amount defined in Public Contracts Code § 22032(a) or less may be performed by the employees of a public agency, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. 
(2)  Public projects for the amount defined in Public Contracts Code § 22032(b) or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in this section. 
(3)  Public projects of more than the amount defined under Public Contracts Code § 22032(c) shall, except as otherwise provided in this division, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure. 
(4)  If all bids received are in excess of the amount defined under Public Contracts Code § 22032(c), the governing body of the public agency may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, up to the amount defined under Public Contracts Code § 22034(f), to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the public agency was reasonable. 
(5)  The aggregate of all construction change orders for a project awarded by informal procedures set forth in this section shall not exceed 15 percent of the total value of the project as outlined in the capital improvement program plan nor cause it to exceed the informal limit as defined in Public Contracts Code § 22032(b). 
(c)  City manager's authority to award contracts. The city council hereby delegates the authority to award informal contracts, in accordance with this division, to the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  Authority of public works director for plans, specifications and working details. The city council hereby delegates to the public works director authority to prepare and adopt plans, specifications and working details for all informal contracts and directs the public works director to develop plans, specifications and working details necessary to enable a qualified contractor to perform the work required for each informal contract awarded. 
(e)  Maintenance and use of list of qualified contractors. The public works director shall develop a list of qualified contractors eligible to submit bids on informal contracts awarded by the city. 
(1)  The list shall be organized in accordance with the license classifications of the contractor's state license board. 
(2)  Every three years, the public works director shall publish, at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids, in all construction trade journals identified by the contractor's state license board, on the city's website, and in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices that the city has elected to establish informal bidding procedures, that it maintains a list of contractors qualified to submit bids on informal contracts, and the city office to contact for all information necessary for a qualified contractor to be included on the list. Notices shall also be sent to all contractors within the city that possess a city business license and all contractors on the bidders list that provide the specific service. 
(3)  Any contractor licensed in the state may upon request be added to the list at any time. 
(4)  The public works director shall develop and provide to contractors applying for inclusion on the list a simplified form requesting the applicant's name, address and state contractor's license number and classification. 
(f)  Informal contract projects identified; bids invited. The public works director shall identify all city public works projects in excess of the monetary limits imposed by law for work performed on projects by the city's own forces but less than the amount which requires performance by contracts awarded by formal bidding and shall, as set forth in this section, accomplish notification of such identified projects to be let by informal contract. 
(1)  Projects shall not be split to avoid any of the bidding requirements contained in this division. 
(2)  The public works director shall mail notices inviting informal bids to all contractors on the list of qualified contractors, for the category of work bid. 
(3)  The public works director shall complete the mailing of notices inviting informal bids, as required by this section, not less than ten calendar days before bids are due. 
(4)  The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms, shall describe how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and shall state the time and place for the submission of bids. 
(g)  Procedure for award of contract. At the time provided in the notice inviting informal bids, the public works director shall open all bids timely received and shall request the city manager to award a contract to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and lowest, the contract shall be awarded by drawing lots of the equal bidders. If no bids are received, the public works director may solicit informal bids again or perform the work by city forces, as he determines to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-1003. - Selection of consultants for professional services for public works projects within the adopted capital improvement plan. 
(a)  Procurements for professional services for public works projects within the adopted capital improvement plan less than $3,000.00 shall be made by the purchasing manager to the most qualified bidder. 
(b)  Procurements for professional services for public works projects within the adopted capital improvement plan that exceed $3,000.00 but not more than $30,000.00, shall be in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Minimum number of quotations—The procurement shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three quotations from bidders on the existing qualified consultant list and shall be awarded to the most qualified bidder. 
(2)  Solicitation of quotations—Quotations may be obtained by written, faxed, or telephoned request. 
(3)  Record of quotations—All quotations shall be kept for a period of one year from date of purchase order. During the retention period, this record shall be open to public inspection. 
(4)  Approval shall be made by the department director and the finance director. 
(c)  For procurements estimated in excess of $30,000.00 but less than the amount provided in Public Contracts Code § 22032(b). 
(1)  Every three years, the purchasing manager shall solicit at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids, requests for qualifications from professional services firms for services on public works projects, for the purpose of establishing a list of qualified consultants. 
(2)  Approval of list of qualified consultants. 
a.  The city manager shall appoint a selection committee to review the consultant proposals and fees by individual specialty category. Evaluation shall be based on criteria established in the request for qualifications. The committee shall be comprised of at least five representatives from the various city departments, as selected by the city manager. The committee shall make recommendations for award of contracts to the public works director. 
b.  The city council shall approve the master list of recommended consultants with up to twenty consultants per specialty category. 
(3)  For each capital project, the public works director shall contact no less than three consultants in any specialty category to request proposals for the specific project, project group, or related work. Requests for project work proposals shall be rotated through the list of consultants within each specialty category. The public works director shall make determination of award of projects with the approval of the finance director. 
(4)  Procurements in excess of the amount provided in Public Contracts Code § 22032(b) shall be awarded pursuant to the formal bid process that is set forth in section 2-977. 
(d)  Sole source award. The city manager shall be authorized to award sole-source professional service contracts under one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The city council has awarded the original contract, and additional services to complete the CIP project from the same consultant are necessary. Additional services shall not exceed $30,000.00 nor cause the total contract cost to exceed the appropriate bidding threshold, or 
(2)  The city manager has awarded a contract for professional services for a CIP project using informal bidding procedures, and additional services from said consultant are necessary to complete the project and does not result in the contract exceeding the $30,000.00 limit. 
(e)  Amendments. 
(1)  Amendments to professional service contracts with an original contract cost of no more than $30,000.00 shall be approved by the public works director and the finance director. Such amendments shall not exceed 20 percent of the original contract cost, nor cause the total contract amount to exceed the appropriate purchasing threshold. 
(2)  Amendments to professional services agreements with an original contract cost exceeding $30,000.00 but less than $125,000.00 shall be approved by the city manager. Such amendments shall not exceed 20 percent of the original contract cost nor cause the total contract cost to exceed the appropriate purchasing threshold. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-1004. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-1005. - Calamity or emergency work. 
The city manager, public works director or finance director may authorize emergency repairs or demolition on public property free of all sections of this division upon a local emergency being declared, pursuant to section 14-76 of this Code. The city manager may authorize emergency repairs or demolition on public property free of all sections of this division upon any agent or officer of the city showing that the repair is for the immediate preservation of health, safety and welfare of the public, repair to existing infrastructure which, if delayed, would cause further deterioration, have significant financial impact, or for the protection of property, and that there is a present, immediate and existing emergency which could not reasonably be foreseen. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-1006. - Design-build contracts for capital improvements. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide definitions and guidelines for the award, use and evaluation of design-build contracts. 
(b)  Definitions. All defined terms in this section appear in italics. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
Design-build means a public works contract procurement method in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity. Design-build also includes projects where in addition to design and construction, other functions may be added including, but not limited to, construction management, inspection, soils/materials testing financing, operating and/or maintenance. 
Design-build entity means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural and engineering services as needed. 
Design-build entity member includes any person who provides licensed contracting, architectural, or engineering services on behalf of the design-build entity. 
(c)  Design-build procurement. Request for proposals, bid invitation and performance specifications. For purposes of this section only, prior to procuring a design-build public works contract, the city shall prepare a request for a proposal setting forth the scope of the project that may include, but is not limited to, size, type and desired design character of the project and site, and performance specifications. The performance specifications shall describe the quality of construction materials, assemblies and other information deemed necessary to adequately describe the city's needs. The performance specifications shall be prepared by a design professional designated by the city. 
(d)  Notice of availability. The notice of availability shall set a date for the opening of proposals and distinctly state the nature and scope of the project to be constructed. At least ten days before the date of opening the proposals, the notice of availability shall be posted on the city's website and in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices. 
(e)  Any architectural firm, engineering firm, specialty consultant or individual retained by the city to assist in the development of criteria or preparation of the request for proposals shall not be eligible to participate in the competition with any design build entity, nor take part in the ranking of proposals during the selection committee process. 
(f)  Selection committee. The city manager shall appoint a selection committee to review and to rank the proposals of the design-build entities. The selection committee shall use the evaluation criteria set forth in subsection (g) or (h) of this section and in the request for proposal. The selection committee shall be comprised of one representative from the finance department, three employees from the department responsible for the project, and one representative from a department other than finance or the responsible department. 
(g)  Selection method for design build projects with an estimated value up to $1,000,000.00. A design-build competition based on performance, specifications and criteria set forth by the city in the request for proposals. 
(1)  Criteria used may include, but not be limited to: 
a.  An evaluation of overall quality, capability, resource availability and financial stability of the firm. 
b.  An evaluation of references provided with respect to responsiveness, quality of work, timeliness and overall performance. 
c.  An evaluation of the firm and/or project manager's ability and experience in providing the service offered, including: experience with local government, scope of services covered, length of time involved, level of client satisfaction, cost/benefits relationship and relative success. 
d.  An evaluation of the experience, training and qualifications of the personnel the firm will be committing for assignments on the proposed project. 
e.  Consideration of items such as proposed design approach, initial and/or life-cycle costs, project features, financing, quality, capacity, schedule, and operational and functional performance of the facility. However, any criteria and methods used to evaluate proposals shall be limited to those contained in the request for design-build proposals. 
f.  The extent to which the firm's proposal meets the technical criteria and methodology requested. 
g.  Analysis of the cost relative to the firm's ability to meet the specifications and criteria set forth in this subsection (e)(1) and in the request for proposal. 
h.  Whether the cost as provided in the bid is guaranteed firm, evidenced in writing and signature by an authorized representative of the firm. 
(2)  Depending on the number of proposals received by the city, the selection committee may develop a "short-list" of the top ranked design/build proposals. 
(3)  Depending on the number of proposals and/or complexity of the project, the selection committee may require the "short-listed" design/build entities to complete an interview/presentation to the selection committee to establish a final ranking. 
(4)  The selection committee will then begin negotiations with the top ranked design/build entity. The negotiations may include but are not limited to project cost, scope, and schedule. If negotiations are not successful, negotiations will cease with the top ranked design/build entity, and negotiations may begin with the second ranked design/build entity. 
(5)  Award shall be made by the city council to the design-build entity whose proposal is judged as one that best serves the interests of the city by meeting the criteria set forth in this subsection (4) and in meeting the requirements established in the request for proposal. 
(h)  Selection method for design build projects with an estimated value over $1,000,000.00. The selection committee may choose to establish a competitive prequalification process that specifies the manner and means used to submit statement of qualifications as well as recommends the manner in which a shortlist will be established, and an award made. 
(1)  Statements of qualifications evaluation criteria may include, but are not limited to, submission of the following documents: 
a.  That the design-build entity is a licensed contractor, and holds an architect and engineering license or subcontracts that license. 
b.  That the design-build entity members have completed projects of similar size, scope, building type, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the project. 
c.  A proposed project management plan establishing that the design-build entity has the experience, competence, and capacity needed to effectively complete the project. 
d.  That the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance, as well as a financial statements. 
e.  That the design-build entity will comply with all other provisions of law applicable to the project. 
f.  That the design-build entity or its members have not had a surety company finish work on any project within the past five years. 
g.  That the design-build entity provides information for the past five years for the following: 
i.  Civil or criminal violations of the contractors' state license law against any member of the design-build entity member. 
ii.  Any conviction of any member of the design-build entity of submitting a false or fraudulent claim to a public agency. 
iii.  Civil or criminal violations of federal or state law governing the payment of wages, benefits, or personal income tax withholding, or of Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) withholding requirements, state disability insurance withholding, or unemployment insurance payment requirements against any member of the design-build entity. 
iv.  Civil or criminal violations of federal or state law against any design-build entity member governing equal opportunity employment, contracting or subcontracting. 
v.  Technical approach and team expertise. 
vi.  Design and construction experience. 
h.  The overall technical qualifications of the design build entity and the individual expertise of key personnel proposed for the project. 
i.  Previous design and construction experience on projects of similar size and scope, as well as the experience of their key personnel assigned to this project. 
(2)  Those design build entities recommended to be placed on the shortlist, shall receive the request for proposals. 
(3)  Award shall be made by the city council to the lowest qualified design build entity. 
(4)  If the selection committee chooses not to utilize the prequalification process, the design build entity shall be selected and awarded pursuant to the process set forth in subsection 2-1006(g) 
(i)  Right to reject any and all bids. Nothing in this section 2-1006 shall require the city to accept any bid and the city hereby reserves the right to reject any and all bids. 
(j)  Subcontractor listing. The city recognizes that the design-build entity is charged with performing both design and construction. Because a design-build contract may be awarded prior to the completion of the design, it is often impractical for the design-build entity to list all subcontractors at the time of the award. 
(1)  It is the intent of the city to establish a clear process for the selection and award of subcontracts entered into pursuant to this section in a manner that affords protection for subcontractors while enabling design-build projects to be administered in an efficient fashion. 
(2)  All of the following requirements shall apply to subcontractors, licensed by the state, that are employed on design-build projects undertaken pursuant to this section. 
a.  The design-build entity in each design-build proposal shall specify the construction trades or types of subcontractors that may be named as members of the design-build entity at the time of the award. In selecting the trades that may be identified as members of the design-build entity, the design-build entity shall identify the trades deemed essential in the consideration of the project. 
b.  Subcontracts not listed at time of award shall be performed or awarded by the design-build entity in accordance with a bidding process set forth in the respective request for proposals or bid invitation. The design-build entity shall furnish to the city documentation to verify that all subcontracts not listed at the time of award were subsequently awarded in accordance with the respective request for proposal or bid invitation. All subcontractors that are listed at the time of award, or subsequently in accordance with the respective request for proposal or bid invitation shall be afforded the protection of Section 4107 of the California Public Contract Code. 
(Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Secs. 2-1007—2-1040. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SALE OR DISPOSITION OF CITY PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-1041. - Sale of surplus real property. 
The city manager shall be authorized to execute an agreement for the sale and transfer of surplus real property if the property meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The property is less than 5,000 square feet in area and as such is exempt from legal notice of sale requirements as set forth in section 2-1062. 
(2)  The property must be sold to an owner of contiguous property. 
(3)  The fair market value is calculated by using the real estate appraisal formulas. 
(4)  The vacant, unused lot is to be used for improvement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3981, § 6, 4-21-2003)  
Secs. 2-1042—2-1060. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SALE OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 2-1061. - Designation of surplus personal property. 
The head of any department may declare any personal property held by such department surplus. Such declaration shall be in writing, and such property, together with such written declaration, shall be delivered to the purchasing manager. The purchasing manager shall store such property and maintain a written inventory for review by each department head of the city. If any department head has use of such property, he may so request from the purchasing manager who shall have the authority to assign the property to any department able to make best use of such property. If, however, no department head makes a request for the use of such property in his department after such inventory has been circulated at least once, the property shall be finally deemed surplus. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5-25; Ord. No. 3151, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-1062. - Sale in open market. 
(a)  Surplus city property in usable condition, if its estimated value is less than $5,000.00, may be disposed of in the manner prescribed in this section. 
(b)  The purchasing manager shall make an investigation of the market conditions of personal property of the type declared surplus and determine prices for all surplus property which, in his opinion, will be competitive with prices in the open market. He may then sell such personal property at such prices by advertising in the most appropriate means which, in his opinion, will bring the greatest number of potential purchasers, but he shall cause to be published at least once, at least three days before such sale, in a newspaper of general circulation published and distributed in the city, a notice of the sale setting forth the following: 
(1)  The day the sale shall begin; 
(2)  The number of days the sale is to be continued if it is to last more than one day; 
(3)  The place where the articles may be examined; 
(4)  The place where the purchase price is to be paid and the property delivered; and 
(5)  A general description of the type of property being sold. 
(c)  The terms of all such sales shall be cash in the amount of the full purchase price. The purchasing manager shall give a receipt to the purchaser of such property, shall keep a copy for his files, and shall forward a copy of such receipt to the treasurer, together with the money so collected from the sale. The treasurer shall receive and deposit such money and shall forward the information to the director of finance, who shall credit the money received from the sale of such property to the fund from which the property was originally purchased. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5-26; Ord. No. 3151, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-1063. - Sale by sealed bid or auction. 
(a)  As an alternate to the method of the sale of surplus personal property in the open market, the purchasing manager shall, in all cases where the estimated value of personal property is $5,000.00 or more, and may, in the sale of all other personal property where, in his discretion, he determines it in the best interest of the city, sell surplus personal property by means of sealed bid or public auction. The procedure for conducting such sale shall be determined by the purchasing manager; provided, however, that the following are included in such procedure: 
(1)  At least one notice, three days before the sale, shall be published on the city's website, and shall be posted in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices containing a general description of the type of property to be sold and the time and place of such bid opening or auction. 
(2)  The terms of all sales shall be cash. 
(3)  The sale by sealed bid or auction shall be to the highest responsible bidder. 
(4)  A receipt shall be given to the purchaser and a copy of such receipt, together with the money received, shall be deposited with the treasurer, and the director of finance shall credit such funds to the fund from which the personal property was originally purchased. 
(b)  In conducting an auction, the purchasing manager may contract with a professional auctioneer, with compensation based on a flat fee, hourly fee, or a percentage of the amount of the sale, whichever is the current common and customary method and rate for such auctioneering services. 
(c)  Surplus personal property determined to be residential, e.g. manufactured housing, may be sold upon approval by the city council in the open real estate market or through a realtor. The procedure for conducting such sale shall be determined by the city manager; provided, however, that the following are included in such procedure: 
(1)  At least one notice, three days before the home is released onto the open market, shall be published on the city's website, and it shall be posted in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for the posting of public notices containing a general description of the type of property to be sold and the procedure in which to obtain additional information on making an offer on the home. 
(2)  If required, selection of a realtor or sales agent shall be by informal bid as set forth in section 2-969. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5-27; Ord. No. 3151, § 1, (part); Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 2-1064. - Trade-ins. 
Notwithstanding any section of this division for the sale of surplus personal property in the open market or any auction, the purchasing manager may trade in surplus personal property with an amount he determines to be reasonable, to be allowed toward the purchase of a similar type of personal property. Typical situations where this might apply might be in the disposal of used motor vehicles and other machinery and equipment for which trade-ins are commonly permitted by the manufacturer. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5-28; Ord. No. 3151, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-1065. - Sale of unserviceable junk or scrap property. 
When any surplus city property is deemed to be unserviceable, junk or scrap, no longer suitable for its original purpose, the purchasing manager shall dispose of such personal property by destruction, trade or sale of the personal property at the best competitive price available in the open market without regard to the other sections of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5-29; Ord. No. 3151, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-1066. - Conveyance of property to charitable, nonprofit organizations. 
Notwithstanding the other sections of this division, the city council may convey to charitable, nonprofit organizations surplus personal property as it is determined by the city council that the use to which the personal property will be put will be for the benefit of the general welfare of the community in matters such as recreation, education, aid to the destitute, city beautification, or any other activity in which the city government may legitimately participate. The maximum estimated value for such personal property shall not exceed $5,000.00, and the organization accepting such personal property shall sign a statement and file it with the city clerk that: 
(1)  It accepts such property on the condition that the property will be used for the purpose designated by the city council; 
(2)  The property shall not be used for any other purpose without permission of the council; and 
(3)  If such property is ever diverted to other than a charitable use, the city may reclaim such property. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5-30; Ord. No. 3151, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-1067. - Conveyance to other public agencies. 
Notwithstanding the other sections of this division, the city council may convey or sell, without recourse to sealed bid or auction, surplus personal property to other public agencies, including cities, counties, school districts, special districts and joint powers agencies as may be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5-31; Ord. No. 3151, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 2-1068. - Disposal of unclaimed property. 
Notwithstanding other sections of this division, unclaimed property in the possession of the police department shall be held by the department for at least 90 days. If the owner of the property appears within 90 days of receipt of the property by the police department, proves ownership of the property, and pays all reasonable charges, the police department shall restore the property to the owner. If the true owner does not make claim for return of the property within 90 days of receipt of the property by the police department, in accordance with the provisions of California Civil Code Section 2080.4, the property may be either retained by the city upon the finding that the property is needed for public use or may be disposed of by the police department by auction. In the event the property is deemed to be of no value, it shall be disposed of in the manner determined to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5-32; Ord. No. 3151, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4218 , § 1, 3-7-2016)  
Secs. 2-1069—2-1100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CITY RECORDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-1101. - Records subject to inspection by mayor and council. 
(a)  Records inspection in execution of office. All city records that are exempt from general public inspection under state law shall be subject to inspection by the mayor or any councilmember, providing such inspection is in the public interest and in the execution of the office of the mayor or councilmember requesting the inspection. To so qualify, such inspection must be in connection with ascertaining the method or manner used by a city department in conducting its business that would assist the inspecting mayor or a councilmember to determine any of the following: 
(1)  If funds are being properly expended. 
(2)  If employment is being made in a way that is not discriminatory. 
(3)  If the operation of the department is being conducted in the most efficient manner. 
(4)  If employees are being dealt with fairly and in accordance with rules, regulations, and policies established by the city council. 
(5)  If complaints of citizens are being expeditiously handled. 
(6)  If officers and employees are carrying out their duties in accordance with rules, regulations, and policies established by the city council. 
(7)  If any officer or employee has misappropriated city property or funds. 
(b)  Duty of confidentiality upon inspecting officers. If the mayor or a councilmember is to inspect records that are exempt by law from inspection by the general public, the officer or employee permitting such inspection shall inform the mayor or councilmember making such inspection and explain that the contents of such records are confidential. Such oral instructions shall be followed by written notification with copies filed with the city attorney and city clerk. Upon receiving the warning of the confidentiality of such records, the mayor or councilmember who inspects them shall be under the same obligation concerning the confidentiality as the custodian of such records, and a breach of such confidence shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, constitute a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Conditions imposed upon certain inspections. Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the following conditions are imposed upon records inspection by the mayor or any councilmember: 
(1)  Any files or records concerning any litigation in which the mayor or councilmember is a party adverse to the city's position shall only be disclosed if permitted by a four-fifths vote of the council or gained through court discovery procedure. 
(2)  Test questions or keys to tests, unless the sole reason is to determine whether or not such tests are fair and not discriminatory, with the burden of showing that such is the reason upon the mayor or councilmember who wishes to make such inspection, with the right of the custodian of such tests and keys to appeal to the city council if such custodian feels such is not the reason. 
(3)  Police reports and records involving felonies, unless the reason for such inspection is to determine whether or not a police officer or police official has properly carried out his duties, with the burden of showing that such is the reason upon the mayor or councilmember who wishes to make such inspection, with the right of the custodian of such records to appeal to the city council if such custodian believes such is not the reason and not in the public interest to disclose the contents of such records. 
(4)  Any record made confidential on account of any physician-patient relationship by the laws of evidence of the state, unless the patient grants permission to such inspection. 
(5)  Any record prohibited from disclosure on account of any law of the state, the United States or other sections of this Code shall not be disclosed to the mayor or any councilmember, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that such law would not apply to the mayor or councilmember. 
(d)  Appeal by custodian of records. Notwithstanding any subsection of this section, the chief of police or the human resources/risk management director who is aggrieved by what he deems to be unwarranted inspections by the mayor or any councilmember of records in his custody may file a written petition with the city council setting forth the reasons why he believes inspection of such records by the mayor or councilmember is not in the public interest or in the execution of the office of the mayor or the councilmember and, therefore, should not be permitted. The city council, after hearing both the reasons by the custodian why inspection should not be permitted and the reasons why the mayor or councilmember should be permitted to make inspections, may order that such records may not be inspected by the mayor or councilmember upon a four-fifths vote of the entire council. 
(e)  Availability of information in records to special panel through councilmember. Any special panel named by the city council to make investigations of any policy of the city may, through a councilmember, obtain records that could be made available to such councilmember under this section, but such panel member shall be subject to the same confidentiality as a councilmember or any other officer who is custodian of such records. However, the councilmember who obtains such information and makes it available to such panel shall, in regard to personnel records or matters involving hiring practices, withhold the name, age, race, telephone number, address and number of dependents and personal references of the person whose records are being submitted to the panel. 
(f)  Request for inspections made through department heads. Any request for inspections made pursuant to this section of material exempt from public inspection under state law shall be made to the department head. 
(Code 1959, § 2-80; Ord. No. 2410, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Right of access to public records of elected officials, Government Code § 6252.5; exemption from inspection of public records, Government Code §§ 6253.2 et seq., 6275 et seq.  
Sec. 2-1102. - Records open to inspection by public generally. 
(a)  Inspection at reasonable times. Except those city records exempt from inspection by virtue of law, public records shall be made available to the public for inspection at reasonable office hours of the city department having possession of such records. However, prior to permitting a member of the public to inspect such records, the head of the department involved may require the member of the public requesting to see such records to wait a reasonable time if it is necessary for the department staff to assemble such records or if such records are being used in connection with some work in process being done by that department. 
(b)  Limitations as to time. If a member of the public wishes to inspect a number of records and such inspection necessitates the member of the public seeking to inspect such public records to have access to the filing cabinets in which the records are kept, such inspection may be limited to either one hour at the beginning of the working day or one hour at the end of the working day, at the discretion of the head of the department involved, so as to not interfere with the regular use of the filing cabinets and work area by city personnel using them in the course of city business. 
(c)  Prohibition on removal. Any member of the public examining such records shall not remove them from the file without permission of the department head and, in any event, shall not remove them from the department. 
(d)  Requesting copies and cost. If copies of the records are requested by any member of the public, such person requesting copies shall pay for the cost of such reproduction as determined by the department head based upon both the cost of the process of reproducing the documents and the staff time involved in making such reproductions. If numerous copies are requested, such copies shall not be made until pressing city business has been taken care of first, and no department shall be required to allow inspection of such documents by the public if it substantially interferes with the department's primary function and purpose. 
(e)  Penalties for damages. Any member of the public who is permitted to examine public records pursuant to this section and who mutilates, damages, or destroys any records so inspected shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, also be liable to the city in money damages for the cost of not only the reproducing of the document but all other consequential damages caused by such loss, mutilation, or damage. 
(f)  Protection of critical records. When a record is very critical and it would be extremely difficult to reconstruct if lost or destroyed and such loss or destruction would result in great harm to the operation of the city department, a department head may prescribe that a member of the department staff accompany the member of the public making such inspection to ensure that no loss or destruction occurs. 
(g)  Charge for staff time. The department head shall prescribe a reasonable charge based upon the time devoted by the staff to permit members of the public to inspect such records, which charge shall bear a reasonable relationship to the cost of the department staff involved. If the member of the public seeking inspection of such records is without any funds to pay for the cost of the duplication of records or for the staff time to accompany him in inspection of critical and irreplaceable records, the city council may grant a waiver of fees prescribed by the department head for such inspection. 
(h)  Fee exclusions. No fees shall be charged for inspection of records when no special staff time is involved and no reproduction or use of equipment is involved. 
(i)  Inspection of special forms of records. Should the records sought to be examined be data processing cards, microfilm, or magnetic tape, the person requesting such inspection may use the facilities of the city to interpret the data processing cards, inspect the microfilm or monitor the magnetic tape, but the use of such city facilities may only be during times when not otherwise used by the departments and staff. The cost of use of such facilities by the public shall be paid for by the member of the public using such facilities, together with the cost of the time of the operator of such facilities if provided by the city as determined by the department head in charge of such facilities. If the member of the public is without funds to pay such charge, the city council may waive such fees. 
(j)  Interference with operations. In any event, whether the records sought to be inspected are in the form of documents or some other form, their inspection shall be made in such a manner as not to handicap or interfere with the orderly operation of the department having such records; nevertheless, department heads shall make every effort to assist the public whenever possible in facilitating inspection of records as public servants. 
(Code 1959, § 2-81; Ord. No. 2410, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, Government Code § 6250 et seq.  
Secs. 2-1103—2-1125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Records management, Government Code § 34090 et seq.; local government records retention, Government Code § 12236. 
 
Sec. 2-1126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appraisal of records means the act of determining: 
(1)  The relative activity of records; 
(2)  Value of records with regards to administrative, legal, fiscal, research or historical interest; 
(3)  Adequate and essential periods of retention; and 
(4)  Appropriate disposition of records. 
Disposition involves either the transfer of inactive records to the records center or the disposal of noncurrent records by destruction, sale as wastepaper or other lawful disposition. 
Physical inventory means a complete listing of file contents by record or record series, together with sufficient supporting data to enable a proper evaluation for determining retention periods. 
Record means any paper, document, archive, map, book, drawing, photograph, videotape, data processing tape, tape sound recording, or microfilm which is created or maintained in the conduct of city business and preserved as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations or other activities, or because of the informational value of data contained therein. 
Record series means groups of related records which are normally used and filed as a unit and which permit evaluation as a unit for disposition purposes. A record series may contain both forms and correspondence. 
Retention period means the period of time established in accordance with statutory or other requirements which must elapse before disposition may be made of a body of records. 
(Code 1959, § 2-90; Ord. No. 2889, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-1127. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  The city clerk shall provide and administer a records center for the efficient and economical storage, maintenance and servicing of inactive city records. 
(b)  Each office and department of the city shall: 
(1)  Conduct a physical inventory and appraisal of all records created and maintained by the department. 
(2)  Prepare a departmental records retention schedule which shall be a list of records and/or record series, identified by title and form number, in alphabetical or numerical arrangement, by organizational unit, noting for each record and/or record series a retention period for maintenance in the office and record center. Original and duplicate copies shall be listed separately, noting for each duplicate record the location of the original and the office or department having custody. 
(3)  Submit the established department records retention schedule to the city clerk. 
(4)  Periodically review the departmental records retention schedule and submit to the city clerk revisions to the schedule which will reflect changes in retention periods or additions or deletions of records. 
(c)  The city clerk, as head of the records management program, shall: 
(1)  Advise and assist in the preparation of records retention schedules. 
(2)  Review such schedules and make recommendations as deemed appropriate to ensure coordination and cooperation in the creation, maintenance, protection, retention and disposition of all city records. 
(3)  Approve or disapprove revisions to the records retention schedule that do not affect the destruction of records, but affect only the transfer of records to the records center. 
(4)  Transmit the departmental records retention schedule and any revisions to the records retention schedule which affect the destruction of records to the city council for approval. 
(d)  The city council shall approve and disapprove the records retention schedule. 
(e)  The city council shall, by approving the departmental records retention schedule, grant to the officers mentioned in this section or to the head of a department the authority to destroy duplicate records less than two years old if they are no longer required in accordance with the retention periods established in such schedule. Requests by officers or the head of a department for the destruction of original records in accordance with the established retention periods shall be forwarded to the city attorney for his written consent and to the city council for its approval, as provided for by the governing general law. 
(Code 1959, § 2-91; Ord. No. 2889, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 2-1128—2-1160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CODE ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-1161. - Authority to cite persons in violation. 
(a)  The city council hereby authorizes all officers and employees of the city who have the duty to enforce city ordinances and this Code to cite persons for violation of such ordinances and this Code, pursuant to Penal Code § 836.5, provided such officers and employees have reasonable cause to believe that the persons to be cited have committed misdemeanors and infractions in their presence which are violations of the ordinance or section of this Code which such officers and employees have the duty to enforce and further provided that such officers and employees have satisfactorily completed the peace officers standards and training course provided for in Penal Code § 832. 
(b)  The city council further authorizes civilian volunteer patrol members (C.V.P.) of the city to cite parked vehicles for violations of the Vehicle Code, this Code and city ordinances. 
(Code 1959, § 1-9; Ord. No. 3095, § 1; Ord. No. 3273, § 1; Ord. No. 3794, § 1)  
Secs. 2-1162—2-1180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Administrative fines or penalties, Government Code § 53069.4. 
 
Sec. 2-1181. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this division to provide an alternative method of enforcement for violations of this Code and any other city ordinances (collectively referred to as the "Code"). The city council finds that an administrative citation program is an appropriate method of enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-1), 3-4-2002)  
Sec. 2-1182. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee (hereinafter referred to as the "enforcement official") shall have the authority to administer and enforce this division and to promulgate rules and regulations for uniform policies and procedures to be followed in the implementation of the administrative citation program. In addition, the enforcement official shall have the authority to nullify or void a citation which was issued in error or to the wrong person. 
(b)  The city manager hereby designates the shelter manager, as defined in chapter 6 of this Code, and his/her deputies and assistants to be the "enforcement official" and issue administrative citations for violations of such chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-2), 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 4152, § 1, 1-23-2012; Ord. No. 4162, § 3, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 2-1183. - Scope. 
(a)  For purposes of this division only, the enforcement official has discretion to treat any violation of this Code as an infraction. This division shall apply only to violations of this Code determined to be infractions (referred to as "municipal ordinance violations"). 
(b)  The procedures established in this division supplement and are an addition to or an alternative to any criminal, civil or other remedy available or established by law or under other sections of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-3), 3-4-2002)  
Sec. 2-1184. - Administrative citation. 
(a)  Issuance . Except as set out in section 2-1185 for correction conditions, the enforcement official, upon determining that a person has committed a municipal ordinance violation (referred to as "responsible party"), may issue an administrative citation to the responsible party using the procedures set out in this section. As used in this division, the term "responsible party" shall mean the occupant or owner of the property or the person otherwise responsible for complying with Code requirements. The administrative citation shall be served by personal service on the responsible party or by regular U.S. mail, to the responsible party's last known address. The responsible party's refusal to accept the administrative citation shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or any proceeding undertaken under this division. 
(b)  Contents . To the extent the following information is reasonably available to the enforcement official, the administrative citation shall: 
(1)  State the date the administrative citation is issued; 
(2)  State the responsible party's name, current residential address, and mailing address; 
(3)  Refer to the Code section violated and describe how the responsible party violated the Code section; 
(4)  State the date the violation was discovered by the enforcement official; 
(5)  State the amount of fine imposed for the violation; 
(6)  Explain how the responsible party may pay the fine, including the location and manner, as well as the time period by which the fine must be paid and the consequences of failure to pay the fine (i.e., 21 days to pay the fine); 
(7)  Explain the procedure for obtaining an administrative hearing; specifically, notice that the responsible party must make a written request within 21 days from the date the administrative citation is issued, that the written request shall be accompanied by full payment of the administrative fine or written proof that the fine has been waived or deferred by the enforcement official, and that the responsible party will be notified by mail of the date of the hearing; 
(8)  Include a warning that a failure to pay the fine and/or failure to appear at a requested administrative hearing may result in the penalties described in section 2-1190(b); 
(9)  Describe the action necessary to correct the municipal ordinance violation and explain that failure to do so may result in the issuance of additional administrative citations and the imposition of additional fines; and 
(10)  Indicate in Spanish that the responsible party may contact the code compliance division for assistance in translating the notice. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-4), 3-4-2002, Ord. No. 4152, § 2, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 2-1185. - Correction conditions. 
(a)  Issuance of correction notice. This section shall apply when the municipal ordinance violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, landscape maintenance, or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety (referred to as "correction condition"). 
(b)  Correction period. A responsible party shall have a reasonable period of time to correct or otherwise remedy a correction condition prior to the issuance of an administrative citation and the imposition of a fine. 
(c)  Correction notice. Upon discovery of a correction condition, the enforcement official shall issue a written correction notice to the responsible party by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the responsible party's last known address. The responsible party's refusal to accept the correction citation shall not affect the validity or any other proceeding set forth in this division. 
(d)  Correction notice contents. To the extent the following information is reasonably available to the enforcement official, the correction notice shall: 
(1)  Refer to the Code section violated and describe how the responsible party violated the Code section; 
(2)  Describe the action necessary to correct the municipal ordinance violation; 
(3)  State the final date by which the correction must be completed; and 
(4)  Include a warning that failure to correct the violation may result in the issuance of an administrative citation and imposition of an administrative fine and shall state the amount of the fine to be imposed for the violation. 
(e)  Procedure upon expiration of correction period. If the responsible party does not remedy the municipal ordinance violation within the period set forth in the correction notice, the enforcement official may issue the responsible party an administrative citation pursuant to section 2-1184. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-5), 3-4-2002) 
State Law reference— Time period to correct certain violations required, Government Code § 53069.4(a)(2).  
Sec. 2-1186. - Responsible party's obligations. 
Within 21 days from the date the administrative citation is issued, the responsible party shall pay the fine amount designated on the administrative citation and may also make a written request for an administrative hearing. As used herein, the "date the administrative citation is issued" shall mean the date the administrative citation is released from the enforcement official's possession by any of the methods specified in section 2-1184. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-6), 3-4-2002, Ord. No. 4152, § 3, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 2-1187. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  Amount . The amount of administrative fines shall be determined by resolution of the city council, which shall include penalty charges for late payments and increased fines for repeated violations. The fine amounts for infractions set forth in other sections of this Code shall not apply to this division and shall in no way limit the amounts which may be imposed for administrative fines. However, the fine amounts shall not exceed the maximums set forth in Government Code § 36900(b). 
(b)  Continuing violation . Each and every day during any portion of which any municipal ordinance violation is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Payment of fine . The responsible party must pay the administrative fine within 21 days from the date the administrative citation is issued. 
(d)  Obligation to correct violation . Nothing in this division shall be interpreted to mean that, because a responsible party has paid the administrative fine, he or she is not required to correct the municipal ordinance violation. Failure to correct the municipal ordinance violation may result in additional fines. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-7), 3-4-2002, Ord. no. 4152, § 4, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 2-1188. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  Ability to contest administrative citation . Any responsible party to whom an administrative citation has been issued may contest that there was a violation of this Code or that he or she is the responsible party by filing a written request with the enforcement official for a hearing within 21 days from the date of issuance of the administrative citation. Such request shall be accompanied by full payment of the administrative fine or written proof that the fine has been waived or deferred by the enforcement official. No hearing shall be set without full payment of the administrative fine or written proof that the fine has been waived or deferred. The enforcement official may waive or defer the fine based on the criteria set forth in section 50-218(a) of this Code. The enforcement official shall set a date for a hearing within 60 days of the request. 
(b)  Notification of hearing . At least 21 days prior to the date of the hearing, the city shall, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal service, give notice in English and Spanish to the responsible party of the time, date and location of the hearing. The city also shall provide the responsible party in advance with any materials provided to the hearing officer. 
(c)  Hearing officer . Appointment and responsibilities of the hearing officer shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The enforcement official shall appoint a person who shall preside at the hearing and hear all facts and testimony presented and deemed appropriate (hereinafter referred to as the "hearing officer"). 
(2)  Any person designated to serve as a hearing officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest, or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure § 170.1. The responsible party may challenge the hearing officer's impartiality by filing a statement with the enforcement official objecting to the hearing before the hearing officer and setting forth the grounds for disqualification. The question of disqualification shall be heard and determined in writing by the enforcement official within 30 days following the date on which the disqualification statement is filed. 
(d)  Administrative hearing procedures . Administrative hearing procedures are as follows: 
(1)  The administrative hearing is intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of the Evidence Code and discovery shall not apply, except that irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded at the hearing officer's discretion. 
(2)  Each party shall have the opportunity to offer testimony and evidence and cross examine witnesses in support of his case. 
(3)  Pursuant to Penal Code § 196, a responsible party shall not be entitled to a jury for an infraction charge, nor shall a responsible party be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him. 
(4)  The hearing officer may continue the hearing or request additional information from either side. 
(e)  Administrative order . The administrative order shall be issued in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Within ten working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall provide the responsible party with his decision in writing (referred to as "administrative order"). The hearing officer shall provide the responsible party with the administrative order by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the responsible party's last known address. 
(2)  The administrative order shall contain the hearing officer's reasons for the decision and the procedure described in section 2-1189 for seeking judicial review. 
(3)  A decision in favor of the responsible party shall constitute a dismissal of the municipal ordinance violation. The city shall promptly return any monies paid by the responsible party. 
(4)  If the hearing officer renders a decision in favor of the city, the responsible party must comply with the administrative order or seek judicial review of the administrative order pursuant to section 2-1189. 
(f)  Failure to attend administrative hearing . The effects of failing to attend the administrative hearing are as follows: 
(1)  Waiver of right of hearing. The responsible party's failure to appear at a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing, a forfeiture of the fine, and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(2)  Good cause. Upon a showing of good cause by the responsible party, the hearing officer may excuse the responsible party's failure to appear at the hearing and reschedule the hearing. Under no circumstances shall the hearing be rescheduled more than one time. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-8), 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 4152, § 5, 1-23-2012) 
Cross reference— Administrative hearings on validity of impoundment of vehicles by police, § 14-141 et seq.  
Sec. 2-1189. - Judicial review. 
If an administrative order is rendered in favor of the city pursuant to this division, the responsible party may seek judicial review of the administrative order by filing an appeal, pursuant to Government Code § 53069.4, within 20 calendar days after service of the administrative order. Pursuant to Government Code § 53069.4, the appealing party shall serve a copy of the appeal notice in person or by first class mail upon the city. Appeal notices shall be sent to the city clerk. If no appeal notice is filed within the 20-calendar-day period, the decision shall be deemed confirmed and final. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-9), 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 4152, § 6, 1-23-2012) 
State Law reference— Judicial review, Government Code § 53069.4(b).  
Sec. 2-1190. - Failure to comply. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "default" shall mean any of the following occurrences: 
(1)  The responsible party fails to either pay the administrative fine within ten working days from the date the administrative citation is issued. 
(2)  The responsible party fails to either comply with the administrative order or to seek judicial review of the administrative order. 
(b)  Late penalty. The occurrence of a default may result in the city increasing the administrative fine, not to exceed the maximum amounts set forth in the council resolution adopted pursuant to section 2-1187(a). 
(c)  Account receivable. Upon the occurrence of a default, the city may treat the administrative fine or penalty fine, whichever is applicable, as an account receivable, subject to the established policy for delinquent accounts receivable. 
(d)  Misdemeanor. Except for the failure to pay an applicable administrative fine, a default shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of $1,000.00 or six months in jail or both. 
(e)  Collection. The city may use all appropriate legal means to collect the fines imposed pursuant to this division. 
(f)  Lien against property. The city council may pass a resolution to place a lien on the real property upon which the violation occurred to collect any unpaid administrative and/or penalty fines as a special assessment against the real property. The resolution shall further direct that the city clerk shall file with the county auditor and the county tax assessor and tax collector certified copies of the resolution. The clerk shall direct the auditor to enter the amounts of the fines against the real property described in the resolution as it appears on the current assessment roll. The amount of the fines shall constitute a lien against the real property against which the fines have been imposed. The tax collector shall include the amount of the fines on bills for taxes levied against the real property. Thereafter, the amount of the charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same person as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest upon delinquent payment. 
(Ord. No. 3950, § 1(5.2-10), 3-4-2002)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 4017, § 1, adopted December 13, 2004, amended chapter 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 6, §§ 6-1—6-9, 6-41—6-49, 6-71—6-75, 6-111—6-113 pertained to similar provisions, and derived from §§ 4-1—4-26 of the 1959 Code; Ord. No. 3225, § 1,(part); Ord. No. 3282, § 1; Ord. No. 3370, §§ 1(part), 2. 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; animal noise, § 18-315. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, Penal Code § 596 et seq.; dogs generally, Food and Agricultural Code § 30501 et seq.; cats, Food and Agricultural Code § 31751 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Domestic animal includes horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese and all other domestic animals and birds normally found in the Continental United States of America, except swine and household pets. 
Enclosed premises means any lot or premises so enclosed as to prevent any confined animal or fowl from escaping therefrom. 
Exotic animal means any species that cannot be legally bought or sold as a pet in the State of California or requires special permitting from the United States Department of Agriculture or the California Department of Fish and Game. 
Guide dog means any guide dog or seeing eye dog which was trained by a person licensed under the provisions of Chapter 9.5 (commencing with section 7200 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code.) 
Household pets include dogs, cats, canaries, parrots and other birds and animals ordinarily kept as household pets. 
License collector means the Executive Director of the Inland Valley Humane Society his/her deputies and assistants. 
Shelter manager means the Executive Director of the Inland Valley Humane Society his/her deputies and assistants. 
Signal dog means any dog trained to alert a deaf person, or person whose hearing is impaired, to intruders or sounds. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-2. - Penalties for violation—Enforcing officer. 
Any person violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney of Los Angeles County, unless otherwise specified. The shelter manager shall enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-3. - Slaughtering and slaughterhouses. 
No person shall establish or maintain any slaughterhouse or slaughter any cattle, sheep, horses, goats or hogs or any other animal, fowl or reptile, except rabbits and chickens for domestic use within the city. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-4. - Certain animals and reptiles prohibited. 
Except as otherwise permitted in the city's zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, section .436(1)(m), it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit to be maintained any of the following on any premises within the city: 
(1)  Swine. 
(2)  Dangerous or poisonous reptiles. 
(3)  Bees. 
(4)  Male goats. 
(5)  Exotic animal. 
However, any such animal may be kept in the city after the owner or custodian of an exotic animal applies for an exotic animal permit from the shelter manager. The shelter manager may issue a permit upon the payment of a fee set by resolution of the city council. This permit will require that the animal be properly caged, maintained and fed and that the owner or custodian has complied with all other applicable laws, ordinances and required permits of the county or state. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 6-5. - Roosters prohibited. 
(a)  No rooster shall be kept on any parcel in the city. The shelter manager shall impound any rooster found in the city. The owner or his/her representative must redeem impounded roosters within 48 hours; failure to redeem within this time shall be deemed to be a forfeiture of the rooster. The owner shall be liable for all impound fees at the time of redemption. Any owner must, as a precondition to the release of the rooster, provide the shelter manager a relocation address outside of the city limits or the intended disposition of the redeemed rooster. The shelter manager may retain the rooster if the redeeming party cannot provide relocation/disposition information that is in accordance with this section. The owner of the rooster shall be liable for all impound and care fees associated with the retention of the rooster. The shelter manager may destroy any rooster not redeemed within 48 hours. 
(b)  It shall be an infraction to provide false information to the shelter manager regarding the relocation address or disposition of a redeemed rooster. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-6. - Animal noise and nuisance animals—Public nuisance. 
(a)  No person shall keep upon any premises in the city, any rooster, peacock, or any other bird or animal which by any sound or cry violates article VII of chapter 18 pertaining to noise. 
(b)  Any animal(s) repeatedly at large, which molests passersby or passing vehicle, attacks or kills other animals, damages/trespasses on public or private property, barks, whines, howls, cries or makes any loud noises in a continuous or untimely fashion, shall be considered a public nuisance. 
(c)  Upon receipt in writing of such nuisance from at least two persons from separate households in the immediate neighborhood, the city or its agent shall issue a notice to abate said nuisance to the owner of the animal or animals or the occupant of said premises in question giving a reasonable amount of time to abate the nuisance. 
(d)  Any person who maintains permits or allows a public nuisance to exist upon his or her property or the premises of another, after reasonable notice in writing from the city or its agents shall be a violation of this section and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. Each day the nuisance continues to exist shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-7. - Running at large. 
No person owning, having an interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, custody or possession of any domestic animal shall allow it to be loose upon any public street or unenclosed lot in the city or to go upon the premises of any other person without the consent of that person or owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-8. - Presence on sidewalks, streets or public rights-of-way. 
No person shall ride, drive or lead any domestic animal upon any sidewalk, street or public right-of-way, except horses on designated equestrian trails. This section shall have no application to parades, animal shows and other types of exhibitions when proper permits have been obtained from the city. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46.  
Sec. 6-9. - Retaining possession of unowned household pet or domestic animal; report. 
No person shall possess any household pet or domestic animal for a period of more than 24 hours without the consent of its owner unless such person shall report it to the shelter manager, who then has the right to impound such animal. The person finding such animal shall, if the owner does not appear, have the first option to adopt the animal, if the shelter manager deems the animal adoptable. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-10. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  The shelter manager, as defined, and his/her deputies and assistants shall have the authority to issue administrative citations for violation of any provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to the current agreement in place between the city and the Inland Valley Humane Society, any fines or penalties due under the citations shall be payable to the Inland Valley Humane Society. 
(b)  The shelter manager and his/her deputies and assistants shall have the authority to issue notices to appear in court pursuant to Chapter 5c (commencing with Section 853.5 of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California) for violations of state and local animal control laws. This authority is based on Section 14503 of the Corporations Code. Animal control officers shall have the authority provided by state law including but not limited to that described by Penal Code section 830.9. 
(Ord. No. 4162, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Secs. 6-11—6-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs, Food and Agricultural Code, § 30501 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-41. - Limitation on number of dogs and cats kept. 
No person shall keep more than three adult dogs or four adult cats, for a combined total of no more than five animals, upon any premises within the city, except puppies or kittens under the age of eight weeks. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-42. - License; application; permanent tags; fee exemption. 
(a)  Persons owning; having an interest in; harboring; or having charge, care, custody or possession of any dog or cat over four months of age or kept within the city for more than 30 days shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  A dog or cat license shall be required for any dog or cat within 30 days after the dog or cat becomes four months of age or within 30 days after the dog or cat is brought into the city, if the dog or cat is over four months of age. 
(c)  An application for a dog or cat license shall be made to the shelter manager or license collector along with payment of the appropriate license fee and applicable penalties as set by the city council by resolution. For each initial dog and cat license issued, a permanent tag stamped with the county and the year of initial issue and numbered to correspond with the dog or cat license will also be issued. 
(d)  A dog or cat license may be issued for a period of one year but no more than three years. The corresponding tag shall be permanently issued to the specifically licensed dog or cat and shall not be transferrable. A duplicate tag may be issued upon completion of a replacement tag request form submitted to the shelter manager or license collector along with payment of a tag replacement fee. 
(e)  The shelter manager or license collector shall keep a register of each dog or cat license issued, the corresponding tag number, name and address of the owner, description of the dog or cat, the date of issuance and the term of the license. The shelter manager or license collector shall provide a receipt for payment of the initial license fees received and the payment of license fees for each subsequent license term. Any license fees not paid prior to or within 30 days of expiration of the then-current license term shall be subject to late penalties. 
(f)  An exemption from payment of license fees shall apply to owners of guide dogs and signal dogs. Owners of guide dogs and signal dogs shall submit a license application to the shelter manager. Said application shall be exempt from payment of license fees and applicable tags will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004; Ord. No. 4243 , § 1, 12-18-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4243 , § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2017, amended the title of § 6-42 to read as herein set out. The former § 6-42 title pertained to license; application; fee exemption. 
State Law reference— Dog license fee authorized, Food and Agricultural Code § 38792.  
Sec. 6-43. - Management and care of dogs generally. 
Every person owning, having an interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, custody or possession of any dog shall observe the following rules concerning the management and care of such dog: 
(1)  Dogs shall be supplied with sufficient food and water. 
(2)  Proper shelter and protection from the weather shall be provided for dogs at all times. 
(3)  All dogs shall be enclosed in shelters after 10:00 p.m., and they shall remain therein until 7:00 a.m. During this period all reasonable means shall be exercised to restrain the dogs from barking. During this period of time, dogs may not be taken from such enclosed shelters unless they are controlled by a competent person. 
(4)  Dogs shall not be without attention for a period of time in excess of 18 consecutive hours. 
(5)  Every reasonable precaution shall be used to ensure that dogs are not teased or abused. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-44. - Barking or howling. 
No person shall violate article VII of chapter 18 pertaining to noise. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-45. - Absence from shelter during night. 
A dog not within an entirely closed shelter between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. may be impounded by the shelter manager who may enter private property for such purpose if such dog is reported to be a nuisance by a neighbor and the occupant of the premises is either not on the property or, after being given notice by the shelter manager, does not immediately put the dog into an entirely closed shelter. A dog so impounded may be returned to the owner upon payment of the boarding of such dog during the time it was impounded. If the dog is so impounded, notice thereof will be given by mail within 24 hours to the address the dog was taken of such impounding. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-46. - Leashing required. 
No person owning, having an interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any dog in the city shall cause or permit such dog to be at large or to run upon any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place or upon any private property or premises other than those of such person unless such dog is controlled by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length and is in the charge, care, control, custody or possession of a competent person. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-47. - Restraint of vicious dogs. 
Any owner or custodian of a dog who violates or permits any of the following violations is guilty of a misdemeanor, notwithstanding any other criminal prosecution that may result from permitting such violation(s): 
(1)  Any owner or person having an interest in, harboring or having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any vicious dog, or any dog of a predatory nature shall not allow such dog upon the premises of any other person without the consent of that person or owner of the property or to be upon a public street, sidewalk or any public place or place open to the public, except when muzzled and held under leash by an able-bodied person. 
(2)  Any dog, while not on the property of its owner or custodian, on more than one occasion has broken the skin of any person or has attacked or killed any domestic or household pet shall be considered vicious. 
(3)  Any dog, regardless of where the incident occurs, attacks and severely injures or kills a human being shall be considered vicious. 
(4)  Upon documentation and verification of any severe injury or death by a vicious dog, the owner or custodian of the dog shall relinquish custody of the dog to the shelter manager. The shelter manager shall then proceed in accordance with California Food and Agriculture Code, Chapter 9, Articles 1—5. 
(5)  The owner or custodian of the relinquished dog shall be liable for all costs incurred to house the dog and any legal fees incurred in the California Food and Agriculture Code, Chapter 9, Articles 1—5 proceedings. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, severe injury means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears, a disfiguring laceration or requires multiple sutures or corrective cosmetic surgery. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004) 
State Law reference— Local potentially dangerous or vicious dog control program, Food and Agricultural Code § 31683.  
Sec. 6-48. - Rabies vaccination required—Dogs and cats. 
Every person owning or harboring any dog or cat over four months of age in the city shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated with rabies vaccine by a person licensed by the state to practice veterinary medicine. The veterinary practitioner shall send a copy of the rabies certificate to the shelter manager. The license collector shall require proof of rabies control vaccination of the dog or cat to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-49. - Management and care of cats generally. 
Persons owning, having an interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, custody or possession of any cat shall observe the following provisions concerning the management and care of such cat(s): 
(1)  No household shall maintain or care for more than four cats that are over eight weeks old. 
a.  Upon adoption of this section, any owner/household who possess and intends to keep more than four cats must notify the shelter master of such intent within 90 days after the adoption of this section. Such owners shall register and pay an annual fee of $5.00 per cat for each cat over the four-cat limit (not to exceed a cumulative total of $200.00). 
(2)  Any cat over six months old that is allowed outdoors shall be spayed or neutered. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-50. - Licensing requirements for cat kennels. 
Any person having current non-profit Section 501(c)(3) status as a Cat Adoption/Fostering Program may apply to the Inland Valley Humane Society on a yearly basis for a cat kennel license. The fee for a cat kennel license shall be set by city council resolution. A licensed cat kennel shall comply with the following provisions and all state and other local laws: 
(1)  No person/organization shall have more than 80 cats total, including kittens under eight weeks of age. 
(2)  All cats must be confined to kennels and may not roam off the property of the owner or custodian. 
(3)  All cats available for adoption must be healthy and either spayed or neutered. 
(4)  A humane officer shall inspect the kennel at least once a year and upon receipt of any complaint regarding the kennel. 
(5)  The licensee shall actively pursue adoptions for the cats in their program. 
(6)  All provisions of section 6-50 must be strictly adhered to. 
(7)  The license may be permanently revoked upon verification of cruelty to any animal or any three violations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Secs. 6-51—6-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Public pounds, Food and Agricultural Code § 32001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Duties of shelter manager. 
The shelter manager shall seize and impound all dogs found running at large within the city and shall keep such dogs in the shelter until they shall have been either redeemed or humanely destroyed, and shall keep a written record of these activities. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-72. - Right of entry. 
The shelter manager in the immediate pursuit of a stray dog or untagged cat shall have the right to enter upon any public or private property within the city, excepting a building designed and used for residential purposes, for the purpose of capturing the dog or cat so that the dog or cat may be examined and impounded. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-73. - Disposition after impoundment. 
The shelter manager shall keep any stray dog not bearing a license tag or any untagged cat for a period of three business days, excluding the day of impoundment, to allow the animal to be claimed by its owner. Any person, during this period, who claims ownership may redeem such dog or cat, provided that he has proof of ownership and the dog or cat is validly licensed. If any stray dog or cat is unclaimed within the three business days, or any dog or cat bearing a license tag is not claimed, the shelter manager shall offer such dog or cat for adoption or humanely destroy the dog or cat, in accordance with California Food and Agriculture Code Sections 31108 and 31752. The shelter manager may, however, humanely destroy any impounded animal on the same day it is impounded if, in the opinion of the shelter manager, it is in great pain due to an injury or has an infectious disease which may be detrimental to the health of other animals at the shelter. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-74. - Obstruction of enforcement—Payment of fees. 
No person shall resist or obstruct the shelter manager in the performance of his duties under this chapter. No household pet or other animal impounded shall be redeemed except upon payment to the shelter manager the fees and boarding costs set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-75. - Contracting for shelter services authorized. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city council from contracting with any public body or nonprofit organization for administering this article and operating the shelter. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Secs. 6-76—6-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PET SHOPS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30. 
 
Sec. 6-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pet shop means any place where pets are kept and offered for sale as part of the business of selling pets. 
Pets means all dogs, puppies, cats, kittens, monkeys, canaries, parrots, parakeets, goldfish, tropical fish, chameleons, turtles and other such animals, fowl, fish and reptiles, including all other animals, fowl, fish or reptiles which, although they may not be of like kind, are kept, used or offered for sale as pets such as chicks, ducklings, rabbits and lambs. 
The business of selling pets means raising or purchasing pets for the purpose of selling them at retail or wholesale for a profit. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-112. - Authority of shelter manager. 
The shelter manager is authorized to enter upon the premises of any pet shop and inspect the premises at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Sec. 6-113. - Operating requirements. 
All owners and operators of pet shops shall: 
(1)  Post a notice, framed and enclosed under glass, legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the building, containing the names, addresses and telephone numbers of persons to notify any hour of the day or night who will proceed immediately to the location so as to permit entry to the premises by the shelter manager. 
(2)  Supply all animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of such animals require. 
(3)  Keep quarters of all animals in a clean and sanitary condition and maintain adequate ventilation. 
(4)  Provide proper shelter and protection from the weather at all times and not allow animals to be overcrowded nor exposed to excessive heat or cold, keep quarters draftfree, and maintain proper temperature for the well-being of the animals at all times. 
(5)  Make provisions that the animals shall not be without attention over 18 consecutive hours. 
(6)  Use every reasonable precaution to ensure that animals are not teased or mistreated. 
(7)  Keep for sale or exhibition only animals, which are strong and healthy. 
(8)  Maintain animals in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape, assume full responsibility for recapturing any animal that escapes and take all reasonable precautions to protect the public from the animals and the animals from the public. 
(9)  Isolate sick or diseased animals from healthy animals at all times. 
(10)  Not permit animals which are enemies by nature or which are temperamentally unsuited to be quartered together or so near each other as to cause the animal fear, torment or annoyance. 
(Ord. No. 4017, § 1, 12-13-2004)  
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, § 901 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Municipal elections generally, Elections Code §§ 9200 et seq., 10100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Boundaries of council districts. 
(a)  First council district. The first council district shall consist of that portion of the city as set forth in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit A and incorporated in this section by this reference. The area set forth in the boundaries labeled with the number "1" and as more particularly described in the legal description attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit B and incorporated in this section by this reference shall be known as council district no. 1. 
(b)  Second council district. The second council district shall consist of that portion of the city as set forth in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit A and incorporated in this section by this reference. The area set forth in the boundaries labeled with the number "2" and as more particularly described in the legal description attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit B and incorporated in this section by this reference shall be known as council district no. 2. 
(c)  Third council district. The third council district shall consist of that portion of the city as set forth in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit A and incorporated in this section by this reference. The area set forth in the boundaries labeled with the number "3" and as more particularly described in the legal description attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit B and incorporated in this section by this reference shall be known as council district no. 3. 
(d)  Fourth council district. The fourth council district shall consist of that portion of the city as set forth in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit A and incorporated in this section by this reference. The area set forth in the boundaries labeled with the number "4" and as more particularly described in the legal description attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit B and incorporated in this section by this reference shall be known as council district no. 4. 
(e)  Fifth council district. The fifth council district shall consist of that portion of the city as set forth in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit A and incorporated in this section by this reference. The area set forth in the boundaries labeled with the number "5" and as more particularly described in the legal description attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit B and incorporated in this section by this reference shall be known as council district no. 5. 
(f)  Sixth council district. The sixth council district shall consist of that portion of the city as set forth in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit A and incorporated in this section by this reference. The area set forth in the boundaries labeled with the number "6" and as more particularly described in the legal description attached to the ordinance codified in this section as exhibit B and incorporated in this section by this reference shall be known as council district no. 6. 
(Code 1959, § 1-16; Ord. No. 2603, § 1; Ord. No. 3563, § 1) 
Charter reference— Council district boundaries, §§ 202, 203.  
Secs. 10-2—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal campaign finance, § 1401 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to limit campaign contributions in municipal elections, Elections Code § 10202, Government Code § 85703; limitations on contributions, Government Code § 85100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The problem of campaign expenditures has become a serious reality of American politics, and campaigns in the city are not excepted. Incidental to the high cost of election campaigning is the problem of improper influence, real or potential, exercised by campaign contributors over elected officials. 
(b)  It is the purpose and intent of the city council in enacting this article to: 
(1)  Place realistic and enforceable limits on the amounts individuals may contribute to political campaigns in municipal elections; 
(2)  Ensure and promote integrity, honesty and fairness in the decisions of public policy; 
(3)  Ensure that funds and services donated to a candidate or campaign committee are used solely for lawful campaign purposes; 
(4)  Ensure a level of discussion of public issues adequate for a viable political campaign; 
(5)  Provide opportunity for all citizens to become candidates for public office unhindered by a need to meet exorbitant campaign costs; and 
(6)  Provide full and fair enforcement of all the sections of this article. 
(c)  In seeking to establish such realistic limitations, it is the intent of the city council to promote a broader and more open participation by all citizens in the electoral process, and it is in no way intended that such limitations should act to deprive or restrict any citizen in the exercise of rights guaranteed under the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-1; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Campaign contribution means any transfer, pledge or loan of money or a thing of value, including any in-kind contribution as defined by state law, made by a person or committee to a council candidate, committee, or for the purpose of supporting the election of such council candidate to the city council, or any transfer, pledge or loan of money or a thing of value, including any in-kind contribution as defined by state law, made by a person or committee to another person or committee for the purpose of supporting or opposing the election of a council candidate or committee, except to the extent that full and adequate consideration is received for such transfer, pledge or loan. The term "campaign contribution" includes any payment made by a person for admission to a fundraising event conducted by or on behalf of a council candidate such as dinners, luncheons and rallies; the granting of discounts or rebates to a council candidate not extended to the public generally; or the granting of discounts or rebates of television stations, radio stations and newspapers to an individual council candidate not extended on an equal basis to all council candidates seeking election to the city council. The term "campaign contribution" shall not include a council candidate's own money or property used on behalf of his candidacy; personal services performed by a person campaigning for or against a council candidate if no compensation is paid, either directly or indirectly, to the person performing such services; or travel expenses incurred by a person campaigning for or against a council candidate if no reimbursement is made, directly or indirectly, for the expenses incurred by such person. 
Candidate means any individual listed on the ballot for nomination for or election to any city office or who has otherwise taken affirmative action to seek nomination or election to city office. 
Committee means any person or combination of two or more persons acting jointly on behalf of or in opposition to a candidate for municipal office or to the qualification for the ballot including the recall of any municipal officer. The term "committee" shall also include any person or combination of two or more persons, whether or not they have filed any documents formalizing their association or organization, as required by state law. 
Election means any primary, general or special municipal election held in the city, including a recall election. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-2; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3755, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions generally, Government Code § 82000 et seq.  
Sec. 10-33. - Supplementation of state law. 
This article is intended to supplement the Political Reform Act of 1974 (Government Code § 81000 et seq.). Unless otherwise provided in this article, words and phrases used in this article, including reporting periods and thresholds, shall have the same meaning as defined in the Political Reform Act of 1974. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-3; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-34. - Campaign contribution limitations. 
(a)  No person other than a candidate shall make and no person or candidate shall solicit or accept any contribution which will cause the total amount contributed by such person with respect to a single election in support of or opposition to a candidate, including contributions to all committees supporting or opposing such candidate, to exceed the following: 
(1)  For any city council candidate, $500.00. 
(2)  For any mayoral candidate, $1,000.00. 
(b)  Loans for use in connection with an election for a period of more than 30 days are prohibited. Loans of more than $500.00 for use in connection with an election are prohibited. Loans to a candidate or his controlled committees shall be counted against the contribution limitations applicable to that candidate; provided, however, a candidate is not prohibited from obtaining a personal loan of any amount from a duly licensed financial lending institution in the regular course of business. 
(c)  Any contributions solicited or accepted pursuant to this section shall be expended only in connection with the candidacy for the office specified in the candidate's declaration of intent to solicit and receive contributions. 
(d)  For purposes of this section the primary and general elections are considered two separate single elections. 
(e)  For purposes of this section the limits in this section shall apply on a calendar-year basis. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-4; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3755, § 1 (part)) 
Charter reference— Voluntary campaign expenditure ceiling, § 1401.  
Sec. 10-35. - Cash contributions. 
No person shall make and no candidate or committee shall solicit or accept any cash contribution in excess of $99.00. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-5; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-36. - Anonymous contributions; reporting of contributions. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly make and no candidate or committee shall solicit or accept any anonymous contributions with the intent of avoiding the reporting requirements of this article or state law. Any such contributions received by the candidate or committee shall be promptly paid over to the city treasurer for deposit in the general fund of the city. 
(b)  All contributions, including campaign contributions, in the amount of $25.00 or more value shall be reported as required by this article or state law. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-6; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3755, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-37. - Campaign expenditures uncontrolled by candidate or committee. 
Persons or organizations not subject to the control of a candidate but who make expenditures on his behalf shall indicate clearly on any material published, displayed or broadcast that it was not authorized by the candidate, when such expenditures in whole or part would have been covered by the limitations of this article if they were subject to the control of the candidate. Such persons or organizations shall comply with all filing requirements imposed upon candidates and committees by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-7; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-38. - Unexpended contributions. 
If a candidate cancels his declaration of intent to solicit and receive contributions for a particular office, ceases to be a candidate or fails to qualify for an office for which contributions have been solicited or accepted, or if there remains a balance in a campaign checking account of a candidate or committee after the date of the election in which the candidate appeared on the ballot, all unexpended funds remaining in the account shall be returned on a pro rata basis to those who have made the contributions or be donated to one or more charitable organizations qualifying for federal income tax exemption. However, a maximum of $5,000.00 in unexpended funds may be retained by a candidate or committee and may be used for any political purpose or other lawful use. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-8; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-39. - Assumed name contributions. 
Under this article no contribution shall be made, directly or indirectly, by any person or combination of persons acting jointly in a name other than the name by which they are identified for legal purposes nor in the name of another person or received from another person on the condition that it be used as a contribution. If it is discovered by a candidate or committee treasurer that a contribution has been received in violation of this article, the candidate or treasurer shall promptly pay the amount received in violation of this article to the city treasurer for deposit in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-9; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-40. - Disclosure of records required from suppliers of goods, facilities and services. 
No person who supplies goods, facilities or services to a candidate or committee for use in connection with a campaign shall knowingly refuse to divulge or disclose to the city clerk the record of any expenditures made by the candidate or committee in payment for such goods, facilities or services. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-10; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-41. - Duties of city clerk. 
(a)  The city clerk shall administer this article. In addition to other duties required by the city clerk under the terms of this article, the city clerk shall: 
(1)  Supply appropriate forms and manuals prescribed by the state fair political commission. These forms and manuals shall be furnished to all candidates and committees and to all other persons required to file reports. 
(2)  Determine whether required documents have been filed and, if so, whether they conform on their face with the requirements of state law. 
(3)  Notify promptly all persons and known committees who have failed to file a document in the form and at the time required by state law. 
(4)  Report apparent violations of this article and applicable state law to the appropriate authorities. 
(5)  Compile and maintain a current list of all statements or parts of statements filed with the city clerk's office pertaining to each candidate. 
(6)  Furnish a copy of this article to each candidate for elective city office. 
(b)  In addition to all other duties set forth in this section, the city clerk shall be authorized to impose a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation of this article. Prior to imposing any fine, the city clerk shall conduct an administrative hearing to review the circumstances surrounding the alleged violation of this article. Prior to conducting the hearing, the city clerk shall provide the accused violator with notice of the date of the hearing and the specific violation and applicable Code section at least ten business days prior to the hearing. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-11; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3755, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq.  
Sec. 10-42. - Construction of article. 
This article shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purposes, and no error, irregularity, informality and no neglect or omission of any officer in any procedure taken under this article which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the council or the city to control campaign contributions and expenditures shall avoid the effect of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-12; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-43. - Payments for communications to members, employees, shareholders, etc., of organization for purpose of supporting or opposing candidate. 
For purposes of this article, payments for communications to members, employees, shareholders, or families of members, employees, or shareholders of an organization for the purpose of supporting or opposing a candidate are not contributions or expenditures, provided those payments are not made for general public advertising such as broadcasting, billboards, and newspaper advertisements. However, payments made by a political party for communications to its members who are registered with that party which would otherwise qualify as contributions or expenditures shall be reported in accordance with this article. 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, Government Code §§ 85312, 85713.  
Sec. 10-44. - Penalty. 
Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any section of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any criminal penalties authorized by law, the city clerk shall be authorized to impose a fine in the amount not to exceed $1,000.00 pursuant to section 10-41. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-13; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3755, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-45. - Effect of violation on outcome of election. 
If a candidate is convicted of a violation of any section of this article and if the court determines that the violation was substantial and that it might have had a bearing on the outcome of the election: 
(1)  If such conviction become final before the date of the election, the votes for such candidate shall not be counted, and the election shall be determined on the basis of the votes cast for the other candidates in that race. 
(2)  If such conviction becomes final after the date of the election and if such candidate was declared to have been elected, such candidate shall not assume office, and the office shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled as otherwise provided by state law. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-14; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 10-46. - Verification. 
All declarations, reports and statements filed under this article shall be signed and verified by the filer under penalty of perjury. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1-15; Ord. No. 3682, § 1 (part))  
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES COST RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Scope. 
This article does not apply to services rendered by the fire department  
Sec. 14-32. - Charges. 
There shall be charged in connection with the provision by the city of enumerated public safety services a fee or charge sufficient to recover some or all of the costs reasonably borne by the city in providing such public safety services. Public safety services provided by the city subject to a fee or charge shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall include only public safety services which the city council finds are provided to small segments of the citizens of the city or to nonresidents of the city. The amount of any such fee or charge shall be set by resolution of the city council, and such fee or charge shall not exceed the costs reasonably borne by the city in providing such public safety services. 
(Code 1959, § 14-50; Ord. No. 3420, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-33. - Determination of costs reasonably borne. 
The costs reasonably borne by the city in providing public safety services shall be determined by reference to the following elements: 
(1)  All applicable direct costs, including but not limited to salaries, wages, fringe benefits, services and supplies, operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred. 
(2)  All applicable indirect costs, including but not restricted to building maintenance and operation, equipment maintenance, communication, printing and reproduction and like indirect expenses. 
(3)  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city administrator, finance department, city treasurer, city clerk, city attorney, police department, and all other staff and support services. 
(4)  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his supporting expenses. 
(Code 1959, § 14-51; Ord. No. 3420, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 14-34—14-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency services, Government Code § 8550 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-71. - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this article are to provide for: 
(1)  The preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in an emergency; 
(2)  The direction of the emergency organization; and 
(3)  The coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Code 1959, § 6-1; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, complications resulting from the year 2000 problem, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the state public utilities commission. 
(Code 1959, § 6-2; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 8558(c).  
Sec. 14-73. - Disaster council membership. 
The city disaster council is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The mayor, who shall be chair. 
(2)  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chair. 
(3)  The executive director of emergency services. 
(4)  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of the city. 
(5)  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans', professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 6-3; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-74. - Disaster council powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the disaster council and it is hereby empowered to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chair or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chair. 
(Code 1959, § 6-4; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Local disaster councils, Government Code § 8610 et seq.  
Sec. 14-75. - Offices of director and executive director of emergency services created. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
(b)  There is hereby created the office of executive director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Code 1959, § 6-5; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-76. - Powers and duties of director and executive director of emergency services. 
(a)  The director of emergency services is hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
(2)  Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
(3)  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this article. 
(4)  Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
(5)  Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this article. 
(6)  If a local emergency is proclaimed as provided in this article, if a state of emergency is proclaimed by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or if a state of war emergency exists: 
a.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council. 
b.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, commandeer the vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties for public use. 
c.  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, if a state of emergency is proclaimed in the county in which the city is located or if a state of war emergency exists, command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers. 
d.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency. 
e.  Execute all his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this article or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this article adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
(b)  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect if the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
(c)  The executive director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency services chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Code 1959, § 6-6; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-77. - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under section 14-76(a)(6)c., be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 6-7; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-78. - Emergency operations plan. 
The city disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency operations plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 6-8; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-79. - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 6-9; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-80. - Violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, during an emergency, to: 
(1)  Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this article. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, if such act is of a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Code 1959, § 6-10; Ord. No. 3180, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Local emergency regulations, Government Code § 8634.  
Secs. 14-81—14-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City police department/chief of police, § 706. 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-321 et seq.; obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers, § 58-4; police department traffic safety report, § 58-44. 
State Law reference— Police protection generally, Government Code § 38630 et seq.; law enforcement officer training, Penal Code § 13500 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-111. - Composition. 
The police department of the city shall consist of a chief of police, an assistant chief of police, captains, lieutenants, desk sergeants, traffic officers, detectives, patrol officers, and such other officers and police officers as may be appointed under the authority of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 22-1; Ord. No. 750, § 1)  
Sec. 14-112. - Powers and duties of police chief. 
The chief of police shall be the chief executive officer of the police department and, subject to the police commissioner and such rules and regulations as the council may prescribe, shall have full charge of the police force and be vested with the authority and duty to: 
(1)  Have direct control, management and direction of all officers and employees of the police department and the power to detail them to such public service as may, in his judgment, be necessary, always looking to the best interests of the city and the efficiency of the department. He shall also have control of such apparatus and equipment as may be necessary for the proper and lawful functioning of his office. 
(2)  Designate the equipment of the department, such as guns and other hardware, style and color of uniforms, etc. 
(3)  Carry out and enforce the rules and regulations of the police department and be able to suspend or remove any officer for cause, in such manner as provided in this article. 
(4)  Observe the general conditions of the police department and equipment and make comprehensive monthly and annual reports to the council of departmental activities and expenses. 
(5)  Investigate all complaints of violations of this Code, city ordinances, laws of the state and federal laws and see that all sections of this Code, ordinances of the city and laws of the state and United States are enforced. 
(Code 1959, § 22-2; Ord. No. 750, § 2)  
Sec. 14-113. - Powers and duties of assistant chief. 
The assistant chief of police shall rank next to the chief of police and shall have similar qualifications. He shall take complete charge in the absence of the chief and shall be vested with the same authority and duties while so acting. Arrangements shall be made so that the assistant chief shall, so far as possible, be present in the absence of the chief. It shall be at all times the duty of the assistant to aid the chief in every possible manner in the enforcement of the law, in maintaining discipline and in ensuring efficiency. 
(Code 1959, § 22-3; Ord. No. 750, § 3)  
Sec. 14-114. - Payment of legal advertising for lost property. 
Whenever any law provides that a finder is entitled to an article he found after a statutory period of time has elapsed after being deposited with the police department and any notice is required to be given by means of legal advertising in a newspaper, the finder, if he becomes entitled to claim such property, shall pay the city through its police department the cost of such legal advertising. Furthermore, if the owner should claim such article as a result of the advertising, the owner shall pay the city through its police department such advertising cost. 
(Code 1959, § 22-4.1; Ord. No. 2231, § 1)  
Sec. 14-115. - Authority to compel prisoners to work. 
(a)  Any person confined in the city jail under a judgment of fine or imprisonment for violation of any section of this Code, city ordinance or state law may be compelled to work and labor upon the streets or other public property or works within the city, under the control and supervision of the chief of police or any other responsible person during the term of such sentence. 
(b)  An order requiring any such person to so labor upon the streets or other public property or works may be made at any time during the period of the sentence of such person at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(Code 1959, § 22-5; Ord. No. 1071, § 1)  
Sec. 14-116. - Investigation fees. 
Any investigation required to be made by the police department as a condition for the issuance or renewal of a permit or license, such as a license to carry a concealed weapon, shall not be made or such permit or license issued until the applicant has paid to the city a sum as determined by the chief of police equal to the expense of the police department in making such investigation, including the cost of processing through the state noncriminal fingerprint cards, unless a fee for such investigation and issuance of permit is specifically provided for by another section of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 22-50; Ord. No. 2539, § 4)  
Secs. 14-117—14-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS ON VALIDITY OF IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES BY POLICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative hearing, § 2-1188. 
 
Sec. 14-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Impound means to seize or otherwise secure possession, custody, or control of a vehicle. 
Possessor means the person entitled to possession of a vehicle, whether by ownership or some other entitlement. 
(Code 1959, § 22-60; Ord. No. 2919A, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-142. - Right to administrative hearing. 
As to any vehicle impounded by or at the request of the police department, the possessor of the vehicle has a right to an administrative hearing to determine whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 22-61; Ord. No. 2919A, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-143. - Notice of procedural options. 
(a)  The following notice shall be given to possessors of vehicles in the manner set forth in subsection (b) of this section: 
"ATTENTION. As vehicle owners or other persons entitled to possession of impounded vehicles, you have the following options: 
A. You may recover possession of your vehicle by paying to the garage having custody of your vehicle the towing and any storage fees that may have accrued. 
B. If you take issue with the impoundment of your vehicle, you may: 
1. Recover possession of your vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees that have accrued to such garage and file a claim for damages with the City Clerk of the City of Pomona in accordance with the procedures provided by law. 
2. Within five (5) days of this notice demand that the Police Department provide an administrative hearing before a hearing officer as to whether there was a sufficient factual and legal basis for impounding your vehicle. Such hearing will be held within twenty-four (24) hours after the filing of your written demand with the Chief of Police. A determination that there was an insufficient factual or legal basis for impounding your vehicle will require the City of Pomona to pay the towing fee and the fee for storage. 
C. This notice has been given pursuant to Article IV, Division 2, of Chapter 14 of the Code of the City of Pomona." 
(b)  The notice set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be printed on 8½-inch by 5½-inch paper in type no smaller than ten point, which paper shall be given to persons inquiring into the whereabouts of or attempting to recover vehicles. The notice also shall appear on clearly visible signs located at all garages and police facilities where persons might reasonably be expected to inquire into the whereabouts of or attempt to recover their vehicles. Such signs shall be printed in letters no smaller than 18 point News Gothic bold type. 
(Code 1959, § 22-62; Ord. No. 2919A, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-144. - Hearing. 
The hearing held pursuant to this division is to be conducted before the chief of police, as the hearing officer, within 24 hours of the filing with the chief of police of a written demand therefor. Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the 24-hour period. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal fashion and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The police department shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. The person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such person is the possessor of the vehicle. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written summary of facts found, arguments presented, and reasons for such officer's decision. A copy of such summary shall be sent to both the possessor of the vehicle and the city attorney. 
(Code 1959, § 22-63; Ord. No. 2919A, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-145. - Decisions of hearing officer. 
Under this division the hearing officer shall only determine that, as to the vehicle in issue, either (i) there was probable cause to impound the vehicle or (ii) there was no such probable cause. If the hearing officer determines that there was no probable cause, the hearing officer, in addition to preparing the summary mentioned in section 14-144, shall sign and date a certificate of no probable cause, copies of which shall be given to the possessor of the vehicle and the city attorney. Upon receipt of the possessor's copy of such certificate, the garage in possession of the vehicle shall release the vehicle to the possessor of the vehicle upon payment of fees for storage beyond the day of the hearing. Towing fees and fees for storage up to and including the day of the hearing shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 22-64; Ord. No. 2919A, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 14-146—14-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COST RECOVERY FOR RESPONSES 
 
Sec. 14-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative costs means the cost of police personnel, facilities and/or equipment reasonably attributed to official police activities in response to a disturbance call and including storage costs for any impounded evidence. 
Disturbance call means a call for police assistance where there is unlawful conduct or a threat to the public peace, safety, health or general welfare. 
Gathering means a party or event on private property where a group of five or more persons have assembled or are assembled for a social occasion or for a social activity. 
Nonresident owner means the owner of the private property where a gathering is conducted who does not reside at the private property. 
Nonresident tenant means the tenant of the private property where a gathering is conducted. 
Person responsible means the person responsible for a gathering, who shall be deemed to be the following: 
(1)  The tenant of the premises where the gathering takes place, if the premises are tenant-occupied private property or a nonresident tenant with notice. 
(2)  The owner of the premises where the gathering takes place, if owner-occupied private property or a nonresident owner with notice. 
(3)  The person who organized the gathering, including, but not limited to, a promoter or agent of an event. 
(4)  If the person responsible for the gathering is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the administrative costs. 
Police response means any police actions reasonably necessary to prevent injury or harm to the persons at a gathering, the premises, neighboring premises, other persons, and/or public property, and/or law enforcement activities or operations reasonably necessary. 
Private property means improved or unimproved real property, not publicly owned, that is the locus of the gathering. 
Response-dispersal means there is an immediate threat to the public peace, safety, health or general welfare requiring an immediate dispersal of a gathering, upon the police department's first response. 
Unlawful conduct means any violation of municipal, state or federal laws, including infractions, misdemeanors or felonies. 
(Code 1959, § 22-141; Ord. No. 3603, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3885, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-172. - Intent. 
The purpose of this division is to allow for reimbursement to the police department for administrative costs related to second and subsequent responses to gatherings which cause disturbances on private property, including unlicensed paid admission dances or concerts. This division further provides for reimbursement to the police department for administrative costs related to an initial response, when an immediate threat to the public peace, health, safety and/or general welfare requires the department to disperse and monitor the dispersement of the gathering. 
(Code 1959, § 22-140; Ord. No. 3603, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3885, § 1)  
Sec. 14-173. - Reimbursement of costs incurred. 
(a)  Second and subsequent disturbance calls. Any person responsible for a gathering upon private property where the gathering constitutes and/or directly results in unlawful conduct and/or threatens the public peace, safety, health or general welfare shall reimburse the police department for the administrative costs incurred in responding a second and/or subsequent time to the gathering within a 24-hour period. No reimbursement shall be required for the administrative costs incurred pursuant to issuance of an initial warning to the responsible person, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Response-dispersal. If the police department is required to conduct a response-dispersal upon private property which has been the subject to a prior response-dispersal and/or a reimbursable disturbance call under subsection (a) of this section within the previous six-month period, any person responsible for the gathering shall reimburse the police department for the administrative costs incurred for the second and/or subsequent response-dispersal. 
(Code 1959, § 22-142; Ord. No. 3603, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3885, § 3)  
Sec. 14-174. - Impounded evidence. 
(a)  Under this division the police chief may impound any evidence of unlawful activity from the premises which is the locus of the gathering, including but not limited to stereo equipment, musical instruments, radios, amplifying equipment, recording equipment and other reasonably related materials. 
(b)  Such administrative costs shall be assessed against the owner of property impounded under this section to reimburse the police department for processing and storage of the impounded evidence. Any person taking possession of the impounded evidence from the police department shall be assessed an administrative charge, irrespective of whether or not such person attended the gathering at which the underlying unlawful activity occurred. 
(Code 1959, § 22-143; Ord. No. 3603, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-175. - Administrative charges. 
(a)  The police department administrative charge pursuant to this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  Personnel cost at the rate set by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Actual cost of any medical treatment required by a police officer for injuries sustained during a police response pursuant to this division. 
(3)  The actual cost of repairing or replacing any city equipment or property damaged or destroyed during a police response pursuant to this division. 
(4)  The storage costs of impounded evidence pursuant to this division which shall be determined by police department policies and must reflect the actual cost of storing said personal property. Such policies shall be submitted to the city council for approval by resolution. 
(b)  The city council may increase the charge and/or penalty cited in subsection (a) of this section by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 22-144; Ord. No. 3603, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3885, § 4)  
Sec. 14-176. - Notice to nonresident owner or tenant. 
The nonresident owner or tenant of private property upon which a gathering has resulted in a police response for a disturbance call shall be given notice that the incident did occur at his property and that, if a disturbance call should occur again at the property, he will be held responsible for the administrative costs incurred for all subsequent responses to disturbance calls at the location. 
(Code 1959, § 22-145; Ord. No. 3885, § 5)  
Sec. 14-177. - Recovery of administrative costs. 
The chief of police shall provide the person responsible with an itemized statement of the administrative costs incurred under this division. The person responsible shall have 30 days from the mailing of the statement to pay the administrative costs. Should the person responsible fail to make payment within the 30-day period, the chief of police shall initiate appropriate court action to recover the costs. 
(Code 1959, § 22-146; Ord. No. 3885, § 6)  
Secs. 14-178—14-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE (DUI) EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— DUI emergency response cost recovery, Government Code § 53150 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-201. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, certain words and phrases used in this division are defined as set forth in this section. Unless apparent from the content of a word or phrase, certain words not specifically set forth by this division shall have the meaning ascribed by Government Code title 5, div. 2, pt. 1, ch. 1, art. 8 (Government Code § 53150 et seq.). 
Driving under the influence (DUI) means when, as a result of drinking an alcoholic beverage or using a drug or both, one's physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that one no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person under the same or similar circumstances. For purposes of potential cost recovery cases, the condition of being under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, drug, or both shall be evidenced by (i) the objective symptoms observed by the arresting police officer, and (ii) the chemical test results showing that driver has a blood alcohol content of 0.08 percent or above or is tested positive for drugs. 
Emergency police response means any police action reasonably taken in responding to a traffic incident associated with the negligent or intentionally wrongful operation of a motor vehicle by a person driving under the influence, including but not limited to such police actions as the use of emergency equipment by police personnel. 
Emergency response costs means the cost of police personnel, facilities or equipment reasonably attributed to police activities or services made in response to a traffic incident associated with the negligent or intentionally wrongful operation of a motor vehicle by a person driving under the influence. 
Intentional wrongful operation of a motor vehicle shall be evidenced by: 
(1)  Conduct intended to injure another person or property as further described in Government Code § 53156(c); 
(2)  Evading arrest where the conduct is intended to injure another person or property; and/or 
(3)  Police pursuits involving the ramming or attempt to ram a police vehicle or other property. 
Negligent operation of a motor vehicle shall be evidenced by (i) a traffic incident or collision involving a DUI driver, or (ii) a situation where the DUI driver commits a hazardous moving violation as defined by the Vehicle Code, including but not limited to speeding or failure to yield for a red light, and where the traffic incident, collision or hazardous moving violation is proximately caused by the action of the DUI driver. 
(Ord. No. 3943, § 1(22-151), 2-4-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-202. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to allow the police department to recover costs associated with emergency police responses to incidents involving the negligent or intentionally wrongful operation of a motor vehicle caused by any person who is under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or both, as authorized by Government Code title 5, div. 2, pt. 1, ch. 1, art. 8 (Government Code § 53150 et seq.). This division shall not limit the city's rights or remedies with regard to any other lawful means available for the recovery of costs or damages. 
(Ord. No. 3943, § 1(22-150), 2-4-2002)  
Sec. 14-203. - Reimbursement of costs incurred. 
Any person who is found to be driving under the influence or whose negligent or intentionally wrongful operation of a motor vehicle results in emergency police response shall be liable for the reimbursement of the expenses or costs incurred by the police department or other city agency as a result of the emergency response. The amount of reimbursement shall not exceed the maximum amount authorized under Government Code § 53155. 
(Ord. No. 3943, § 1(22-152), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 4121, § 1, 6-20-2009)  
Sec. 14-204. - Emergency response costs. 
For purposes of this division, the emergency response costs of the police department, which are subject to reimbursement, shall include the following: 
(1)  Police personnel cost at an hourly rate depending on the rank of the officer attending the incident. 
(2)  Actual costs for blood alcohol drawing at a minimum rate set by resolution of the city council for each blood draw. 
(3)  The fee associated with each individual booked into the county jail facility. 
(4)  The actual cost of any medical treatment required by a police officer for injuries sustained during a police response pursuant to this division. 
(5)  The actual cost of repairing or replacing any city equipment or property damaged or destroyed during an emergency police response, pursuant to this division. 
(6)  The actual cost of storing impounded evidence or personal property as determined by police department policies and approved by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 3943, § 1(22-153), 2-4-2002)  
Sec. 14-205. - Cost recovery. 
The police chief shall provide the person driving a motor vehicle under the influence, pursuant to this division, with an itemized statement of the applicable reimbursable emergency response costs authorized under this division. The person responsible shall have 30 days from the mailing of the statement to reimburse the city for the emergency response costs, with installment payments deemed to be acceptable. Should the person responsible fail to make payment within the 30-day period, the account will be considered delinquent and will be forwarded to the city attorney's office to proceed with any and all remedies available for the collection of the amount due to the city. 
(Ord. No. 3943, § 1(22-154), 2-4-2002)  
Secs. 14-206—14-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE AMBULANCES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4149, §§ 1, 2, adopted November 7, 2011, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 14-241—14-244, 14-271—14-275, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 31-50, 31-52—31-57, 31-59, 31-60 of the 1959 Code; Ord. No. 2616, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2776, § 7; Ord. No. 2874, § 2; Ord. No. 3127, §§ 12, 14; Ord. no. 3391, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3466, § 1; Ord. No. 3808, §§ 1—4. 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, Health and Safety Code § 1797 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-241. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of this article to establish procedures for the permitting of ambulance operators that wish to provide emergency and non-emergency ambulance services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-242. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined: 
Ambulance means a motor vehicle specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm, or otherwise incapacitated persons, licensed by the California Highway Patrol as an emergency vehicle, and used, or having the potential for being used, in emergency service to the public. 
Ambulance service means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose. 
Ambulance operator means any person or entity that, for monetary or other consideration, operates or owns one or more ambulances for the transport of one or more persons needing medical attention or services and which is licensed pursuant to Los Angeles County Code Section 7.16.030. 
Ambulance operator permit means an identification card issued by the business license division to each applicant for the purpose of providing ambulance services within the city. 
Business license means a business license issued by the business license division pursuant to chapter 50, article VIII of the Pomona City Code. 
City means the City of Pomona, California. 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of Pomona, or his or her designated representative. 
County means the County of Los Angeles, State of California. 
Emergency means a sudden, unforeseen event for which a person has a need for immediate medical attention or the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency giving rise to the need for an ambulance equipped to provide basic or advanced life-support services. 
Licensee means an ambulance operator which has been granted a license to operate an ambulance in the city. 
Medical services means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Public safety agency means any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the county. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-243. - Business license required. 
Each and every ambulance to be placed in service within the city shall require a business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an ambulance within the city without first having obtained a business license. Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-244. - Exclusions. 
A business license shall not be required for, and the provisions of this article shall not apply to, any of the following: 
(a)  A public agency acting as an ambulance service operator; 
(b)  Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any "state of war emergency," "state of emergency," or "local emergency," as defined in the Government Code; 
(c)  An ambulance transporting a patient from a location outside of the city, regardless of destination; 
(d)  An ambulance service transporting a patient by helicopter or a fixed-wing airplane; or 
(e)  An ambulance driving through the city to get to a destination outside the city. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-245. - Prerequisites to business license. 
(a)  An ambulance operator permit issued by the City of Pomona is required prior to obtaining a business license for the operation of any ambulance in the City of Pomona. 
(b)  Each and every ambulance to be licensed in the city shall first be licensed by the California Highway Patrol and the County of Los Angeles Emergency Medical Services Agency. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-246. - Ambulance operator permit—Indemnification. 
It shall be a condition of an operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter that the permittee agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its city council, and each member thereof, and every officer, agent and employee of the city, from any and all liability or financial loss resulting from any suits, claims, losses, or actions brought by any person, and from all costs and expenses of litigation, including attorney's fees, by reason of injury to any person, including, but not limited to, officers and employees of the permittee, performed under and pursuant to this permit, and any and all activities, operations, and conditions in any manner connected therewith or pertaining thereto. Such indemnity shall include, but not be limited to, any and all liabilities, demands, claims, damages, losses, costs and expenses caused or alleged to have been caused by any negligent or other act of permittee or act of permittee's employees, agents or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-247. - Ambulance operator permit application. 
(a)  An application for an ambulance operator permit shall be submitted to the business license division. The following shall be submitted along with the completed permit application: 
(1)  A copy of current ambulance operator license issued by the County of Los Angeles Emergency Medical Services Agency; 
(2)  Any other information as may be required by the city; and 
(3)  Ambulance operator permit application fee, as set by city council resolution. 
(b)  An ambulance operator permit shall expire on the same date as the ambulance operator license issued by the County of Los Angeles Emergency Medical Services Agency. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-248. - Business license application. 
(a)  A separate application shall be submitted for each individual ambulance vehicle to be placed in service within the city. 
(b)  In addition to the information required to complete an application for a business license, each application shall require submittal of the following: 
(1)  A copy of the applicant's current ambulance operator license issued by the County of Los Angeles EMS Agency; 
(2)  A copy of the current ambulance vehicle license issued by the County of Los Angeles EMS Agency; 
(3)  If the applicant's business offices are located in the city or the applicant otherwise has a location in the city, a copy of a zoning clearance issued by the city. 
(4)  Such other information as the city manager may require; and 
(5)  Payment of the processing fee, as set by city council resolution and the business license tax set forth in section 14-249. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-249. - Business license taxes. 
The business license tax shall be paid in advance in the amount of $42.75 per quarter or $171.00 annually per ambulance (as adopted by Ordinance No. 2776 and adjusted by CPI pursuant to Pomona City Code section 50-415). 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-250. - Issuance or denial of business license. 
(a)  The business license division shall issue a business license if it has determined the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  That the applicant possesses a current ambulance operator license issued by the County of Los Angeles Emergency Medical Services Agency; 
(2)  That the vehicle to be licensed is currently licensed by the California Highway Patrol and the County of Los Angeles Emergency Medical Services Agency; and 
(3)  That the business license tax and processing fee has been paid. 
(b)  The failure of the applicant to meet the requirements of any provision of this article, in addition to the grounds for denial stated in Pomona City Code section 50-381 et seq. shall constitute a sufficient basis upon which an application for a business license to operate an ambulance may be denied. 
(c)  In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed by the business license division in writing of the reasons therefor and refunded the full amount paid, less the processing fee. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-251. - Term of license; renewals. 
(a)  The term of the business license shall not exceed the term of the license issued by the County of Los Angeles EMS Agency and shall expire concurrent with the license issued by the EMS. 
(b)  Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials as original applications. 
(c)  Any ambulance for which the business license has expired shall not operate within the city until a new license has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-252. - Transfer of license prohibited. 
No business license for the operation of an ambulance can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this section: 
(a)  Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to: 
(1)  A sole proprietorship; 
(2)  A partnership, including any change in the partners; and 
(3)  A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise; 
(b)  Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver; 
(c)  A sale or transfer of over ten percent of the assets of a licensee. 
(d)  Any of the events set forth in this section shall require submittal of a new business license application. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-253. - Business license suspension or revocation. 
(a)  In addition to the reasons set forth in Pomona City Code sections 50-381 et seq., the city manager may suspend or revoke an ambulance operator's permit or ambulance business license for any or all of the following: 
(1)  Failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard, or requirement of state law, or regulation of this article, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder; 
(2)  Failure by the licensee to maintain a current and valid license issued pursuant to Chapter 7.16 of the Los Angeles County Code, as applicable; 
(3)  Failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard or requirement of Chapter 7.16 of the Los Angeles County Code, as applicable; or 
(4)  Lapse of insurance coverage. 
(b)  Any ambulance for which the license has been suspended or revoked shall immediately cease operation within the city. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 14-254. - Unauthorized parking. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator, driver or attendant of any ambulance to cause or permit an ambulance to be parked upon any street, highway or city-owned public property located within the city any longer than necessary to load and unload passengers. 
Any ambulance parked on city property in violation of this section may be towed away and stored by a police officer, person or private towing service designated by the chief of police under the direction of a police officer. The owner of any ambulance so removed and stored may reclaim it, but such owner shall first pay the cost that is incurred in removing and storing such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4149, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Secs. 14-255—14-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Private security services, Business and Professions Code § 7580 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-311. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Patrol officer means an individual engaged in the art of guarding property as the owner, member or employee of a patrol system. 
Patrol system means any private service or private system which purports to furnish or does furnish to members or subscribers any watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any part of the territory of the city or to guard or watch any property, including guarding against theft, fire, or both, or to perform any service usually and customarily performed by the city police force. The term "patrol system" includes every mortuary or funeral home, private service or private system which purports to furnish or does furnish escorts for funeral processions whether, such escort service is a principal part of its business or not. 
(Code 1959, § 22-6; Ord. No. 1030, § 2; Ord. No. 1981, § 1; Ord. No. 2030, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2536, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-312. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The city council may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article governing patrol systems and patrol officers. 
(Code 1959, § 22-31; Ord. No. 1030, § 29)  
Sec. 14-313. - Authority of council to duplicate patrol areas. 
Nothing in this article limits the power of the city council to grant a license to more than one patrol system to operate in the same area. 
(Code 1959, § 22-27; Ord. No. 1030, § 25)  
Sec. 14-314. - Conduct of patrol officer generally. 
A patrol officer shall not, either by himself or through the actions of another, harass, annoy or commit a nuisance against or injure the property of or unnecessarily enter or otherwise trespass upon the property of any person whose property the patrol system of such patrol officer is not employed to protect. 
(Code 1959, § 22-26; Ord. No. 1030, § 24)  
Sec. 14-315. - Sale or transfer of badge. 
A person shall not give, deliver to, or sell any patrol officer's badge or any badge of a design the same as or so similar to the patrol officer's badge as to be mistaken therefor to any private person. 
(Code 1959, § 22-23; Ord. No. 1030, § 21)  
Sec. 14-316. - Purchase or receipt of badge. 
A person shall not purchase or receive as a gift, pawn or pledge any patrol officer's badge. 
(Code 1959, § 22-24; Ord. No. 1030, § 22)  
Sec. 14-317. - Impersonation. 
A patrol officer shall not wear any uniform which is in imitation of or can be mistaken for an official sheriff's uniform or an official police uniform of the police force of any city within the county or an official uniform of any state officer. 
(Code 1959, § 22-25; Ord. No. 1030, § 23)  
Sec. 14-318. - Uniform and equipment. 
The chief of police shall specify the uniform and equipment, including weapons, which a private patrol officer may wear on duty. A patrol officer shall not wear any uniform, equipment or weapon not so specified. 
(Code 1959, § 22-28; Ord. No. 1030, § 26; Ord. No. 2030, § 6)  
Sec. 14-319. - Report of patrol officer to authorities. 
Patrol officers shall not perform official police or investigation activities, but shall immediately report every violation of law and every unusual occurrence to the nearest sheriff or police substation. A patrol officer shall make a full report of such violation or other occurrence without unnecessary delay to such substation. 
(Code 1959, § 22-29; Ord. No. 1030, § 27)  
Sec. 14-320. - Investigation of complaints. 
All complaints regarding the activities of a patrol system or of a patrol officer employed by a patrol system shall be investigated by the chief of police. Reports of such complaints shall be held in the chief of police files and shall be subject to inspection of the city council at all times. 
(Code 1959, § 22-30; Ord. No. 1030, § 28)  
Sec. 14-321. - Use of patrol officer not named on license. 
The operator of a patrol system shall neither employ nor utilize the services in any way of a patrol officer whose name is not on the license of such operator. 
(Code 1959, § 22-21; Ord. No. 1030, § 19)  
Secs. 14-322—14-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-341. - Required; application fee. 
Every person conducting a patrol system shall first procure a special city license for such purpose in addition to any state license required and shall pay an application fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 22-7; Ord. No. 1030, § 4; Ord. No. 2534, § 1)  
Sec. 14-342. - Filing of application. 
Any person desiring a license to conduct a patrol system shall file a verified application with the chief of police accompanied by the required fee. 
(Code 1959, § 22-8; Ord. No. 1030, § 5)  
Sec. 14-343. - Contents of application. 
An application for a license to conduct a patrol system shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the corporate officers and manager, and a certified copy of the resolution authorizing such application. 
(4)  The district or territory proposed to be served by the patrol system. 
(5)  A description of the methods of operation. 
(6)  The names and addresses of all patrol officers who are or will be owners, officers or employees of the applicant. 
(7)  A statement as to what offenses, if any, any person mentioned in subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this section has been convicted and the time, place and circumstances thereof. 
(8)  Such other information as either the city council or the chief of police may require. 
(Code 1959, § 22-9; Ord. No. 1030, § 6)  
Sec. 14-344. - Supporting evidence. 
Every application for a license to conduct a private patrol system shall include evidence on the part of the applicant that such applicant has complied with the requirements of Business and Professions Code div. 11, ch. 11.5, art. 3 (Business and Professions Code § 7582 et seq.). 
(Code 1959, § 22-10; Ord. No. 1030, § 7; Ord. No. 1483, § 1)  
Sec. 14-345. - Investigation and report of chief of police. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license to conduct a patrol system, the chief of police shall investigate the character, fitness and qualifications of every person whose name appears on the application. He shall transmit the application to the city council, together with his recommendation that the license be granted or denied, together with his reasons therefor. He shall also inform the city council as to what persons, in his opinion, would be permitted to act as patrol officers and in what territory the applicant shall be allowed to operate, together with his reasons therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-11; Ord. No. 1030, § 8)  
Sec. 14-346. - Preliminary action of council; right to hearing. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license to conduct a patrol system, the city council shall either grant it to the full extent requested, or it shall notify the applicant that it intends to deny the application or to grant the application, but permit operations in only a portion of the territory or by only a part of the patrol officers or both applied for. Within five days of such notification, the applicant may demand a public hearing. If he does not do so, he shall be deemed to have consented to such denial or granting of the license. 
(Code 1959, § 22-12; Ord. No. 1030, § 9)  
Sec. 14-347. - Hearing; notice. 
Within 20 days after an applicant for a license to conduct a patrol system files with the city council a demand for a public hearing, as provided in section 14-346, the city council shall hold a public hearing either before itself or a referee and shall serve notice of the time and place of such hearing upon the chief of police, upon the applicant and upon every person named as a patrol officer in the application whom the city council intends not to allow to act as such. 
(Code 1959, § 22-13; Ord. No. 1030, § 10)  
Sec. 14-348. - Final action on application. 
The city council shall inform the chief of police and city clerk of its final action on each application for a license to conduct a patrol system. 
(Code 1959, § 22-14; Ord. No. 1030, § 11)  
Sec. 14-349. - Notice of change in officers. 
The licensee of a patrol system shall inform the business license division within five days after any patrol officer no longer is an owner, member or employee of such licensee and shall return the license and badge of such patrol officer, and the patrol officer's name shall be removed from the license of the patrol system. 
(Code 1959, § 22-16; Ord. No. 1030, § 13)  
Sec. 14-350. - Application for modification of license. 
The licensee of a patrol system at any time may file an application with the chief of police either to change or increase his territory of operation or to add patrol officers or both. 
(Code 1959, § 22-17; Ord. No. 1030, § 14)  
Sec. 14-351. - Procedure for modification of license. 
The city council shall grant or deny applications to modify existing patrol system licenses in the same manner as for original applications. 
(Code 1959, § 22-18; Ord. No. 1030, § 15)  
Sec. 14-352. - Sale or transfer of privilege. 
The holder of a patrol system license shall not sell or offer to sell any transfer or relinquishment of the privilege to operate a patrol system in territory assigned to him or for any consideration whatever agree to advocate or not to oppose the granting of any other patrol system license. 
(Code 1959, § 22-22; Ord. No. 1030, § 20)  
Secs. 14-353—14-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ALARM SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-391. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm agent means a person employed by an alarm business whose duties include selling on premises, altering, installing, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, responding to or monitoring an alarm system, or a person who manages or supervises a person employed by an alarm business to perform any of the duties described in this definition. The term "alarm agent" does not include a person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location and who neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed nor designs the scheme for physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location. 
Alarm business means the business by any person who, for any consideration, engages in business or accepts employment selling, leasing, maintaining, monitoring, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility or who responds to alarm systems except for any alarm agent. 
Alarm system means any mechanical or electronic device or assembly of equipment and devices which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility; for deterring others from the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility; or to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated to which police are expected to respond. Alarm systems include but are not limited to direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility are not included within this definition nor are auxiliary devices installed by the telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system. 
Alarm vendor means the person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by his agents, employees, representatives or family any alarm system. 
Applicant means a person who files an application for a new, renewal, or reinstated permit as provided in this article. 
Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated. 
Day means a calendar day. 
Direct dial service means a device which is connected to a telephone line and, upon activation of an alarm system, automatically transmits a message or signal indicating a need for emergency response. 
False alarm means an alarm signal activated by causes other than the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act which the alarm system is designed to detect necessitating response by the police department where an emergency situation does not exist. An alarm signal activated by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not subject to the control of the alarm subscriber shall not constitute a false alarm. 
Notice means written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee or given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service or upon the placing of the notice in the custody of United States Postal Service. 
Permit revocation means the permittee can no longer maintain an alarm which emits a sound, signal or message to which the police are expected to respond. 
Permittee means any person granted a permit under this article. 
Proprietor alarm means an alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business. 
Public nuisance alarm means an alarm which has had more than six false alarms in any consecutive 365-day period. 
Residence means the premises occupied by a person as a regular place of abode and which conforms to the city zoning ordinance. 
Service fee means a fee paid to the city after an excessive number of false alarms. 
Subscriber means any person who purchases, leases, contracts for or otherwise obtains an alarm system or for the servicing or maintenance of an alarm system from an alarm business. 
(Code 1959, § 22-101; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-392. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates or willfully fails to comply with sections in this article is guilty of an infraction, except where otherwise expressly provided. 
(b)  Any person violating any section of this article who has previously been found guilty of an infraction under this article for violation of the same section within the past 12-month period may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-131; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-393. - Confidentiality. 
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this article shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 22-132; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-394. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The conviction of any person for violation of this article or for failing to secure a permit as required by this article shall not relieve the person from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the time of the conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the sections of this article. 
(b)  The amount of any permit fee, service response fees and excessive false alarm penalty fees, including any cost incurred by the city in the collection of response service fees and excessive false alarm penalty fees, shall be deemed a debt to the city. 
(c)  All remedies shall be cumulative and the exercise of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the exercise of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing this article and the collection of debts owed to the city 
(Code 1959, § 22-133; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-10-2012)  
Sec. 14-395. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations governing burglary and robbery alarm systems, businesses and agents within the city; require permits therefor; establish fees; and provide for punishment for violation of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 22-100; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-396. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article is not applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles. 
(b)  The United States government, the state, counties and other governmental entities are exempt from fees required in this article, but such entities shall be subject to obtaining permits and enforcement for false alarm violations of this article. 
(Code 1959, §§ 22-109, 22-124; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-397. - Enforcement. 
The police department shall enforce this article. 
(Code 1959, § 22-130; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-398. - Exceptions. 
(a)  A 30-day adjustment period to correct mechanical problems will be allowed for any new, improved or replaced alarm system. Before the false alarm sections of this article shall be applicable to such system, if the permittee shows that any false alarm was the result of conditions beyond his control and not the result of negligence on his part or that of his employees, provided, further, that the permittee can demonstrate that he neither knew of the defect in the alarm system nor in the exercise of due care should have known of such defect, such alarm shall not be deemed a false alarm within the meaning of this article. 
(b)  The alarm subscriber may contest the responding officer's determination of a false alarm by contacting the chief of police within five days of notification of the false alarm. The decision of the chief of police concerning false alarms and permit revocations shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 22-125; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-399. - Audible alarm requirements. 
(a)  An audible alarm shall terminate its operation or the audible alarm shall automatically reset within 15 minutes of its being activated. 
(b)  If an audible alarm has emitted an alarm signal in excess of 30 minutes within a one-hour period, it may be declared a nuisance. The police department may cause such alarm to be disconnected by a registered alarm agent and the cost thereof to be a charge payable by the alarm subscriber. 
(Code 1959, § 22-102; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-400. - Automatic dialing into city lines prohibited. 
No person shall install, use or cause to be used any telephonic device which is activated electronically to automatically dial a public telephone line of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 22-103; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-401. - Live answering service. 
Under this article any automatic telephonic dialing system shall dial to and the message shall be received by a live answering service such as a private alarm dispatch center. 
(Code 1959, § 22-104; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-402. - Use of digital communicator systems. 
Under this article the use of digital communicator systems shall be permitted, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Digital communicator receivers are to be interfaced to the police department's computer-aided dispatch system. 
(2)  The telephone number dialed by the digital communicator system is not a number used by the city or listed in the telephone directory. 
(3)  All costs incurred pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) of this section are to be provided at no cost to the city. 
(Code 1959, § 22-105; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-403. - Possession of state identification by agents. 
Every alarm agent, while engaged in the duties of an alarm agent, shall carry on his person at all times a valid identification card issued pursuant to the Alarm Company Act (Business and Professions Code § 7590 et seq.), issued by the department of consumer affairs, and shall display the identification card to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1959, § 22-106; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-404. - Business license and subscriber data required. 
(a)  Each alarm business installing or repairing alarm systems or acting as an alarm agent for alarm subscribers within the city shall be required to obtain and maintain a City of Pomona business license. Prior to issuance of a business license, each alarm business and alarm agent shall submit to the city contact information, as specified by the chief of police, for each alarm subscriber and for each and every location within the city for which the alarm business or agent provides alarm services. 
(b)  Each alarm business or agent providing alarm services to subscribers within the city shall notify the city of any change in subscriber information within 30 days of such change. A "change in subscriber information" requiring notification to the city shall include, but not be limited to, discontinuance of service by a subscriber, a new subscriber, or a change of subscriber contact information. 
(c)  Failure by an alarm business or agent to comply with subsections (a) and (b) above shall deem such alarm business or agent fiscally responsible for any service response fees and excessive false alarm penalties, if such failure to comply results in the city's inability to recover service response fees and penalties. 
(d)  In the event an alarm system is not serviced by an alarm business or alarm agent, it shall be the responsibility of the business owner where the alarm is located or, if a residence, the responsible party on record for utilities at the residential location to obtain the required permit and provide any change in subscriber information to the city within 30 days of such changes. 
(e)  In the event of excessive false alarms received from a business location or residential dwelling that has been vacated, the owner of record on file with the Los Angeles County Recorder during any 365-day period shall be responsible for payment of response service fees and false alarm penalty fees. 
(f)  Non-compliance with any provisions of this section may be punishable as an infraction and shall be subject to the administrative citation process. 
(Code 1959, § 22-107; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4167, § 2, 9-10-2012) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30.  
Sec. 14-405. - False alarms. 
A person shall not knowingly turn in a false alarm. This section does not prohibit a test of an alarm system if procedures are taken to ensure that no signal is transmitted to the police department. 
(Code 1959, § 22-117; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-406. - Corrective action for false alarms. 
After any false alarm, the alarm subscriber shall, upon request by the police department, submit a written report within ten days describing actions taken or to be taken to eliminate the cause of future false alarms. 
(Code 1959, § 22-118; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-407. - Response to alarm system activations. 
If the police department determines that a false alarm has occurred, the police officer responding to the alarm shall leave a notice at the premises which shall include the date and time of the response and a statement that the alarm was a false alarm and the subscriber should take action to correct the causative problems and a warning that more than six false alarms in any 12-month period will result in the alarm system being declared a public nuisance. Multiple activations of an alarm system within a calendar day shall count as only one false alarm for the purpose of this article. However, multiple activations will require the subscriber to submit within ten days a written confirmation that prior multiple activation causes have been corrected. A copy of this notice will be filed with the alarm owner's permit application. Once an alarm system has been declared a public nuisance, it can no longer emit a sound, signal or message to which the police are expected to respond. Violators will be punished in accordance with section 14-394. 
(Code 1959, § 22-119; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-408. - Grounds for service fees and penalty fees for false alarms. 
Under this article service fees and penalty fees shall be paid to the city by an alarm subscriber after the police department has responded to an excessive number of false alarms generated from any one source or subscriber. Service response fees and excessive false alarm penalty fees shall be set according to the following schedule: 
(1)  The first and second false alarms in any consecutive 365-day period shall not be considered excessive, and no service response fee or excessive false alarm penalty fee shall be assessed. 
(2)  For the third false alarm within any consecutive 365-day period, the subscriber shall pay a service response fee set by resolution of the city council; however, no excessive false alarm penalty fee shall be assessed. 
(3)  For the fourth false alarm within any 365-day period, the subscriber shall pay both a service response fee set by resolution of the city council and an excessive false alarm penalty fee of $156.00. 
(4)  For the fifth false alarm within any 365-day period, the subscriber shall pay both a service response fee set by resolution of the city council and an excessive false alarm penalty fee of $220.00. 
(5)  For the sixth false alarm and each subsequent false alarm within any 365-day period, the subscriber shall pay both a service response fee set by resolution of the city council and an excessive false alarm penalty fee of $256.00. 
(Code 1959, § 22-120; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3515, § 1; Ord. No. 4167, § 3, 9-10-2012)  
Sec. 14-409. - Impermissible systems and uses. 
(a)  No person shall operate or use any alarm system that emits a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning system. 
(b)  No person shall operate or use an alarm system designed to report a violation of Penal Code § 211 for any purpose other than reporting robberies or other crimes involving potential serious bodily injury or death. 
(Code 1959, § 22-128; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 14-410—14-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SYSTEM PERMITS 
 
Sec. 14-431. - Required. 
No person shall install or use an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm permit, in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1959, § 22-108; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-432. - Application; furnishing copy of article. 
(a)  Applications for all permits under this division shall be secured from the police department and shall be accompanied by the required fee. The fee is established to cover part of the cost of investigating and processing the applications and permits and is not refundable. The police department shall prescribe the form of the application and shall request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. The application for alarm systems shall require the type of alarm system installed and, if applicable, the name, address, telephone number and state license number of the person or agent who will render service or repairs during any hour of the day or night. 
(b)  The police department shall provide, upon request, a copy of this article to all developers, all business license applicants and all businesses established for the purpose of installing, monitoring, servicing and marketing of burglary or robbery alarm systems within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 22-113; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-433. - Issuance; denial. 
(a)  The alarm system permit shall be denied by the police chief if the alarm system does not comply with standards and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The permit shall be issued to the person or subscriber using or possessing the alarm system at the installation premises. 
(Code 1959, § 22-114; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-434. - Appeal of denial. 
Under this division any appeal concerning the denial of a permit shall be filed with the chief of police within 15 days after the date the denial takes effect. The appeal procedure will follow guidelines set forth in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 22-115; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-435. - Issuing authority. 
The issuing and approving authority under this division shall be the police chief. 
(Code 1959, § 22-112; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-436. - Fees; renewal. 
The fee for any alarm system permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall not require annual renewal. 
(Code 1959, § 22-116; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-437. - Revocation. 
(a)  An alarm system permit will be revoked by the police department for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  An alarm system has more than six false alarms that occur within any consecutive 365-day period. 
(2)  The failure to observe any of the regulations or other sections of this article. 
(3)  The applicant or permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record to be filed with any city agency. 
(4)  The applicant or permittee has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past 12 months, unless the applicant can show a material change in original circumstances since the date of revocation. 
(b)  When an alarm permit is to be revoked, the police department shall give the permittee 15 days' notice of its intention to do so by written notice. Upon failure of the permittee to file an appeal to the chief of police as provided in this division, the permit shall be revoked at the expiration of such 15-day period. The alarm system shall be placed on nonemergency response status until a new permit has been issued. A new permit shall not be issued for any alarm system where a permit has been previously revoked until the expiration of six months from the date of revocation or only upon proof that repair or other corrective action has been made to the satisfaction of the chief of police. 
(c)  The fee to issue a permit for any alarm system where the permit has previously been revoked shall be set by resolution of the city council, in addition to the permit fee set forth in this division, to help defray the administrative and investigative costs associated with examining the premises and the proof of the repair or other corrective action submitted with the application. 
(d)  When an appeal is filed, the order of revocation shall remain in effect until such time as the appeal process is completed. 
(e)  If notice of revocation has been given, the permittee may appeal to the chief of police by filing a statement setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the action of the revocation, provided that such appeal shall be filed prior to the expiration of the 15-day period following the service of the notification of revocation. The chief of police shall consider the appeal and may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the revocation. The decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Code 1959, §§ 22-121—22-123; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-438. - Transferability. 
No alarm permit issued under this division shall be assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1959, § 22-126; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-439. - Display; payment of fees. 
(a)  The permit issued pursuant to this division shall be maintained on the premises where the alarm system is located. Each permit shall be given a unique number. 
(b)  The police department shall charge the permit application as provided in this division. No permit shall be issued, reinstated or renewed for any person until all alarm system permit fees, service charges and excessive false alarm penalty fees due and owing are paid. 
(Code 1959, § 22-110; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4167, § 4, 9-10-2012)  
Sec. 14-440. - Additional duties of permittee. 
(a)  Under this division the premises shall display the street address at or near the front of the premises and at other places where access is available, such as from an alley or parking lot. The street address shall be clearly visible. 
(b)  The permittee or the permittee's designee shall respond to a premises following activation of an alarm constituting part of a commercial alarm system for which a permit at that location has been issued under this division. The response shall be made within a reasonable time and, in any event, within 30 minutes after being requested to do so by the police department. 
(Code 1959, § 22-127; Ord. No. 3348, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 14-441. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4167, § 5, adopted September 10, 2012, repealed § 14-441, which pertained to notice of change in information and derived from Code 1959, § 22-111; Ord. No. 3348, § 1(part).  
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6; parks and recreation, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 62; sand and grease traps, § 62-471 et seq.; industrial wastes, § 62-501 et seq.; disposal of hazardous materials prohibited, § 62-652; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74; unsafe buildings and structures, § 74-171 et seq.; subdivisions and zoning, ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT OF BUILDINGS CONSTITUTING NUISANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement, Government Code § 38771 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building includes all commercial, industrial and residential buildings, including single-family homes, duplexes, and apartment houses. If a housing unit in a multiple-family building is a nuisance as defined, the procedure in this article may be applicable to one or more housing units in the multiple-family structure. If a rental unit in a commercial or industrial building is a nuisance as defined, the procedure in this article may be applicable to one or more rental units in the commercial or industrial building. 
Nuisance means any nuisance as declared in Penal Code § 11225, Penal Code § 186.22a or Health and Safety Code § 11570. 
(Code 1959, § 5-75; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Authority to define nuisance, Government Code § 38771.  
Sec. 18-32. - Notices and orders of police chief. 
(a)  Commencement of proceedings. Whenever the police chief has found and determined that a building is a nuisance as defined in section 18-31, he shall commence proceedings to cause the vacation of the building for one year. 
(b)  Notice and order. The police chief shall issue and serve by certified mail a notice and order directed to the record owner and all interested parties, as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, of the building. The notice and order shall contain the following: 
(1)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located. 
(2)  A statement that the police chief has found the building to be a nuisance with a brief and concise description of the specific conditions found to render the building a nuisance. 
(3)  A statement that the nuisance may be abated by vacation of the premises for one year. 
(4)  Statements advising that: 
a.  Any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the police chief to the city manager, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this article and filed with the police chief within 15 days from the date of such notice and order; and 
b.  Failure to appeal will constitute a wavier of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter. 
(c)  Service of notice and order. The notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property; one copy thereof also shall be served on each of the following if known to the police chief or disclosed from official public records: the holder of any lease of record and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the police chief to serve any person required to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings under this article as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by this section. 
(d)  Method of service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by first class mail, postage prepaid, to each person at his address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the police chief. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the police chief, a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed to the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by first class mail in the manner provided in this subsection shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(Code 1959, § 5-76; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-33. - Recordation of notice and order. 
The police chief shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying (i) that the building is a nuisance, and (ii) that the owner has been so notified at the time of the service of notice and order set forth in section 18-32. 
(Code 1959, § 5-77; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-34. - Appeal. 
(a)  Form. Any person entitled to service under section 18-32 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the police chief under this article by filing at the office of the police chief a written appeal containing the following: 
(1)  The names of all appellants participating in the appeal. 
(2)  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order. 
(3)  A brief statement describing the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellants. 
(4)  A brief statement of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside. 
(5)  The signatures of all parties named as appellants or their representatives and their mailing addresses. 
The appeal shall be filed within 15 days from the date of such order or action of the police chief. 
(b)  Processing of appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the police chief shall present it to the city manager, who shall designate the hearing officer for such appeal. 
(c)  Scheduling and noticing appeal hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the hearing officer shall fix the date, time and place for hearing of the appeal. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to each appellant at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. 
(Code 1959, § 5-78; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-35. - Effect of failure to appeal. 
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with section 18-34(a) shall constitute a waiver of his right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 5-79; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-36. - Scope of hearing on appeal. 
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-80; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-37. - Stay of order under appeal. 
Enforcement of any notice and order of the police chief issued under this article shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Code 1959, § 5-81; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-38. - Procedure for conduct of hearing appeals. 
(a)  Reasonable dispatch. Under this article the hearing officer shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives. He may grant continuances for good cause shown. 
(b)  Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the hearing officer or by certified shorthand reporter. The costs of the certified shorthand reporter shall be an administrative cost under section 18-44 if the hearing officer determines that the building involved in the proceeding is a nuisance. 
(c)  Transcript. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon the payment of the costs therefor. 
(d)  Oaths and certifications. In any proceedings under this section, the hearing officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts. 
(Code 1959, § 5-82; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-39. - Form of notice of hearing. 
Pursuant to this article, the notice to the appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may include other information: 
You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before (name) , the Hearing Office appointed by the City Manager, at (place) on (date) , at (time) , upon the Notice and Order served upon you to determine whether your property is a nuisance as defined in Section 18-31, Pomona City Code. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to question all witnesses testifying against you. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents or other items by filing a declaration under penalty of perjury therefor with the Hearing Officer. 
(Code 1959, § 5-83; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-40. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  Filing of declaration. Under this article the hearing officer may obtain issuance and service of subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence at a hearing upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of a declaration under penalty of perjury therefor which states the name and address of the proposed witness; specifies the exact items sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in detail to the issues involved; and states that the witness has the desired items in his possession and under his control. A subpoena need not be issued when the declaration is defective in any particular. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who refuses without lawful excuse to attend any hearing or to produce material evidence in his possession or under his control as required by any subpoena served upon such person as provided for in this section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1959, § 5-84; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-41. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Rules. Hearings held pursuant to this article need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
(b)  Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(c)  Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil action in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(d)  Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts in this state. 
(e)  Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(f)  Rights of parties. Each party shall have the right, among others, to: 
(1)  Call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing. 
(2)  Introduce documentary and physical evidence. 
(3)  Question opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing. 
(4)  Impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify. 
(5)  Rebut the evidence against him. 
(6)  Represent himself or be represented by anyone of his choice. 
(g)  Official notice. Official notice shall be given as follows: 
(1)  What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state. 
(2)  Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed. 
(3)  Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority. 
(4)  Inspection of premises. The hearing officer may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that (i) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; (ii) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; and (iii) the hearing officer shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer. 
(Code 1959, § 5-85; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-42. - Method and form of decision. 
Under this article the hearing officer shall file a written decision in the office of the city manager. If the hearing officer determines that the building or portion thereof is a nuisance, he shall direct the appellant to vacate and secure the building for one year. Such decision shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and shall state the hearing officer's findings, conclusions and recommendations and shall set forth that it is subject to Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final forthwith. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to each party by certified mail. A notarized copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the county recorder. 
(Code 1959, § 5-86; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-43. - Enforcement of order. 
(a)  Generally. After any order of the police chief or the hearing officer made pursuant to this article shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the police chief or hearing officer made pursuant to this article has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the police chief may: 
(1)  Cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection (a) of this section; or 
(2)  Institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
(c)  Failure to commence vacation. Whenever the required vacation is not commenced within 15 days after any final notice and order issued under this article becomes effective: 
(1)  The police chief shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading as follows: 
NUISANCE 
DO NOT OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice. 
Police Chief, City of Pomona 
(2)  No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the vacation ordered by the police chief has been completed. 
(Code 1959, § 5-87; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 18-44. - Recovery of costs. 
The police chief shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred pursuant to this article, including administrative costs, in the building vacation. He shall mail a copy of the accounting to the persons who have interest in the property, together with a notice of the time and place that the statement will be submitted to the city council for confirmation and approval, at which time the council will consider any objection which may be raised by any party involved in the proceeding. The city shall conform to the procedure in Government Code §§ 38773.1 and 38773.5. 
(Code 1959, § 5-88; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part)) 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement authorized, Government Code § 38773.  
Sec. 18-45. - Lien against property for vacation of building. 
At the time fixed for the hearing of the statement expense held pursuant to this article, the city council shall consider the statement together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the doing of the work and any other interested person, after which by resolution the report as submitted or as ordered, revised, corrected or modified by the city council shall be confirmed and adopted. If the statement is not paid within five days after the passing of the resolution, it shall constitute a lien on the real property from which the building was vacated and shall be collected as a special assessment against the real property. The resolution shall further direct that the city clerk shall file with the county auditor and the county tax assessor and tax collector certified copies of the resolution and the statement adopted therein. The clerk shall direct the auditor to enter the amounts of the charges against the real property described in the statement and resolution as it appears on the current assessment roll. The amount of the charges shall constitute a lien against the real property against which the charges have been imposed. The tax collector shall include the amount of the charges on bills for taxes levied against the real property. Thereafter, the amount of the charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same person as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest upon delinquent payment. 
(Code 1959, § 5-89; Ord. No. 3492, § 3 (part))  
Secs. 18-46—18-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE REMOVAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Removal of parked and abandoned vehicles, Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.; authority to provide for removal of vehicles and recover costs thereof, Vehicle Code § 22660. 
 
Sec. 18-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hearing officer means the city manager. 
Highway means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term "highway" includes a street. 
Inoperative vehicle and abandoned vehicle mean any vehicle as defined in section 58-231. 
Owner of the land means the owner of the land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
Owner of the vehicle means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
Public property does not include a highway. 
Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1959, § 5-100; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3955, § 5, 6-17-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-82. - Finding; nuisance declared. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Vehicle Code § 22660 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property; to promote blight and deterioration; to invite plundering; to create fire hazards; to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to health and safety of minors; to create a harborage for rodents and insects; and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this article, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-100; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-83. - Applicability. 
This article is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction and shall be in conformance with state law. 
(Code 1959, § 5-102; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-84. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is: 
(1)  Completely enclosed within a building or stored or parked in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, a licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Vehicle Code div. 11, ch. 10 (Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.) and this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-101; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-85. - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided, this article shall be administered and enforced by the code enforcement officer. In the enforcement of this article the code enforcement officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-103; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3323, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-86. - Removal by contractor. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person for the purposes of this article, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-104; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-87. - Administrative costs. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof under this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-105; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-88. - Abatement authority. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private property or public property within the city, the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed. 
(Code 1959, § 5-106; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3323, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-89. - Notice of intention to abate and remove. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or any parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of owner of land) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of Municipal Code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ___________, license number, _______, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (Municipal Code chapter number). 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle within ten days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City, and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle is located. As owner of the land on which said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the hearing officer within such ten-day period, the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn statement within such ten-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appeal in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle, or in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed  _____
(Date) 	s/  _____
Code Enforcement Officer 
 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—Notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle—make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of Municipal Code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (Municipal Code chapter number). 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle within ten days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the hearing officer within such ten-day period, the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed  _____
(Date) 	s/  _____
Code Enforcement Officer 
 
(Code 1959, § 5-107; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3323, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-90. - Hearing; city authority to abate without hearing. 
(a)  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the code enforcement officer within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove given pursuant to this article, a public hearing shall be held by the hearing officer on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
(b)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by certified mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for a hearing is not received within the ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Code 1959, § 5-108; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3323, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-91. - Hearing procedures; decisions of hearing officer. 
(a)  All hearings under this article shall be held before the hearing officer who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or any parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
(b)  The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other actions as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this article. He may delay the time for removal of such vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the vehicle or part removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this article and determine that the administrative costs and the cost of removal be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(c)  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
(d)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 5-109; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-92. - Time to remove nuisance. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance or five days from the date of mailing of the notice of the decision if such notice is required by section 18-91, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical license plates, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Code 1959, § 5-110; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-93. - Notice to department of motor vehicles after removal. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof pursuant to this article, notice shall be given to the department of motor vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the department of motor vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Code 1959, § 5-111; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-94. - Costs. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to section 18-89 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Government Code § 38773.5 and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Code 1959, § 5-112; Ord. No. 3246, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 18-95—18-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI ELIMINATION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Graffiti abatement, Government Code §§ 38772, 38773.2, 53069.3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-121. - Purpose and intent; definitions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The city council hereby finds and determines that the writing, spraying, scratching, etching or otherwise affixing graffiti or other inscribed materials on publicly or privately owned real or personal property without the consent or permission of the owner thereof is a public nuisance and obnoxious, as well as injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Such markings are often placed on such structures by gangs to indicate illicit control over certain locations or areas for purposes of criminal activity. 
(2)  Such markings directly and indirectly encourage gang warfare, including drive-by shootings, and other acts of violence which result in injuries and fatalities to gang members and innocent bystanders, alike. 
(3)  Such markings are destructive to publicly and privately owned property and cause depreciation in the value of such property and depreciation in the value of adjacent and surrounding properties as well. 
(4)  Such markings result in blight and deterioration of property and business values in the community and lead to economic loss and the destruction of property in general. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, inscribed or painted on any public or private real or personal property without the consent or permission of the owner thereof. 
Responsible adult means a parent, legal guardian or person having legal responsibility for an unemancipated individual under the age of 18. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-130), 3-18-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-122. - Removal. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to use public funds and facilities for the summary abatement and removal of any of the instances of graffiti described in section 18-121 as provided for and subject to the provisions of Government Code § 53069.3. 
(b)  The city may recover city funds utilized for the repair, replacement and removal of publicly or privately owned property defaced with graffiti or other inscribed material so long as the expenditure is made for one and/or all of the following: 
(1)  Replacement of or repair to publicly or privately owned real property defaced by graffiti only if the graffiti or other inscribed material cannot be removed cost effectively. 
(2)  The removal of graffiti or other inscribed material itself, and only if the graffiti or other inscribed material cannot be removed cost effectively may the portion of the property that was defaced be repaired or replaced. 
(3)  The removal, repair or replacement performed on public property is done only after securing consent of the public entity having jurisdiction and, for privately owned real or personal property, only after securing the consent of the owner or possessor. 
(c)  If the owner or the person who has primary responsibility for control of personal or private property defaced with graffiti declines to consent to the removal, repair or replacement of such property by the city and permits the property to remain so defaced for a period of 48 hours after the application of the graffiti, the owner shall be deemed as maintaining the property in such a condition as to cause a public nuisance. Under such circumstances, the building official may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti nuisance pursuant to sections 74-179 through 74-197. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (c) of this section, the maintenance of graffiti on public or private property in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance is a misdemeanor or infraction. Prosecution of the violation as a misdemeanor or infraction lies in the sole discretion of the city attorney or district attorney of the county. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-131), 3-18-2002)  
Sec. 18-123. - Reward leading to apprehension and conviction of vandals. 
The city council may, by resolution, offer to pay a reward for information leading to the determination of the identity and the apprehension and conviction of persons who willfully damage or destroy property by defacing it with graffiti or other inscribed material. When a person willfully damages or destroys any property of the city or any property of any other local agency or state or federal agency located within the city, such person shall be liable for the amount of any reward paid pursuant to this article and Government Code § 53069.5. If he is an unemancipated minor, the responsible adult for such minor shall be liable for the reward amount and other fines and costs as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-132), 3-18-2002)  
Sec. 18-124. - Advisement of article. 
The city manager and/or police chief, to the extent permitted by law, are authorized to appear before any court finding any minor or other person guilty of the act of graffiti vandalism for the purposes of informing such court of the provisions of this article regarding graffiti removal and summary abatement and seeking recovery of costs incurred by the city in removing and/or abating the graffiti caused by such minor or other person. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-133), 3-18-2002)  
Sec. 18-125. - Preremoval preservation of sufficient evidence. 
Pursuant to the authorization granted by Government Code § 53069.3(c)(2), the police department may promulgate procedures for preremoval preservation of sufficient evidence of graffiti or other inscribed material for criminal prosecutions or proceedings pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 602 pertaining to the person who inscribed or applied the graffiti or other material. If the police department chooses to promulgate procedures, those procedures shall be followed by the city prior to or during removal of graffiti or other inscribed material. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-134), 3-18-2002)  
Secs. 18-126—18-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS 
 
Sec. 18-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Etching substance means any type of liquid or paste product used to permanently etch glass. Ingredients of such etching liquids, etching pastes or etching baths may include but are not limited to ammonia/sodium bifluorides and sulfuric acid. 
Graffiti implement means any writing instrument that has a porous point, tip or nib that measures in excess of 1/16 of an inch in width at its widest point, commonly known as markers, marking pens or sign pens, or any glass etching tools or substances. For purposes of this division, a graffiti implement shall not include an aerosol container of paint unless expressly stated otherwise. 
Minor means any unemancipated person who is less than 18 years of age. 
Transfer means any sale, exchange, gift or loan. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-135), 3-18-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-152. - Restrictions on transferring implements to minors. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, or otherwise furnished any graffiti implement to any minor, unless such minor first delivers to the person from whom the item is sought a written request for such item signed by the parent or guardian of such minor. The person making any transfer of the item shall retain possession of the signed written request for not less than 30 days and, during such time of retention, shall present the signed request to any peace officer upon such officer's request. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-136), 3-18-2002)  
Sec. 18-153. - Possession in designated public places. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for a minor or other person to have in his possession any graffiti implement, including an aerosol container of paint, on any public lands or facilities, such as a public park, parkway, median, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or while in or near an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, and other similar types of infrastructure not normally used by the public, except as may be authorized by the city. This section shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a parent or guardian or during school hours in the course and scope of supervised school activities. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-137), 3-18-2002) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46.  
Sec. 18-154. - Storage and posting requirements for commercial establishments. 
It is unlawful for any commercial establishment that offers to the public items that are defined as graffiti implements, including aerosol containers of paint, to fail to keep, store and maintain such implements in a place that is locked and secured or otherwise inaccessible to the public and to fail to post, in a conspicuous location, a sign measuring not less than 12 inches by 12 inches, in substantially the following form: 
IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR A MINOR TO BE SOLD SPRAY PAINT, MARKERS WIDER THAN ONE-SIXTEENTH OF AN INCH, ETCHING TOOLS OR SUBSTANCES, WITHOUT A WRITTEN REQUEST FROM A PARENT OR GUARDIAN. P.C.C. 18-154 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-138), 3-18-2002)  
Secs. 18-155—18-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GRAFFITI REMOVAL COST RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 18-181. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for the recovery of abatement and related administrative costs incurred by the city in removing graffiti from public or private real or personal property pursuant to section 18-122. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-139), 3-18-2002)  
Sec. 18-182. - Obligation for expense. 
(a)  When the city removes graffiti pursuant to section 18-122, the expense of abatement and related administrative costs shall be an expense of the minor or other person creating, causing, or committing the graffiti nuisance, and the expense of abating such nuisance shall be a lien against the property of the minor or other person and a personal obligation against the minor or other person. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the responsible adult shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor who has created, caused, or committed a graffiti nuisance. As such, the city may recover the costs incurred by the city in abating any nuisance resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material by placing a lien against the property of the responsible adult and by making the expense a personal obligation of the responsible adult. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the name and address of the responsible adult, if known, shall be reported by the probation officer to the chief of police for the purpose of enforcement of this section. 
(d)  As used in this section, the term "expense of abatement and related administrative costs" includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant and his parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person. 
(e)  For purposes of this division, the term "minor" or "other person" means a minor or other person who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Penal Code §§ 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7; a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Penal Code §§ 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7; or a minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 602 by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Penal Code §§ 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-140), 3-18-2002)  
Sec. 18-183. - Summary abatement procedure. 
The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure to collect abatement and related administrative costs incurred in the summary abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement by a minor or other person of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material. The procedure shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Notice shall be given to the minor or other person prior to the recordation of a lien on the parcel of land owned by the minor or other person. Such notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure pt. 2, title 5, ch. 4, art. 3 (Code of Civil Procedure § 415.10 et seq.). 
(2)  Notice shall be given to the responsible adult prior to the recordation of a lien on the parcel of land owned by the responsible adult. Such notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure pt. 2, title 5, ch. 4, art. 3 (Code of Civil Procedure § 415.10 et seq.). 
(3)  If the minor or other person or responsible adult, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon the property owned by the minor or other person or responsible adult in a conspicuous place, for a period of ten days. The notice shall also be published pursuant to Government Code § 6062 in a newspaper of general circulation that is published in the county in which the property is located. 
(4)  A graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located. From the date of recording, the lien shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
(5)  A graffiti nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the following: 
a.  The amount of the lien; 
b.  The name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed; 
c.  The date of the abatement order; 
d.  The street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and 
e.  The name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
(6)  If the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (5) of this section shall be recorded by the city. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
(7)  A graffiti nuisance abatement lien may be satisfied through foreclosure in an action brought by the city. 
(8)  The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(9)  Costs that are subject to a lien under this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Court costs; 
b.  Attorney's fees; 
c.  Costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material; 
d.  Costs of repair and replacement of defaced property; 
e.  Costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant and his parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program; and 
f.  The law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-141), 3-18-2002)  
Sec. 18-184. - Abatement of graffiti nuisance; special assessment. 
The purpose of this section is to establish, as an alternative to the procedure established in section 18-183, a procedure to collect abatement and related administrative costs incurred in the summary abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement by a minor or other person of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material by making the abatement and related administrative costs a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor or other person or owned by the responsible adult. The procedure shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(2)  All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. 
(3)  If any real property to which the abatement and related administrative costs relate has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, the abatement and related administrative costs shall not result in a lien against the real property but shall instead be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(4)  Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment may be recorded. 
(5)  Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property or a minor or other person is responsible for a graffiti-related nuisance or crime, the court may order that person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 3953, § 1(5-142), 3-18-2002)  
Secs. 18-185—18-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 18-221. - Responsibility. 
Every owner, lessee, occupant, or person having charge of any property or premises within the city is required to maintain the landscaping located on such property or premises in a manner so as not to violate this article, and such owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of the property or premises remains liable for violations of this article regardless of any agreement with any third party regarding such property or premises. The duty imposed by this article on a property owner shall not relieve those persons referred to in this section from their similar duty. 
(Code 1959, § 5-170; Ord. 3915, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 18-222. - Public nuisance. 
The following acts and conditions, when performed or existing upon any property, lot or parcel of land within the city, are declared to be unlawful and are defined as and declared to be public nuisances which are injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare and have a tendency to degrade the aesthetic appearance and property values of or injure or potentially injure surrounding property: 
(1)  Dead, decayed or hazardous trees, weeds or other vegetation dangerous to the public safety and welfare or which constitute a fire hazard, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Overgrown vegetation likely to harbor rats or other vermin. 
b.  Overgrown grass or other vegetation having the potential to depreciate the property values of other properties in the immediate neighborhood. 
(2)  Inadequately maintained landscaping which is visible from any public street, property, or right-of-way and which, either alone or in combination with other conditions on the subject property, tends to degrade the aesthetic quality of or tends to reduce property values in the immediate neighborhood, including without limitation any of the following: 
a.  Lawns growing in excess of six inches in height or untrimmed and encroaching more than two inches over sidewalks or other hardscape improvements. 
b.  Untrimmed trees, hedges, shrubs or other plants which are normally trimmed by other property owners in the city. 
c.  Trees, shrubs, lawn or other plants which are dying from lack of adequate water, fertilization or maintenance, or where the trees, shrubs, lawn or other plants are diseased. 
d.  Lack of vegetation, lawn, shrubs or other decorative vegetative ground cover on any improved property when compared to other properties in the same land use zone. 
e.  Failure of any property owner, with the exception of single-family homeowners, to substantially comply with any landscaping plans previously approved by the city in connection with the city's issuance of any land use approval. 
f.  Failure of any property owner to maintain any fences, hedges or other plants in compliance with zoning code section .503-I. 
g.  Failure to comply with the landscape maintenance provisions of zoning code section .503-J(M). 
(Code 1959, § 5-171; Ord. 3915, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3948, § 1, 3-4-2002)  
Sec. 18-223. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating or causing the violation of any of the sections of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the city attorney or the district attorney of the county. 
(Code 1959, § 5-172; Ord. 3915, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 18-224—18-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 18-261. - Nuisance. 
Pursuant to Government Code title 4, div. 3, pt. 2, ch. 13 (Government Code § 39500 et seq.), all weeds and all rubbish and refuse upon the sidewalks, parkways and alleys within the city are public nuisances which shall be abated by the property owner abutting the sidewalk, parkway or alley. 
(Code 1959, § 28-216; Ord. No. 3209, § 1)  
Sec. 18-262. - Authority for alternative procedures. 
(a)  Pursuant to Government Code title 4, div. 3, pt. 2, ch. 13, art. 2 (Government Code § 39560 et seq.), the city council formally adopts the alternative procedures sections. 
(b)  The city council desires to designate the fire chief as the public officer of the city responsible for performing the duties imposed upon the street superintendent under the alternative procedures. 
(Code 1959, § 28-217(a), (b))  
Secs. 18-263—18-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 18-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agricultural property means a parcel of real property which is undeveloped for any use other than agricultural purposes. 
Ambient noise level means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources excluding alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
A-weighted sound level means the total level meter in decibels of all sounds as measured with a sound level meter with a reference pressure of 20 micropascals using the A-weighted network (scale) at slow response. The unit of measurement shall be defined as dB(A). 
Commercial property means a parcel of real property that is developed and used either in part or in whole for a commercial purpose. 
Cumulative period means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments, which may be continuous or interrupted. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power: The number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm of the base ten of this ratio. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provision for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
Emergency machinery, vehicle, work, or alarm means machinery, vehicle, work, or an alarm used, employed, performed, or operated in an effort to protect, provide, or restore safety conditions in the community or for the citizenry or work performed by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Fixed noise source means a stationary device that creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to residential, agricultural, industrial, and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, or air conditioner and refrigeration equipment. 
Grading means any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination thereof conducted at a site to prepare such site for construction or other improvements thereon. 
Health care institution means any hospital, convalescent home or other similar facility which provides health care, medical treatment, room, board or other services for the ill, retarded, or convalescent. 
Hertz (Hz) means the unit that describes the frequency of a function periodic in time, which is the reciprocal of the period. 
Impulsive noise level means a noise of short duration, usually less than one second, and of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Industrial property means a parcel of real property that is developed and used either in part or in whole for manufacturing purposes. 
Intruding noise level means the total sound level, in decibels, created, caused, maintained, or originated from an alleged offensive source at a specified location while the alleged offensive source is in operation. 
Licensed means the issuance of a formal license or permit by the appropriate jurisdictional authority or, where no permits or licenses are issued, the sanctioning of the activity by the jurisdiction as noted in the public record. 
Mobile noise source means any noise other than a fixed noise source. 
Plainly audible means clearly heard by a person using his unaided hearing faculties. 
Residential property means a parcel of real property that is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels. 
Simple tone noise means a noise characterized by a predominant frequency so that other frequencies can not be readily distinguished. If measured, simple tone noise shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure levels in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands as follows: by five dB for frequencies of 500 hertz (Hz) and above or by 15 dB for frequencies less than or equal to 125 hertz. 
Sound level meter means an instrument meeting American Standard Institute's Standard S1.4-1971 or most recent revision thereof for type 1 or type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
Sound pressure level of a sound, in decibels, means 20 times the logarithm to the base 20 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
Vibration means any movement of the earth, ground, or other similar surface created by temporal and special oscillation of displacement, velocity, or acceleration in any mechanical device or equipment located upon, attached to, affixed to, or in conjunction with that surface. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-2; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3939, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-302. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise and vibration in the city, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit such noise and vibration generated from or by all sources as specified in this article. 
(b)  It is determined that certain noise levels and vibration are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to public interest. Therefore, the city council declares that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, caused or maintained any noise or vibration in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with this article is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-1; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-303. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating or causing the violation of any of the sections of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the city attorney or the district attorney of the county. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-15; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3949, § 1, 3-4-2002)  
Sec. 18-304. - Public nuisance; additional remedies. 
(a)  As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any section of this article, which operation or maintenance causes or creates sound levels or vibration exceeding the allowable standards as specified in this article, shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with the law. The expense of such abatement may be by resolution of the city council declared to be a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-16; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-305. - Exemptions. 
The following activities shall be exempted from this article: 
(1)  Occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting and entertainment events, provided such events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the city relative to the staging of such events. Notwithstanding the forgoing, any conditional use permit or other permit issued by the City of Pomona requiring the permittee to abide by this article shall not be entitled to an exemption under this section without express action of such exemption. 
(2)  Except as provided in section 14-399, any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle, work or warning alarm or bell, provided the sounding of any bell or alarm on any building or motor vehicle shall terminate its operation within 30 minutes in any hour of its being activated. 
(3)  Noise sources associated with or vibration created by construction, repair, remodeling or grading of any real property or during authorized seismic surveys, provided such activities do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday, and provided the noise level created by such activities do not exceed the noise standard of 65 dB(A) plus the limits specified in section 18-311(b) as measured on residential property and any vibration created does not endanger the public health, welfare and safety. 
(4)  All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment associated with agricultural operations, provided: 
a.  Operations do not take place between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a federal or state holiday; 
b.  Such operations and equipment are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions; or 
c.  Such operations and equipment are associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application, provided the application is made in accordance with permits issued by or regulations enforced by the county department of agriculture. 
(5)  Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property, provided such activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
(6)  Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-7; Ord. No. 3120, § 1(part); Ord. No. 4110, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 18-306. - Variances. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a noise or vibration source which violates any of the sections of this article may file an application with the chief of police for a variance from the sections of this article wherein such owner or operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with such sections, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method of achieving compliance, and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. An application for a variance shall remain subject to prosecution under the terms of this article until a variance is granted. 
(b)  The chief of police shall evaluate all applications for variance from the requirements of this article and may grant such variances with respect to time for compliance, subject to such terms, conditions and requirements as he may deem reasonable to achieve maximum compliance with this article. Such terms, conditions and requirements may include but shall not be limited to noise levels and operating hours. Each such variance shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving maximum compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment. In his determination the chief of police shall consider the following: 
(1)  The magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise. 
(2)  The use of the property within the area of impingement by the noise. 
(3)  The time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work. 
(4)  The economic factors related to age and useful life of the equipment. 
(5)  The general public interest, welfare and safety. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms of such variance shall be unlawful. The decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Code 1959, §§ 14.9-12, 14.9-13; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-307. - Decibel measure criteria. 
Any decibel measurement made pursuant to this article shall be based on a reference sound pressure of 20 micropascals as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network (scale) at slow response. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-3; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-308. - Proposed developments. 
Each department whose duty it is to review and approve new projects or changes to existing projects that result or may result in the creation of noise shall consult with the chief of police prior to any such approval. If at any time the chief of police has reason to believe that a standard, regulation or action or proposed standard, regulation or action of any department respecting noise does not conform to this article, the chief of police may request such department to consult with him on the advisability of revising such standard or regulation to obtain uniformity. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-11; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-309. - Vibration. 
Notwithstanding other sections of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to create, maintain or cause any ground vibration which is perceptible without instruments at any point on any affected property adjoining the property on which the vibration source is located. For the purpose of this article, the perception threshold shall be presumed to be more than 0.05 inch per second RMS vertical velocity. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-10; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-310. - Designated noise zones. 
The properties described in this article are hereby assigned to the following noise zones: 
Noise zone 1 	Single-family residential properties 
Noise zone 2 	Multiple-family residential properties 
Noise zone 3 	Commercial properties 
Noise zone 4 	Industrial properties 
Noise zone 5 	High traffic corridors 
 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-4; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3939, § 2)  
Sec. 18-311. - Exterior noise standards. 
(a)  The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all property within a designated noise zone: 
Noise 
Zone 	Time Interval 	Allowable Interior Noise Level 
1 	10:00 p.m. to  7:00 a.m. 	50 dB(A) 
	 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	60 dB(A) 
2 	10:00 p.m. to  7:00 a.m. 	50 dB(A) 
	 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	65 dB(A) 
3 	10:00 p.m. to  7:00 a.m. 	60 dB(A) 
	 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	65 dB(A) 
4 	Any 	70 dB(A) 
5 	Any 	70 dB(A) 
 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the city to create any noise or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the noise level, when measured on any other property, to exceed the following: 
(1)  The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than 30 minutes in any hour; 
(2)  The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any hour; 
(3)  The noise standard plus ten dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; 
(4)  The noise standard plus 15 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
(5)  The noise standard plus 20 dB(A) for any period of time. 
(c)  If the ambient noise level exceeds any of the noise limit categories in subsections (b)(1) through (4) of this section, the cumulative period applicable to such category shall be increased to reflect such ambient noise level. If the ambient noise level exceeds the noise limit category in subsection (b)(5) of this section, the maximum allowable noise level under such category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
(d)  If the measurement location is on a boundary between two different noise zones, the lower noise level standard applicable to the noise zone shall apply. 
(e)  If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient noise level can be determined, the measured noise level obtained while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to the allowable noise level standards as specified respective to the measurement location's designated land use and for the time of day the noise level is measured. The reasonableness of temporarily discontinuing the noise generation by an intruding noise source shall be determined by the chief of police for the purpose of establishing the existing ambient noise level at the measurement location. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-5; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3861, § 1; Ord. No. 3939, § 3)  
Sec. 18-312. - Interior noise standards. 
(a)  The following noise standard, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within all noise zones: 
Noise 
Zone 	Type of Land Use 	Time Interval 	Allowable Interior Noise Level in dB(A) 
All 	Residential 	10:00 p.m. to  7:00 a.m. 	40 
		 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	50 
 
Each of the noise limits specified shall be reduced by five dB(A) for impulse or simple tone noises or for noises consisting of speech or music; provided, however, that if the ambient noise level exceeds the resulting standard, the ambient shall be the standard. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the city to create any noise or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such a person which causes the noise level, when measured within any other residential dwelling unit in any noise zone, to exceed the following: 
(1)  The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; 
(2)  The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
(3)  The noise standard plus ten dB(A) for any period of time. 
(c)  If the ambient noise level exceeds any of the limit categories in subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section, the cumulative period applicable to such category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. If the ambient level exceeds the noise category in subsection (b)(3) of this section, the maximum allowable noise level under such category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
(d)  If the measurement location is on a boundary between two different noise zones, the lower noise level standard applicable to the noise zone shall apply. 
(e)  If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient noise level can be determined, the same procedures specified in section 18-311(e) shall be deemed proper to enforce this section. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-6; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-313. - Schools, churches, libraries and health care institutions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a noise which causes a noise level at any school, hospital or similar health care institution, church, or library, while such is in use, to exceed the noise standards specified in section 18-311 prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital, church or library is located or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in a hospital, convalescent home or other similar health care institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three separate locations within one-tenth mile of the institution or facility indicating a quiet zone. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-8; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-314. - Noise level measurement. 
The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected residential unit. The measurements shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source with windows in an open position, depending on the normal seasonal ventilation requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-9; Ord. No. 3120, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-315. - Animal noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to keep or harbor any dog or other animal that, by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, or the making of other noise, shall annoy or disturb a neighborhood of two or more persons who are residents of separate households. 
(b)  Upon documentation of three or more violations of this section, any such dog or animal shall be deemed a nuisance and may be seized and impounded. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-18; Ord. No. 3939, § 4 (part)) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6.  
Sec. 18-316. - Residential property nuisance noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon a residential property or a property with a residential use to make or continue or cause to be made, within the city limits, any disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. 
(b)  Disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises include, but are not limited to, the playing, use, operation or the permitting of playing, use or operation of any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drums, stereo, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in any residential area. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any participant in a duly licensed parade or to any person who or organization that has been otherwise duly authorized by the city to engage in such conduct. Notwithstanding the forgoing, any conditional use permit or other permit issued by the City of Pomona requiring the permittee to abide by this article shall not be entitled to such exemption under this section without express action of such exception. 
(d)  The operation on a residential property of any such set, instrument, stereo, television set, machine, loudspeaker, or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(e)  The operation on a residential property of any such set, instrument, stereo, television set, machine, loudspeaker, or similar device between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9-19; Ord. No. 3939, § 4(part); Ord. No. 4110, § 2, 11-17-2008)  
Secs. 18-317—18-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SHOPPING CARTS AND LAUNDRY CARTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Shopping carts and laundry carts, Business and Professions Code § 22435 et seq.; local ordinances regulating shopping carts or laundry carts, Business and Professions Code § 22435.8. 
 
Sec. 18-351. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned shopping cart prevention plan means a document submitted by the responsible business owner pursuant to section 18-357. 
Abandoned shopping carts means any cart taken from the business site without the written consent of the owner to either public or private property. 
Agent means the person or persons designated in the owner's abandoned cart prevention plan authorized to perform or provide retrieval services on behalf of the owner of the business. The agent may be the owner if so designated in the approved abandoned cart prevention plan. 
Cart means both shopping carts and laundry carts. 
Director means the city utility services director, or such other official designated by the city manager to administer this article. 
Laundry cart means a basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for the purpose of transporting fabrics and/or clothing, and the supplies necessary to process them. 
Owner means any person or entity, who in connection with the conduct of a business, possesses, leases or makes carts available to customers or the public for the purpose of transporting merchandise on the business premises. For purposes of this article, "owner" shall also include the owner's designated agent. 
Premises means the entire area owned, occupied, and/or utilized by the owner, who provides carts for use by customers or other persons, including any parking lot or other property provided by or on behalf of the owner for customer parking or use. 
Shopping cart means a basket mounted on wheels or a similar device intended for the use of customers in a retail or commercial business establishment for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind within the confines of the business establishment, including the parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-201, 9-22-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-352. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds that the removal of shopping and laundry carts from the premises or parking areas of retail establishments, and the use and abandonment of such carts, or parts thereof, on public or private property is found to create conditions tending to reduce property values, promote blight and deterioration, constitute a nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, be aesthetically detrimental to the community, and is injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the use of shopping or laundry carts on public right-of-ways, and the presence of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public or private property, is declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure that both customers and business owners take responsibility for the abatement of this public nuisance. This article requires business owners to take measures to prevent the removal of shopping carts from the business site, to make unauthorized removal of such shopping carts a violation of this Code, and to facilitate retrieval of abandoned shopping carts in a manner consistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-200, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-353. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all persons, including, but not limited to, owners of business establishments or other commercial services within the city limits who provide carts for customer use. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-202, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-354. - Cart identification and premises signage required. 
(a)  Every cart, including shopping carts and laundry carts, owned or provided by any business owner shall have a legible sign permanently affixed to the cart that contains the following information in both English and Spanish languages: 
(1)  An up-to-date identity of the cart owner, business establishment, or both. 
(2)  Notification to the public that the removal of the cart from the premises or parking area of the business establishment, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state and city law. 
(3)  An up-to-date address and valid phone number of the cart owner or the business establishment for cart return. 
(4)  Notification to the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises. 
(b)  Any cart found abandoned on public or private property that does not have the identification and information required by this section shall be removed from the property and disposed of by the city in accordance with state law. 
(c)  All business owners providing carts shall post signs in both English and Spanish languages no less than 18 inches in width and 24 inches in height with block lettering not less than one-half inch in width and two inches in height in a conspicuous place on the premises within two feet of all customer entrances and exits, including the parking area, stating at a minimum, the following: 
REMOVAL OF CARTS FROM THESE PREMISES AND/OR UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION IS PROHIBITED BY LAW 
(Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code Section 22435.2; Pomona City Code Section 18-356) 
AND PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $1,000 
and 
SACAR LOS CARRITOS Y/O TENERLOS EN SU POSESION SIN AUTORIZACION ES PROHIBIDO POR LA LEY 
(Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code Section 22435.2; Codigo de la Ciudad de Pomona Seccion 18-356 
Y SERA CASTIGADO CON UNA MULTA 
DE HASTA $1,000 
(d)  Any business owner not in compliance with this section within 60 calendar days from its adoption will be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-203, 9-22-2003; Ord. No. 4101, § 1, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 18-355. - Abandonment prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any cart to be abandoned on or upon any sidewalk, street or other public area, or upon private property, other than the premises of the owner of such cart. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a business owner to knowingly have on its premises for the use of its customers, carts identified on the carts as belonging to a different business owner. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-204, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-356. - Unauthorized removal and/or possession prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful to do any of the following acts if a cart had or has a permanently affixed sign as provided in section 18-354: 
(1)  To remove a cart from the business premises or the parking area of a business establishment providing carts for use while on the premises, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner or business establishment of possession of the cart; 
(2)  To be in possession of a cart that has been removed from the business premises or the parking area of a business establishment providing carts for use while on the premises, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner or business establishment of possession of the cart; 
(3)  To be in possession of a cart with serial numbers, its sign or containment mechanisms removed, obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner or business establishment of possession of the cart; 
(4)  To alter, convert, or tamper with a cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof, including but not limited to containment mechanisms, or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart; or 
(5)  To be in possession of a cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of the business establishment providing carts for use while on the premises, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner or business establishment of possession of the cart. 
(b)  There is a rebuttable presumption that any cart with proper identification pursuant to section 18-354 but not located on the premises or parking lot of the proper business establishment: 
(1)  Was removed from the business premises by the person using the cart, and without the owner's consent; or 
(2)  Was not abandoned by the owner. 
(c)  Subsection (a)(1) shall not apply to carts removed as authorized by the owner for the purpose of repair, maintenance or disposal. 
(d)  Subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(5) shall not apply to those persons who obtain written consent from the owner allowing the removal and use of the cart off the premises of the proper business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-205, 9-22-2003; Ord. No. 4101, § 2, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 18-357. - Mandatory abandoned cart prevention plan. 
Every business owner who provides carts, or allows or intends to allow the use of carts, shall develop, implement and comply with the terms and conditions of a city approved abandoned cart prevention plan to prevent the unauthorized removal by any person of any carts from the owner's premises and, if removed, to retrieve the cart within 24 hours of the removal, or notice of removal. The owner's abandoned cart prevention plan shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Name of business/owner. The name of the owner and the business name; the physical address where the business is conducted; name, address and phone numbers of the on-site and off-site owner if different. 
(2)  Inventory of carts. A complete list of all carts maintained on or in the premises. 
(3)  Community outreach. 
a.  A description of the community outreach process under which the owner shall cause notice to be provided to customers that the removal of carts from the premises is prohibited, and a violation of state and city law. This notice shall include, but is not limited to, flyers distributed on the premises, warnings on shopping bags, signs posted in prominent places near door and parking lot exits, direct mail, announcements using intercom systems on the premises, web site or other means demonstrated to be effective. 
b.  Notice of posting. There shall be posted by the owner of any retail establishment furnishing a parking area and shopping carts for its customers, prominently and conspicuously, a notice in substantially the following form: "REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS FROM THESE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED BY LAW (POMONA CODE SECTION 18-356) AND WILL SUBJECT THE VIOLATOR TO A FINE OF UP TO $1,000.00." 
(4)  Cart identification. Signs and cart identification requirements which conform to state law. 
(5)  Loss prevention measures. A description of the specific measures that the owner shall implement to prevent cart removal from the premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to, electronic or other disabling devices on the carts so they cannot be removed from the premises, effective management practices, use of courtesy clerks to accompany customers and return carts to the store, use of security personnel to prevent removal, security deposit for use of cart, other demonstrably effective measures acceptable to the city's utility services director, likely to prevent cart removal from the premises. 
(6)  Employee training. A description of an ongoing employee training program that shall be implemented by the owner and that shall be designed to educate new and existing employees on the abandoned cart prevention plan and conditions contained therein, at least annually. 
(7)  Mandatory cart retrieval. A plan for retrieval of abandoned carts by the owner within a 24-hour time period of removal, or evidence of a contract with a city licensed retrieval service. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-206, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-358. - Submittal of plan for approval or denial. 
(a)  Each business owner shall submit an abandoned cart prevention plan in compliance with this article beginning on the effective date of this ordinance along with payment of mandatory abandoned cart prevention plan fee as established by city council resolution. For all new businesses that open during or after this deadline, and have shopping and laundry carts, the owner shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article regardless of receipt of written notice from the director of utility services. In implementing this article for the period commencing upon adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived through December 31, 2004, the director shall provide no less than 60 days written notice to each owner of the date that the owner's initial abandoned cart prevention plan is due. The director may approve or deny the proposed plan and notify the owner of such decision within 30 days of receipt of the plan. If approved, the abandoned cart prevention plan shall be implemented by the owner no later than 30 days from the date of approval. After December 31, 2004, the owner shall comply with the provisions of this article regardless of receipt of written notice from the director. 
(b)  The director may deny a plan based upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Implementation of the plan would violate provisions of the building, zoning, health, safety, fire, police or other city codes, or any county, state, or federal law which substantially affects public health, welfare or safety. 
(2)  The plan fails to include all the information required by this article. 
(3)  The plan is insufficient or inadequate to prevent removal of carts from the owner's premises. 
(4)  The plan fails to address any special or unique conditions due to the geographical location of the premises as they relate to cart retention and prevention efforts. 
(5)  Implementation of the plan would violate a term or condition of another policy or requirement of the city Code. 
(6)  The owner has knowingly made a false statement of fact, or omitted a fact required to be revealed in an application for a plan, or in any addendum or report or other information required to be provided regarding the plan. 
(c)  If the plan is rejected as incomplete or inadequate, the director shall indicate the areas of incompleteness or inadequacy, and the owner shall have an additional 30 days in which to resubmit a corrected plan. 
(d)  An owner who fails to submit a complete plan, or fails to implement approved plan measures, or fails to comply with the approved plan measures, may be required to submit a new plan upon the city's request and/or shall be subject to enforcement of these requirements through any lawful means available to the city. 
(e)  The director's denial of a plan shall be the final administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-207, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-359. - Plan modification. 
At any time, subsequent to the director's approval of an abandoned cart prevention plan, the owner may request a modification of a previously approved plan to address a change in circumstances, an unanticipated physical or economic impact of the plan, or a need to modify an ineffective plan. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-208, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-360. - Exemption from mandatory plan. 
(a)  The city may exempt any owner from compliance with this article if records indicate that carts from the owner's establishment had not been retrieved at the city's expense in the previous year. 
(b)  Any owner may request an exemption on an annual basis from the requirements of this article if the owner provides written documentation and demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that the owner has: 
(1)  A contract with a city licensed cart retrieval service, or a physical device or mechanism in place or management practice currently implemented that prevents the unauthorized removal of carts from the owner's premises; and, 
(2)  None of the owner's carts have been found abandoned on three or more occasions during the period of six continuous months immediately preceding the date the application for an exemption is submitted to the city. 
(c)  A written application for the exemption shall include all of the following: 
(1)  The name of the owner and the name of the business; the physical address where the business is conducted; and the name, address and phone number of the on-site and off-site owner; 
(2)  The method, management practice, or physical device that will ensure that the carts will not leave the premises. 
(3)  Payment of the exemption application fee as established by city council resolution. 
(d)  Any exemption granted to an owner shall be void upon the sale or transfer of ownership of the business. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-209, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-361. - Renewal of exemption. 
Any owner granted an exemption from the abandoned cart prevention plan shall file with the director a written application for a one-year renewal of the exemption annually in accordance with the provisions of section 18-360. The written application for a renewal of the exemption shall include the information required to be submitted in the initial application for the exemption in accordance with the provision of section 18-360 and payment of the renewal exemption fee as established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-210, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-362. - Denial or revocation of a renewal of an exemption. 
An application for a renewal of an exemption may be denied or revoked by the city upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Any of the owner's carts is or has been abandoned on public or private property, or in a right-of-way for longer than three business days after notification by the director on three occasions in any six month period. 
(2)  The owner has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The owner knowingly makes a false statement of fact or omits a fact required to be revealed in an application for the exemption, or in any amendment or report or other information required to be made. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-211, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-363. - Hearing and appeal procedure for renewal of exemption. 
(a)  Notice of intended decision. 
(1)  Upon determining the existence of any of the grounds for denial or revocation of a renewal of an exemption in accordance with section 18-362, the director may issue to the owner a notice of intended decision to deny or revoke the exemption. 
(2)  The notice of intended decision shall state all the grounds upon which the denial or revocation of the renewal application for an exemption is based. 
(3)  The notice of intended decision shall advise the owner that the denial or revocation shall become final unless the owner files a written request for hearing before the director within ten calendar days of the date of service of the notice of intended decision to deny or revoke the renewal of the exemption. 
(4)  The notice of intended decision shall specify the effective date of the denial or revocation of such exemption. 
(b)  Procedure for hearing before the director. 
(1)  The written request for a hearing before the director must be received by the director within ten calendar days of the notice of intended decision to deny or revoke the renewal of the exemption. 
(2)  Upon timely receipt of a written request for a hearing, the director shall schedule a hearing, which shall be held no later than 30 calendar days after receipt of a timely request for hearing. 
(3)  The director shall serve a notice of hearing on the owner at least ten calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
(4)  At the hearing before the director, the owner shall be given the opportunity to present witnesses and relevant documentary evidence. 
(5)  The hearing will be conducted informally and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence which the city deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious may be considered. 
(c)  Decision of the director. 
(1)  Within 20 calendar days after the hearing, the director shall serve on the owner a written decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the director's intended decision. 
(2)  The decision by the director after hearing shall become final unless the owner files an appeal before the city manager within the time period specified in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Appeals to the city manager. 
(1)  If an owner is dissatisfied with the written decision of the director, the owner may file an appeal to the city manager. 
(2)  The appeal must be in writing on a form provided by the city manager's office and must be received by the city manager's office within 15 calendar days of the date of the director's decision. An appeal fee established by city council resolution shall be submitted concurrently with the appeal form. 
(3)  The city manager, or his designee, shall preside at the hearing and hear all facts and testimony presented and deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-212, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-364 - Noncompliance; enforcement 
(a)  Any owner who fails to comply with any provision of this article or any provision of the owner's approved abandoned cart prevention plan shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation through any lawful means available to the city, including without limitation, those set forth in Business and Professions Code § 22435.7, as well as the institution of an administrative remedy in accordance with this article. Pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 22435.7, an administrative fee shall be established by city council resolution. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection 18-354(a) and/or section 18-356 is guilty of a misdemeanor. The provisions of these sections are not intended to preclude the application of any other laws relating to the prosecution of thefts. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-213, 9-22-2003)  
Sec. 18-365. - Retrieval notification. 
The city shall notify the owner of an abandoned cart as identified on the signage information permanently affixed to the cart. The city notification shall be documented and provided either by telephone or by written notice. The notification shall require that the identified carts be retrieved pursuant to the conditions for retrieval as set forth in the owner's abandoned cart retrieval plan. Carts not retrieved in accordance with the approved cart retrieval plan shall be subject to the administrative fee as provided for in section 18-364. 
(Ord. No. 3996, § 5-214, 9-22-2003)  
Secs. 18-366—18-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PRIVATE WELLS AND RESERVOIRS 
 
Sec. 18-391. - Violations; recovery of costs. 
Any water well that is abandoned and is not capped or filled in, so as to meet the requirements of the director of public works/city engineer, is a public nuisance. The director of public works/city engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any property, either private or public, within the city and take whatever steps are necessary to cap or fill in the abandoned well. The owner of such property shall be charged the cost of the work required and done by the director of public works/city engineer. The expenses of the director of public works/city engineer shall be collected in accordance with Government Code §§ 38773.1 and 38773.5. 
(Code 1959, § 34-58; Ord. No. 1162, § 6) 
State Law reference— Authority to define nuisance, Government Code § 38771; nuisance abatement, Government Code § 33773.  
Sec. 18-392. - License for construction. 
Every person, school district or governmental agency, water company, city or association partnership, or irrigation company in the county, any of whom own, control or operate or have upon their premises a water well or reservoir within the city limits, is hereby required, before starting to drill a water well or to construct and build a reservoir within the city limits, to first obtain a license to drill and construct a water well or reservoir within the city limits from the director of public works/city engineer. The director of public works/city engineer shall issue such a license upon the applicant's giving to the director of public works/city engineer the following information: 
(1)  The location of the proposed water well or reservoir. 
(2)  The size of the hole to be dug or reservoir to be constructed. 
(3)  The proposed depth of the water well or reservoir. 
(4)  The exact legal description of the property upon which the water well is to be located or the reservoir is to be constructed. 
(Code 1959, § 34-54; Ord. No. 1162, § 2)  
Sec. 18-393. - Covering standpipes; fencing reservoirs. 
(a)  Any person, governmental unit or department thereof, city, school district, state or county owning, operating and maintaining a standpipe within the city limits of greater than ten inches in diameter and more than two feet in depth shall keep it covered and the cover locked to the side of the pipe so that it can only be opened by removing the lock. 
(b)  All reservoirs shall be fenced according to regulations to be provided by the director of public works/city engineer. Such regulations shall be designed to further public safety and prevent diminution of water quality or water quantity. 
(Code 1959, § 34-55; Ord. No. 1162, § 3)  
Sec. 18-394. - Abandonment. 
(a)  All water wells or reservoirs which are abandoned within the city limits shall not be so abandoned until the director of public works/city engineer has been notified, upon a form which he shall provide, of the intention of the owner of such well or reservoir to abandon it. It is hereby required that all water wells abandoned shall be immediately capped at the time of their abandonment or filled in and that the capping or filling in of the well shall be done under the direction and supervision of the director of public works/city engineer. The director of public works/city engineer shall enter upon the recordation of his office in connection with the water well the facts concerning the abandonment, the date and exactly how the well was capped or filled in at the time of abandonment. 
(b)  Upon the abandonment of any reservoir, the owner thereof is hereby required to fill it in so that it will not be a hazard to life within the community. The director of public works/city engineer will enter upon his records the facts of the time of the abandonment of the reservoir and the facts of what was done to fill in the reservoir. 
(Code 1959, § 34-56; Ord. No. 1162, § 4)  
Sec. 18-395. - Investigation of abandonment. 
The director of public works/city engineer is hereby empowered, upon a reasonable suspicion of the existence of an abandoned water well, to enter upon any property within the city and determine whether or not it exists and if it has been properly capped or filled in so as to preserve the safety of life and limb within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 34-57; Ord. No. 1161, § 5)  
Secs. 18-396—18-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 62. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-431. - Definitions. 
Any terms defined in the federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency on November 16, 1990, as may from time to time be amended, as used in this article shall have the same meaning as in that statute or regulations. Specifically, the definition of the following terms included in that statute or regulations are incorporated by reference, as applicable or as may be amended: "discharge," "illicit discharge," "pollutant," and "stormwater." 
(Code 1959, § 35-3; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-432. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by: 
(1)  Eliminating nonstormwater discharges to the city storm sewer. 
(2)  Controlling the discharge to city storm sewers from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater. 
(3)  Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable. 
(b)  The intent of this article is to protect and enhance the water quality of the city's watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act. 
(Code 1959, § 35-2; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-433. - Construction and applicability of article. 
This article shall be construed to ensure consistency with the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto; applicable implementing regulations; and NPDES Permit No. LA 0061654-CI16948 and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 35-5; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-434. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the sections of this article shall be guilty of an infraction. After a third conviction for a violation of the same section, subsequent violations within a 12-month period may be charged as a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the sections of this article is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare and is declared and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated and/or restored by any authorized enforcement official. Civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city attorney. The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property, and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property. Such lien shall continue in existence until the lien shall be paid. If the lien is not satisfied by the owner of the property within three months after the completion by the authorized enforcement official of the removal of the nuisance and the restoration of the property to its original condition, the property may be sold in satisfaction thereof in a like manner as other real property is sold under execution. If any violation of this article constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the city council shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further hearing. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action the city may seek and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
(1)  A temporary and/or permanent injunction. 
(2)  Assessment of the violation for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(3)  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation. 
(4)  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this subsection shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing this article. 
(Code 1959, §§ 35-18, 35-19, 35-23, 35-25; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement authorized, Government Code § 38773.  
Sec. 18-435. - Taking of property. 
This article shall not operate to deprive any landowner of substantially all of the market value of his property or otherwise constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. If application of this article to a specific project would create a taking, pursuant to this article the city council may allow additional land uses, but only to the extent necessary to avoid a taking. Such uses shall be consistent with and carry out the purposes of this article as stated in section 18-432. 
(Code 1959, § 35-7; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-436. - Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing violation. 
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any section of this article shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 35-21; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-437. - Acts potentially resulting in violation of federal and/or state acts. 
Any person who violates any section of this article or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this article or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation may also be in violation of the federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act (Water Code § 13000 et seq.) and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts, including civil and criminal penalty. Any enforcement action authorized under this article should also include notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
(Code 1959, § 35-22; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 18-438—18-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 18-461. - Responsibility for administration. 
This article shall be administered for the city by the city engineer. Where storm drain facilities and/or watercourses are owned and/or maintained by the county public works department or other public agency legally responsible for certain watercourses, the requirements and regulations of county public works department or such other agency shall be applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 35-4; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-462. - Remedies not exclusive. 
Remedies under this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for in this article shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Code 1959, § 35-28; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-463. - Administrative enforcement powers. 
In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this article, any authorized enforcement official has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies: 
(1)  Cease and desist orders. When an authorized enforcement official finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this article, the official may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge or practice or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall: 
a.  Comply with the requirement; 
b.  Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and/or 
c.  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring. 
(2)  Notice to clean. Whenever an authorized enforcement official finds any oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land or upon any parcel of land or grounds which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the city storm sewer system or a nonstormwater discharge to the city storm system, he may give notice to remove such oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice. 
(Code 1959, § 35-26; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-464. - Authority to arrest or issue citations. 
(a)  The city manager shall have and is vested with the authority to arrest or cite any person who violates any section of this article in the manner provided by the Penal Code for the arrest or release on citation of misdemeanors/infractions as prescribed by Penal Code pt. 2, title 3, ch. 5 (Penal Code § 833 et seq.); Penal Code pt. 2, title 3, ch. 5C (Penal Code § 853.5 et seq.); and Penal Code pt. 2, title 3, ch. 5D (Penal Code § 853.9 et seq.). 
(b)  Such authorized enforcement officials or employees may issue a citation and notice to appear in the manner prescribed by Penal Code pt. 2, title 3, ch. 5C (Penal Code § 853.5 et seq.), including Penal Code § 853.6. It is the intent of the city council that the immunities prescribed in Penal Code § 836.5 be applicable to public officers or employees acting the course and scope of employment pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 35-27; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-465. - inspection authority. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the sections of this article or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises or perform any duty imposed upon the official by this article, provided that: 
(1)  If such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and 
(2)  If such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. 
(b)  Any such request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that if the entry is refused inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. If the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(c)  Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this article, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illicit discharges, discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater system, or similar factors. 
(Code 1959, § 35-14; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-466. - Authority to sample and establish sampling devices. 
The city shall have the right to establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations pursuant to this article. During all inspections as provided in this article, the official may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on site. 
(Code 1959, § 35-15; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-467. - Notification of spills. 
As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed release of materials, pollutants or waste which may result in pollutants or nonstormwater discharges entering the city storm sewer system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and cleanup of such release and shall notify the city of the occurrence by telephoning the city and confirming the notification by correspondence to the city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 35-16; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-468. - Requirements to test or monitor. 
Any authorized enforcement official may request that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater system undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the official may specify. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analyses and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and/or reports requested. 
(Code 1959, § 35-17; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-469. - Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program. 
Any business required to file a hazardous materials business plan under Health and Safety Code div. 20, ch. 6.95 (Health and Safety Code § 25500 et seq.) for any facility subject to the state's hazardous materials inventory and response program shall submit a program for compliance with this article, including the prohibitions on nonstormwater discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce stormwater pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Code 1959, § 35-29; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-470. - Judicial review. 
The provisions of Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6 are applicable to judicial review of city decisions pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 35-24; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 18-471—18-490. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 18-491. - Discharge of pollutants. 
The discharge of nonstormwater discharges to the city storm sewer system is prohibited. All discharges of material other than stormwater must be in compliance with an NPDES permit issued for the discharge, other than NPDES Permit No. CA 0061654-CI16948. 
(Code 1959, § 35-8; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-492. - Exceptions to discharge prohibition. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in section 18-491: 
(1)  Any discharge regulated under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations. 
(2)  Discharges from the following activities are not subject to the prohibition on discharges when properly managed: 
a.  Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources; 
b.  Landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
c.  Irrigation water; 
d.  Diverted stream flows; 
e.  Rising groundwaters; 
f.  Infiltration to separate storm drains; 
g.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
h.  Foundation and footing drains; 
i.  Water from crawl space pumps; 
j.  Air conditioning condensation; 
k.  Springs; 
l.  Individual residential car washings; 
m.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
n.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
o.  Municipal street maintenance activities; 
p.  Street washwaters; or 
q.  Flows from firefighting. 
(Code 1959, § 35-9; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-493. - Discharge in violation of permit. 
Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of NPDES Permit No. 0061654-CJ16948, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city engineer, and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. 
(Code 1959, § 35-10; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-494. - Illicit discharge and illicit connections. 
It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain, or continue illicit drainage connections to the city storm sewer system and to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the city storm sewer system. This prohibition is expressly retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(Code 1959, § 35-11; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-495. - Reduction of pollutants in stormwater. 
Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the city storm sewer system shall undertake all practicable measures to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include ownership and use of facilities which may be a source of pollutants such as parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, commercial facilities, stores fronting city streets, etc. The following minimal requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catchbasin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city so that the it might be or become a pollutant, except in containers or in lawfully established dumping grounds. 
The occupant or tenant or, in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain such sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from such sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on such real property as required for the disposal of garbage. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(2)  Standards for parking lots and similar structures. A person owning or operating a parking lot, gas station pavement or similar structure shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the city storm sewer system. 
(3)  Best management practices for new developments and redevelopments. Any construction contractor performing work in the city shall endeavor, whenever possible, to provide filter materials at the catchbasin to retain any debris and dirt from flowing into the city's storm sewer system. The city engineer may establish controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from new developments and redevelopments as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants. Any person or company engaging in a construction activity that requires an NPDES construction permit must demonstrate possession of such permit before grading and/or building permits may be issued. A copy of the NPDES permit shall be retained on site and shall be shown to authorized enforcement officials upon request. 
(4)  Notification of intent and compliance with general permits. Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger, described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state water resources control board, or the regional water quality control board, Los Angeles Region, shall provide notice of intent, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such discharges. All persons or companies engaging in industrial activity that requires an individual NPDES permit shall acquire such permit before discharging any nonstormwater runoff into the city storm sewer system. A copy of the NPDES permit shall be retained on site and shall be shown to authorized enforcement officials upon request. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. 
(5)  Compliance with best management practices. Where best management practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any federal, state, regional, and/or city agency for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater system, every person undertaking such activity or operation or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such guidelines or requirements as may be identified by the city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 35-12; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-496. - Watercourse protection. 
(a)  Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes or such person's lessee or tenant shall: 
(1)  Keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles which would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse; 
(2)  Maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse; and 
(3)  Not remove such vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. 
(b)  No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts, unless written authorization has first been obtained from the city engineer or other applicable controlling public agency: 
(1)  Discharge into or connect any pipe or channel to a watercourse; 
(2)  Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse; 
(3)  Deposit in, plant in, or remove any material from a watercourse, including its banks, except as required for necessary maintenance; 
(4)  Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change, or remove any structure in a watercourse; or 
(5)  Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of or within a watercourse or so close to the side as to cause a diversion of the flow or to cause a probability of such material being carried away by stormwaters passing through such watercourse. 
(Code 1959, § 35-13; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 18-497—18-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COST (RECOVERY) CENTER 
 
Sec. 18-521. - Purpose and scope. 
The city stormwater cost center is established to provide funding for the stormwater management and discharge control program. The stormwater cost center shall include the following: 
(1)  All activities and resultant expenses required under the county urban runoff clean water program. 
(2)  All activities and resultant expenses required by a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit which authorizes and regulates discharges from the city storm sewer system. 
(3)  All activities and resultant expenses associated with the cleaning, maintenance and operation of the city storm sewer system and the maintenance and management of those facilities that potentially contribute pollutants to the city storm sewer system. 
(4)  Capital expenses associated with the repair, replacement, and capital improvement of the city storm sewer system. 
(5)  All expenses associated with the maintenance, operation, and capital requirements of any stormwater treatment system which may be prospectively required by federal and/or state law. 
(6)  All expenses for any activities directly related to any of the expenses in subsections (1) through (5) of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 35-30; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-522. - Revenue source. 
The city stormwater system cost center shall derive revenue from all of the following sources: 
(1)  Reimbursements, grants, and/or subventions made available through the county stormwater/urban runoff quality management program. 
(2)  Reimbursements, grants, and/or subventions made available by any other governmental entity for the purpose of supporting any of the activities of the city stormwater management and discharge control program. 
(3)  Any other funds the city council directs to be allocated to the stormwater system cost center from money available to it, including but not limited to money in its general fund. 
(4)  Service charges assessed by the city in accordance with this article. 
(5)  Any and all fines, cost reimbursements, and/or fees received by the city as a result of criminal and/or civil prosecution for violations of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 35-31; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-523. - Establishment of service charge. 
Every person owning real property within the city or owning property not within the incorporated city limits but discharging stormwater to the city storm sewer system shall pay a service charge calculated in accordance with section 18-524. 
(Code 1959, § 35-32; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-524. - Calculation of service charges. 
Under this division service charges shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be calculated in a manner which distributes, as equitably as possible, storm sewer system costs to users of the system proportionate to the benefit received. Stormwater runoff and consequent storm sewer system loading is directly related to the physical size of any parcel of land. The equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) may be utilized in the calculation of service charges where each single-family residential parcel has an EDU of one and the EDUs for other types of property will be calculated on the basis of six EDUs per acre of land with a minimum of one and a maximum of 30 EDUs for any single parcel of land. In addition, other factors which disproportionately affect storm sewer system costs and which are attributable to any user or class of users may be utilized in the setting of rates for that user or class of users. 
(Code 1959, § 35-33; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-525. - Collection, interest and penalties. 
(a)  The city treasurer is authorized to have the charges imposed by this article collected by the county in conjunction with the county's collection of property tax revenues for the city as a part of the general sanitation charge. If the county collects the charges imposed by this article, the imposition of penalties, additional fees and interest upon owners who fail to remit any charge imposed by this article or who fail to remit any delinquent remittance under this article shall be subject to and governed by the rules, regulations and procedures utilized by the county in its collection of property taxes and charges for the city and in its collection of this additional charge for the city. 
(b)  Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under this article shall become a part of the charges required to be paid. 
(Code 1959, § 35-34; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 18-526. - Delinquent charge remedies. 
(a)  Delinquent charges under this article are hereby made a lien upon the real property serviced by the storm sewer system. 
(b)  The amount of any charge, penalty, and interest imposed under this article shall be deemed a debt to the city. 
(c)  The city attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable relief to enforce this article. In any such action, the city shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(d)  The remedies established in this article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available to the city for collection of the charges imposed. 
(Code 1959, § 35-35; Ord. No. 3735, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 18-527—18-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 18-600. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the State of California has in Government Code §§ 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Pomona does hereby adopt the following flood plain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-601. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Secs. 18-602—18-609. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 18-610. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application: 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this article. 
Building. See "structure." 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "flooding." 
Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the flood plain management regulations. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain management regulations means this article and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Governing body is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
Historic structure: means any structure that is 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or directly by the secretary of the interior in states with approved programs. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See "base flood." 
Recreational vehicle: means a vehicle which is 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Secs. 18-611—18-619. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 18-620. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of the City of Pomona. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-621. - Basis for establishing flood-prone areas. 
The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of Pomona. This data will be on file at the Public Works Department, City Hall, 505 S. Garey Avenue, Pomona, California. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-622. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-623. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-624. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-625. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of City Council of the City of Pomona, any department, agency, officer or employee thereof; the State of California; or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-626. - Severability. 
This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
Secs. 18-627—18-629. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 18-630. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such construction or other development is within flood-prone areas. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-631. - Designation of the flood plain administrator. 
The public works director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this article by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-632. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Permit review. Review all development permit applications to determine: 
a.  Permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review and use of any other base flood data. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agency or other source. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Secs. 18-633—18-639. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 18-640. - Standards of construction. 
If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall: 
(1)  Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Be constructed: 
a.  With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-641. - Standards for subdivisions or other proposed new development. 
If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that: 
(1)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Sec. 18-642. - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
(1)  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and 
(2)  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
(b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-19-2006)  
Secs. 18-643—18-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - ABANDONED AND DISTRESSED PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 18-700. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish an abandoned property registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties, and to require certain management and maintenance standards for abandoned and distressed properties. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-701. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply in this section: 
Abandoned property means real property that is vacant and either: (1) the subject of a current notice of default, (2) the subject of a current notice of trustee's sale, (3) the subject of a tax assessors lien sale, (4) the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, (5) has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure, or (6) has been surrendered or deserted in contemplation or threat of foreclosure. 
Accessible means any real property or structure that is unsecured in such a way as to allow access to unauthorized persons. 
Agreement for sale means any agreement or written instrument that transfers or conveys title to real property from one person or entity to another person or entity. 
Assignment of rents means a written instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one person or entity to another person or entity. 
Beneficiary means the beneficiary (either original beneficiary or the assignee) under a note secured by a deed of trust. 
Buyer means any person who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement for sale, as defined in this section. 
City means the City of Pomona. 
Code compliance manager shall mean the individual responsible for the day-to-day management of the code compliance division or his/her designee. 
Dangerous building means any building or structure that is in violation of any condition referenced in the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Building, as adopted by Pomona City Code, chapter 74. 
Deed of trust means any instrument, including any deed of trust or mortgage, by which legal title to real property, or any interest therein, is transferred to a trustee as security for a real estate loan, including, without limitation, any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e.: 2nd trust deed, 3rd trust deed, etc. 
Deed in lieu of foreclosure means a document that transfers legal title to a property from the trustor to the trustee, upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust. 
Default means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, whether monetary or otherwise. 
Distressed property means real property that is under a current notice of default or notice of trustee's sale, or pending tax assessor's lien sale, or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary or trustee by way of a deed in lieu of foreclosure, but which is lawfully occupied. 
Enforcement officer shall mean any individual employed, or otherwise charged, by the City of Pomona to enforce codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations, or laws adopted by city council or other regulatory bodies. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that, on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that a subject property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, and/or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant. 
Foreclosure means the process by which a property, placed as security for a loan, is sold to satisfy the debt if the trustor defaults. 
Local means the area within 40 miles of the subject property. 
Neighborhood standard means those conditions that are present on a simple majority of other occupied properties within a 300-foot radius of the subject property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, or any other abandoned property, within the 300-foot radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority. 
Notice of default or notice of trustee's sale means a notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale or other similar remedies authorized by law. 
Out of area means the area in excess of 40 miles from the subject. 
Owner means any person having a legal title in any real property. 
Owner of record means the person or entity having recorded title to the property as shown in the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder's office. 
Property means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property. 
Responsible party means the person having actual control of the property at any given time, including the owner of record, the beneficiary, the trustee, the servicing company, or real estate agent acting, or any other party, acting on behalf of the owner of record, beneficiary, or trustee. 
Securing or its variants means such measures as may be directed by the code enforcement manager or his or her designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, and the repair or boarding of door, window or other openings to a minimum of the current HUD securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required. 
Trustee means the person holding a deed of trust on a property. 
Trustor means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds the legal title to a property over to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
Vacant means a building or structure that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-702. - Recordation of transfer of loan—Deed of trust—Assignment of rents. 
Within ten calendar days following the purchase or transfer of a loan or any deed of trust secured by abandoned property, the new beneficiary and trustee shall both record with the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder's office an assignment of rents that lists the names of the beneficiary and trustee and the mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary and trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the deed of trust. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-703. - Registration requirements. 
(a)  Any beneficiary and trustee under a deed of trust, or their designee, on abandoned property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust, upon default by the trustor, prior to recording a notice of default with the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder's office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, the beneficiary and trustee shall, within ten calendar days following the inspection, register the property with the code enforcement manager on forms provided by the city. The beneficiary and trustee shall post a notice no less than 8.5" × 11" in size on the property indicating the most recent date and time of inspection. The notice shall be posted in a manner consistent with subsection 18-705(c). A failure to perform such inspection or post a notice of inspection shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  Any distressed property shall be inspected by the beneficiary and trustee, or their designee, at least monthly until either: (1) the trustor or other party remedies the default, or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the trustee shall, within ten calendar days following the required inspection, register the property with the code compliance manager on forms provided by the city. The beneficiary and trustee shall post a notice no less than 8.5" × 11" in size on the property indicating the most recent date and time of inspection. The notice shall be updated each time an inspection of the property occurs, and shall be posted in a manner consistent with subsection 18-705(c). A failure to perform such monthly inspections or post or update a notice of inspection shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  The registration shall contain the names of the beneficiary and trustee, the street address of the beneficiary and trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact name, facsimile and phone numbers for the beneficiary and trustee and, in the case of an out of area beneficiary or trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the subject property. 
(d)  At the time of registration, the beneficiary and trustee shall concurrently file a statement of intent which will include: (1) the expected period of vacancy, (2) a plan for regular maintenance during the period of vacancy, and (3) a timeline for the lawful occupancy, rehabilitation or demolition of the subject property. 
(e)  An annual registration fee for the beneficiary and trustee shall accompany the registration form. Registration fees will not be prorated. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1st of each year and must be received by the code compliance manager no later than January 31st of the year due. The amount of the registration fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(f)  Anytime after the property is determined to be vacant and if there are any changes to ownership, whether recorded or not, or if the loan is transferred to another beneficiary, trustee or owner ("responsible party"), the responsible party shall re-register the property with the city. The re-registration must occur within ten calendar days of the change. A re-registration fee will be assessed. The amount of the re-registration fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(g)  Abandoned properties shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this article as long as they remain abandoned. 
(h)  Any person or entity who has registered an abandoned property under this article must report in writing any change of information contained in the registration within ten calendar days following the change. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-704. - Management and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  The beneficiary and trustee of the subject property shall obtain a local property management company that holds a valid and current City of Pomona business license to inspect the property on a weekly basis to monitor the property for compliance with this Code. 
(b)  In addition to any other management and maintenance requirements in this Code (including, but not limited to chapter 18 of this Code), abandoned and/or distressed properties shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Abandoned and/or distressed properties shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, kept free of: weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law), discarded personal items, including, but not limited to, inoperable or abandoned vehicles, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or distressed. 
(2)  Abandoned and/or distressed properties shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
(3)  Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard existing at the time registration was required. 
(i)  Required landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf or so designed specifically designed for residential installation. 
(ii)  Required landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
(iii)  Required maintenance includes, but is not limited to, compliance with Pomona City Code chapter 18 and Pomona Zoning Code section .503-J(M), irrigation equipment that is operational at all times, an ongoing water supply, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
(4)  Pools and spas shall be (i) kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris to prevent pools and spas from becoming a breeding ground for mosquitoes and other vectors, or (ii) drained and kept dry. If pools and spas are kept in working order pursuant to subdivision (i) above, electrical service to the property must be maintained and ongoing, and a failure to maintain electrical service in this scenario shall constitute a violation of this article. Under either subdivision (i) or (ii) above, properties with pools or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of California. 
(c)  Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary, trustee and owner of any obligations set forth in this Code, any other code, law, covenants conditions and restrictions, or any homeowners association rules and regulations that may apply to the property. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-705. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Abandoned and/or distressed properties shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible by unauthorized persons. "Secure manner" includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows, "secure manner" means the re-glazing or boarding of the broken window. If the window is boarded up on the exterior of the building, any boards used must be painted to match the existing color of the building. 
(b)  If any abandoned property is owned by a corporation or out of area beneficiary, trustee or owner, a local property management company that holds a valid and current City of Pomona business license shall be obtained to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this article, and any other applicable local or state laws, are being met. 
(c)  The abandoned property shall be posted with the name and a 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than 18" × 24" in size and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of at least 45 feet and shall contain along with the name and 24-hour contact number, the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY _______ and TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL _______." The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building or structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visual from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals or passersby. All exterior postings must be constructed of, and printed with, weather resistant materials. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-706. - Additional authority. 
In addition to all other enforcement remedies established in this Code, the code compliance manager shall have the authority to require the beneficiary, trustee or owner, or any combination thereof, to implement additional maintenance and security measures, including but not limited to, securing of any and all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to stop the decline of the abandoned or distressed property. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-707. - Fees. 
The fees for registering or re-registering a property subject to this article shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-708. - Enforcement. 
Violations of this article may be enforced as allowed in this Code or state law, including, but not limited to, the appointment of a receiver or an injunction in order to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-709. - Violations and penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person that violates any portion of this article shall be subject to enforcement and fines as provided in this Code or as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 18-710. - Other remedies. 
The rights and remedies provided in this article are cumulative and in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 4168, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Emergency management and emergency services, ch. 14; fireworks, § 34-111 et seq.; access to fire hydrants, § 46-231; drawing water from fire hydrant, § 62-206; tampering with fire hydrant, fire hose or water main, § 62-207; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Fire safety standards, Health and Safety Code §§ 18938, 13133. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - County fire code. 
The Los Angeles County Fire Code, as it exists on the adoption date of this Code, is hereby adopted by reference. 
Charter reference— Adoption by reference, § 512. 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, Government Code § 50022.1 et seq.  
Sec. 22-2. - Provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect chapter 11 of the Code of the City of Pomona, California (1959 edition), as amended, or any portion of any ordinance found in or amendatory of such chapter. Such chapter and such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Chapter 24 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Public Health Code adopted. 
(a)  The City of Pomona hereby adopts as its own Public Health Code, Chapter 8.04 of Title 8 and Titles 11 of the Los Angeles County Code as they are now constituted as of April 26, 2005 and as amended in the future, to the extent that they do not conflict and/or are inconsistent with the Pomona City Charter and Code as it is now constituted and as amended in the future. 
(b)  A copy of the pertinent titles of the Los Angeles County Code as constituted as of April 26, 2005 and as amended in the future shall be on deposit in the office of the city clerk and shall be maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 4047, § 2, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 4048, § 1, 12-5-2005)  
Chapter 26 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Annual budget. 
(a)  The annual budget for the library department shall be part of the annual city budget to be adopted by the city council. The department shall prepare and submit annually to the council, through the director of finance and the city manager, the library's budget as recommended by the board of library trustees. 
(b)  The director of finance shall be the chief accounting officer for the department and shall maintain its books and records of revenue and expenditures, which shall be subject to audit and control, as for other departments of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-13; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 26-2. - Funds. 
(a)  All money acquired by gift, devise, bequest, or otherwise, for the purposes of the library, shall be apportioned to a library fund and shall be applied to the purposes authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  Payments from library funds shall be made upon warrants signed by the library director. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall have custody of all money and funds of the department. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-12; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 26-3—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-521 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Established; general responsibilities. 
(a)  The board of library trustees is established and shall oversee the management and operations of the public library. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the board of library trustees shall have the responsibility and duty to: 
(1)  Recommend policies for the administration and governance of the library and library department; 
(2)  Recommend policies under which the library and library department shall be operated; and 
(3)  Exercise and perform such powers and duties consistent with this chapter as may be necessary or desirable for the proper administration and government of the library and the library department, subject to the sections and restrictions contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-1; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 26-32. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
(a)  The board of library trustees shall hold no less than one regular meeting each quarter, as it may prescribe by resolution or minute order. 
(b)  A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time. 
(c)  All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and shall be held at such place as the board shall from time to time specify by resolution or minute order. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-6; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 26-33. - Election of officers. 
The board of library trustees shall elect one of its members as its president who shall serve for one year and until his successor is appointed and in his absence shall select a president pro tem. In addition, the board of library trustees shall appoint a secretary who may but need not be a member of the board. The president and the secretary shall serve at the pleasure of the board. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-7; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 26-34. - Rules, regulations, bylaws and records. 
(a)  The board of library trustees shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. The secretary shall maintain a complete record of all proceedings of the board. Minutes of board meetings shall be approved at the next regular meeting of the board and thereafter forwarded to the city clerk. 
(b)  Subject to this chapter and applicable sections of law, the board shall establish such rules for the conduct of its proceedings as it may deem necessary. 
(c)  Any person who violates any rule, regulation, or bylaw made by the board of library trustees may be fined or excluded from the privileges of the library. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-8; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 26-35. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The board of library trustees shall: 
(1)  Provide guidance to staff for delivering library services to the community; 
(2)  Establish rules of conduct, fees, fines and loan periods; 
(3)  Recommend library policy, rules, regulations and procedures and hours for library operations; 
(4)  Serve as a board of appeal in resolving citizen/library issues; 
(5)  Receive citizen input on library services; 
(6)  Coordinate activities with outside groups, such as Friends of the Library and other local, regional, statewide, and national groups that support and promote library issues; 
(7)  Serve as an advocate in support of the library; 
(8)  Ensure the library remains independent from political influences; and 
(9)  Keep the library free to city residents and property owners. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-3; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 26-36. - Purchase of books, journals and publications. 
The board of library trustees may direct the purchase of necessary books, journals, publications, and other items unique to the operation of the library, as appropriate, subject to the city's purchasing requirements found in article VII of chapter 2. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-9; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 26-37. - Solicitation and acceptance of funds. 
The board of library trustees may participate in the city's efforts to receive gifts, grants and funds for the sole benefit of the library and its operations. The board shall adopt specific policies and guidelines concerning solicitation prior to any activity to solicit or acceptance of any donation, gift, grant or funds, subject to approval by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-10; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 26-38. - Other duties. 
The board of library trustees may, in its advisory capacity, review and make recommendations to the city council as necessary and proper in order to carry out the provisions this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1-14; Ord. No. 3916, § 1 (part))  
Chapter 30 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Pet shops, § 6-111 et seq.; business license required for alarm systems, § 14-404; selling on streets, § 46-14; outdoor dining and newsstands within public rights-of-way, § 46-341 et seq.; taxation, ch. 50; business license tax, § 50-331 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 54; tow service franchises, § 58-671 et seq.; utilities, ch. 62; vehicles for hire, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— General authority to license for regulatory purposes, Business and Professions Code § 16000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CLOSEOUT OR DISTRESSED GOODS SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Regulated sale means any of the following: 
(1)  Any sale of goods, wares or merchandise or a sale of any department of goods, wares and merchandise constituting an insurance, bankruptcy, liquidation, mortgage, insolvent's, assignee's, executor's, administrator's, receiver's, or trustee's, or any closing-out sale or removal; 
(2)  A sale of goods, wares or merchandise damaged by fire, smoke or water or a sale of goods from the stock of a bankrupt, receiver, trustee, insurance company, receivership or trusteeship; 
(3)  Any sale of goods, wares or merchandise or a sale of any department of goods, wares or merchandise that is anticipatory to or to avoid the termination, closing, liquidating revision, winding up, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale; or 
(4)  A sale where it is advertised or a representation made that reasonably conveys to the public the belief that, upon the disposal of any such stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited to, sales advertised, held out or represented as an adjuster's sale, adjustment sale, administrator's sale, alteration sale, assignee's sale, bankrupt sale, benefit of administrator's sale, benefit of trustee's sale, building coming down sale, closing sale, closing-out sale, damaged goods' sale, end sale, executor's sale, final days' sale, fire sale, forced-out sale, forced-out-of-business sale, insolvent sale, last days' sale, lease expires sale, liquidation sale, loss of lease sale, mortgage sale, receiver's sale, removal sale, reorganization sale, salvage sale, smoke sale, smoke and water sale, trustee's sale, quitting business sale, wholesale cleaning-out sale, and also including, but not limited to, sales, the advertisement of which contains the word "creditors." 
(Code 1959, § 25-1; Ord. No. 1351, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-32. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No license fee need be paid and the sections of this article shall not be applicable to the following: 
(1)  The selling at auction or public sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or property belonging to the United States, the state, the county, the city, or any other governmental agency; 
(2)  Any sale conducted under or by virtue of or pursuant to the authority of any process issued out of or by any duly constituted city, county, state or federal court, authority, or body; or 
(3)  The bona fide sale of the household goods, livestock or farm implements of the owner thereof at the domicile of such owner or any assets of the estate of a decedent or incompetent, or the sale by the owner thereof of real property upon which his home, dwelling or business is located or of household furniture, fixtures or articles owned by him and located within or upon the real property upon which his home or dwelling is situated. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be determined to apply to the publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes any advertisement in good faith without the knowledge of its falseness, deceptiveness, or misleading character or without knowledge that this article or any section or any portion thereof has not been complied with. 
(Code 1959, §§ 25-14, 25-16; Ord. No. 1351, §§ 14, 16)  
Sec. 30-33. - Validity of other license. 
No license granted and in effect pursuant to any section of this Code, other than sections applying to regulated sales, shall be effective for a regulated sale, and no regulated sale may be concluded pursuant to any license other than that granted for the purpose of such regulated sale. 
(Code 1959, § 25-15; Ord. No. 1351, § 15)  
Sec. 30-34. - Investigations. 
The business license division or any other city official designated by the city manager shall at all times have the power and it shall be the duty to make an investigation of the business and books, records and accounts and other documents pertaining thereto of any person conducting or permitted or authorized to conduct regulated sales. 
(Code 1959, § 25-2; Ord. No. 1351, § 2)  
Sec. 30-35. - Limitations on removal of merchandise. 
The license provided for in division 2 of this article shall be valid only for a sale of goods, wares and merchandise inventoried and described in the application for such license, in the manner and at the time and place set forth in such application. Any removal of such goods, wares or merchandise, so inventoried and described, from the place of sale described in the application shall cause such goods, wares and merchandise to lose their identity for the purpose of such regulated sale, and no license will thereafter be issued for the conduct of a sale of such goods, wares or merchandise so removed from the place described in the application, under section 30-62, at any other place. 
(Code 1959, § 25-8; Ord. No. 1351, § 8)  
Sec. 30-36. - Adding to stock after issuance of license. 
No person in contemplation of the conduct of a regulated sale under a license as provided in division 2 of this article shall add any goods, wares or merchandise to the inventory filed with the application provided for in section 30-62 for the purpose of selling or disposing of such goods, wares or merchandise at such sale. 
(Code 1959, § 25-9; Ord. No. 1351, § 9)  
Sec. 30-37. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a regulated sale, under any license granted pursuant to division 2 of this article, to add to, during the continuance of any such regulated sale, any goods, wares or merchandise described and inventoried in his original application for such license. No goods, wares or merchandise shall be sold at or during such sale, excepting the goods, wares or merchandise described in the inventory accompanying the application. Each and every addition of goods, wares or merchandise, for the purpose of sale, to the stock of goods, wares or merchandise described in the inventory and each sale of such goods, wares or merchandise as were not described in such inventory shall constitute a separate offense under this article. Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 25-10; Ord. No. 1351, § 10)  
Secs. 30-38—30-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-61. - Required. 
No person shall advertise, represent or hold out that any sale is a regulated sale without first obtaining a license to conduct such sale from the business license division. 
(Code 1959, §§ 25-1, 25-3; Ord. No. 1351, §§ 1, 3; Ord. No. 1997, § 1))  
Sec. 30-62. - Application; grounds for refusal. 
(a)  Application for a regulated sale license shall be made to the business license division and shall be accompanied by the applicant's written, verified affidavit stating that the facts set forth in the application and the accompanying inventory or statement are true and correct. Such application shall also set forth the following: 
(1)  The location of the proposed sale. 
(2)  The nature of the occupancy showing the length of term of the lease, if any. 
(3)  The reason the proposed sale is to be conducted. 
(4)  The dates upon or during which the proposed sale is to be conducted. 
(5)  The number and date of a valid business license issued by the city to the applicant. 
(6)  Any other facts or statements required by the business license division. 
(b)  Such application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A full, true and correct inventory or statement itemizing in detail the amount and description of the goods, wares, merchandise and personal property to be sold at such sale, together with the cost and proposed selling price of each item. 
(2)  The required license fee in an amount equal to one percent of the total cost or selling price, whichever is lower, as shown upon the inventory, but not less than the amount set by resolution of the city council, provided that the license fee for advertising termination or removal of the business shall be as set by resolution of the city council if such business has been in business under the same ownership for the last three consecutive years. 
(c)  The license shall authorize the conducting of the respective sales therein licensed, upon the days listed in the application. 
(d)  If the business license division has determined that any unusual purchases or additions to the stock of goods, wares or merchandise, for which the application has been filed, have been made within 60 days prior to filing such application, the business license division shall refuse to issue the license. 
(Code 1959, § 25-3; Ord. No. 1351, § 3; Ord. No. 1997, § 1)  
Sec. 30-63. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  The business license division shall, after investigation and verification of facts contained in the application, issue the regulated sale license. 
(b)  If after investigation the business license division is unable to verify the facts, the business license division shall deny the license. 
(Code 1959, § 25-4; Ord. No. 1351, § 4)  
Sec. 30-64. - Endorsement and preservation of application. 
The business license division shall endorse on the application for a regulated sale license the date of filing and shall preserve the application for record in its office. 
(Code 1959, § 25-5; Ord. No. 1351, § 5)  
Sec. 30-65. - Time limit. 
Except as otherwise provided, all regulated sales made pursuant to the license provided for in this division must be made within the period of 30 calendar days, including and following the first day specified in the license. The license may be renewed for no more than 30 calendar days as provided for in section 30-66. In no event may a regulated sales license continue for more than 60 calendar days. 
(Code 1959, § 25-6; Ord. No. 1351, § 6)  
Sec. 30-66. - Renewal; frequency of issuance. 
(a)  If a regulated sale is not completed within the 30-calendar-day period, the licensee may apply for a license to conduct the sale for an additional 30-calendar-day period, by complying with the following: 
(1)  Notice of the intention to apply for renewal is published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(2)  The application to renew is made in the same manner as provided in section 30-62 and is made five days before expiration of the license. 
(3)  A license fee is paid in one-half of the amount paid for the original license. 
(b)  The business license division, after investigation and verification of the facts contained in the application and after investigation of objections made by any interested party, shall grant or deny the license. 
(c)  No license for conducting a regulated sale shall be issued to any individual, partnership, association or corporation in which 50 percent or more of the stock control or ownership remains in the same person who has, within a period of two years from the date of the application, been granted a license to conduct such a sale; nor shall a license be issued for any portion of the same goods or for use upon any portion of the same premises until two years after expiration of a prior regulated sale license. 
(Code 1959, § 25-7; Ord. No. 1351, § 7)  
Sec. 30-67. - Revocation. 
The license issued under this division to any person who shall hold, conduct or carry on any sale of goods, wares or merchandise contrary to this article or whose advertising, statement, representation or assertion is false or untrue in any respect or which by the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false or untrue, deceptive or misleading or which shall violate any section of this article shall be forthwith revoked by the business license division on the determination that any section of this article has been violated, and such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If the order for such revocation is reversed on appeal pursuant to section 30-68, the time during which any sale is suspended pursuant to such revocation shall not be counted in calculating the number of days during which the license for such sale shall be effective. 
(Code 1959, § 25-11; Ord. No. 1351, § 11)  
Sec. 30-68. - Appeal of rejection of application or revocation. 
(a)  Any person to whom a license has been issued under this division or whose application has been rejected may appeal in writing to the city council within five days after the rejection of any application or the denial of any application to renew any application or the revocation of any existing license to conduct a regulated sale. The council shall forthwith set such matter for hearing at the council chambers and cause notice of the time and place thereof to be given to the applicant in writing either by delivery to him personally or by transmission of such notice by United States mail not less than five days prior to the date set for such hearing. Transmission of such notice by United States mail addressed to the applicant at the address given in the application for the license under section 30-62 shall be deemed to be delivery on the date of mailing thereof. 
(b)  At the time and place set for the hearing the applicant shall appear and offer evidence in support of the application. After such hearing the city clerk shall forthwith give notice in writing of the decision of the city council to the applicant by delivery to him personally or by United States mail addressed to the applicant at the address given in his application. If proper showing is made entitling the applicant to such license or to the continuation or retention of the license, the council shall determine the proper fee to be charged, in which event the council shall include in such notice the amount of such fee. 
(c)  The decision of the business license division, in the absence of any appeal to the city council, and the decision of the council, in any review pursuant to this section, shall be final and conclusive upon any and all persons affected thereby. Any fee finally determined shall be due and payable forthwith upon giving the required notice, in the amount specified. 
(Code 1959, §§ 25-12, 25-13; Ord. No. 1351, §§ 12, 13)  
Secs. 30-69—30-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Calendar day includes any day of any week, including traditional holidays and weekends. 
Comprehensive compliance program means a mandatory detailed written description, submitted on a city-approved form in conjunction with an entertainment business permit application describing, in the manner required in section 30-127, the measures to be taken by the entertainment business permittee to ensure compliance with the restrictions and requirements of this article and this Code. 
Entertainment business refers to businesses subject to a business license in the downtown specific plan area that offer entertainment activities or events, including, but not limited to, theater, comedy, music and/or dance events, and/or sporting events, whether live or prerecorded, professional or amateur. Adult-oriented businesses are not permitted. 
Entertainment business activity refers to any public event, gathering or assembly in a structure or elsewhere on private real property, located in the downtown specific plan area, and for which an admission charge or cover fee or minimum purchase requirement is requested of any attendee. This includes, without limitation, any act, concert, play, review, pantomime, scene, song, dance, song and dance act, exhibition, sporting event, comedy performance, poetry recitation or other presentation of any kind for the benefit of the public, whether professional or amateur, live, or conducted with the use of any electronic means or devices whatsoever. The permittee, any employees thereof, as well as security personnel shall not be included in any determination of whether an entertainment business activity is being conducted. Businesses whose primary activity is the operation of a movie theater in a structure designed and approved for this operation are excluded from this definition. 
Entertainment business event refers to any single instance of an entertainment business activity, as defined in this section. 
Entertainment business permit means an annual permit which is issued to the owner or tenant of the building by the business license division pursuant to this article and which is renewed thereafter in conjunction with future business license applications or renewals. 
Entertainment business permittee refers to the person to whom an entertainment business permit has been issued. The permittee may only be the owner or the tenant of the premises. Such permittee shall ensure that all restrictions and requirements of an entertainment business permit and all requirements of this article are adhered to at all times. 
Person means any human being, fiduciary, trustee, association, corporation, organization, partnership, or any other entity of any kind. This includes, without limitation, all persons in actual or apparent control of private real property on which an entertainment business activity is occurring, whether as the entertainment business permittee; as an owner, tenant or occupant of real property; as a business owner or operator; or as a promoter or the provider of an entertainment business activity, as well as the on-site agents or representatives of all such persons. As used in this definition, the terms "promoter" and "provider" mean any person who uses the facilities, structure or real property of another to present, conduct or carry on an entertainment business activity. 
Working day means any day, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, during which all city departments are regularly open for business. 
(Code 1959, § 24-10; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-102. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of the sections or requirements of this article, and any such person who violates or fails to comply with the sections or requirements of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Whenever this article makes any act or omission unlawful, such act or omission shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. Any violation of any section of this article is also specifically found to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in any manner allowed by law. 
(Code 1959, § 24-21; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-103. - Mandatory notice of events. 
(a)  Notice required. No person shall conduct, carry on, participate or engage in or allow or cause others to conduct, carry on, participate or engage in any entertainment business event or activity without first filing written notification thereof with the police department at least 20 calendar days prior to the event. 
(b)  Notice contents. The notice shall contain the following supplemental information: 
(1)  Applicant information. 
(2)  Promoter information. 
(3)  Description of the event including the following: 
a.  Name of the event proposed. 
b.  Location, including the address. 
c.  Type of event and names of entertainers appearing. 
d.  The maximum number of spectators or participants. 
e.  Date and hours of the event. 
(Code 1959, § 24-19; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 30-104—30-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 30-126. - Required. 
Notwithstanding any other section or requirement of this Code to the contrary, no person shall conduct, carry on, participate or engage in or allow or cause others to conduct, carry on, participate or engage in any entertainment business activity or event in the downtown specific plan area without first obtaining and maintaining a valid entertainment business permit therefor and without first providing proper notice to the city of such activity or event as required under section 30-103. A violation of this section or of any other section of this article or of any of the restrictions and requirements of an entertainment business permit is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor offense. 
(Code 1959, § 24-9; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-127. - Application contents. 
Any application for an entertainment business permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Identification of prospective entertainment business permittee. The identification of the prospective entertainment business permittee in accordance with the following: 
a.  Individual. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant shall state his legal name including any aliases, address, social security number, driver's license or state personal identification number, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he is at least 21 years of age. 
b.  Partnership. If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall provide the following: 
1.  The partnership's complete name and address; 
2.  The names, addresses, social security numbers, and driver's license or state personal identification numbers of all partners; 
3.  A description of the partners (whether the partnership is a general partnership or a limited partnership); 
4.  A copy of the partnership agreement; and 
5.  A federal identification number. 
c.  Corporation. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall provide its complete name, the state of incorporation, the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state, names and capacity of all officers and directors. The applicant shall also provide the name and address of the registered corporate agent, the name and address of the registered office for service of process and the federal identification number. 
d.  Application signature. The applicant, whether an individual or a duly authorized representative of a partnership, corporation, or other entity, shall sign and date the application with the following statement: 
I declare, under penalty of perjury, that I have read and understand all of sections 30-101 through 30-154 of the Pomona City Code, that I will operate my business in compliance with all City of Pomona ordinances and regulations and that all of the information I have provided in this application is true and correct to the best of my knowledge. 
e.  Fictitious name registration. If the applicant intends to operate the business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name with the business license division as part of the application process. 
(2)  Type of activity. The applicant shall provide a written statement, signed under penalty of perjury, regarding the kind, character, or type of entertainment business activities or events that the applicant proposes to conduct, operate, or carry on. 
(3)  Property owners or lessors and possessors or lessees. The applicant shall provide the address where the business will operate and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the site's owners and/or lessors, as well as such information for the current lessees or tenants in possession. The proposed entertainment business permittee must also provide proof of legal ownership or possession of the site, by submitting copies of the deed or executed lease agreement. 
(4)  Floor plan. The applicant shall submit a floor plan for review by the chief building official to determine safe occupancy levels. The floor plan shall be dimensioned and drawn to scale. It shall contain information on ingress and egress, as well as proposed seating arrangements within the building. If the applicant intends to use several different seating arrangements, the applicant shall provide information on the different arrangements. If a stage or dance floor is to be employed for any purpose, the applicant shall additionally identify and describe these areas. 
(5)  Map showing parking and loading areas. An area plan shall be submitted identifying parking areas to be used by customers, including the number of spaces available, and loading areas to be used by the entertainers. 
(6)  Estimated number of events. The estimated number of events anticipated in one year shall be submitted and used to project service demands and estimate costs. 
(7)  Entertainment business permit fee. An entertainment business permit fee, which shall be set by separate city council resolution, is required for every application, and no application shall be considered complete without payment of such fee. Nonprofit organizations are exempt. 
(Code 1959, § 24-11; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-128. - Application review and approval process. 
(a)  Application submittal. The application for an entertainment business permit shall be submitted on a city-approved form, together with all required attachments, to the business license division. 
(b)  Application completeness. An application is complete if all information required under this division and stated in the application form is provided along with the required nonrefundable application fee. The business license division manager shall review all applications for completeness within five working days of the business license division's receipt thereof. If complete, the business license division manager shall forward copies of the application to the reviewing city divisions and/or departments stated in subsection (c) of this section. If an application is incomplete, the manager shall, within five calendar days of the business license division's receipt thereof, notify the applicant of this determination in writing by first class mail. This notice shall state the reasons for this determination and the required corrective actions. 
(c)  Application review. Upon receipt of the completed application from the business license manager, each of the following city divisions and/or departments shall, within the time stated in subsection (d) of this section, review and approve application as follows: 
(1)  Building and safety division review. The building and safety division shall review the application to determine whether the structure in which an entertainment business activity or event is proposed is certified for occupancy and public assembly and is in conformance with all building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes and occupancy limitation standards adopted by the city. Upon such findings and determinations of full compliance, the building and safety division shall approve the application. 
(2)  Planning division review. The planning division manager shall review the application to determine whether the real property and structures in which an entertainment business activity is proposed are in conformance with all city zoning codes and standards, including, without limitation, permitted uses, parking requirements, refuse collection and disposal standards and signage regulations. Upon such findings and determinations of full compliance, the planning division manager shall approve the application. 
(3)  Police department review. The police chief shall investigate the background and criminal history of the applicant and shall deny the application if his investigation reveals any of the following: 
a.  False or misleading information. The applicant gave false or misleading information or omitted material facts in the documents and materials submitted during the application process; 
b.  Use of illegal drugs. The applicant has knowingly or negligently allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances while responsible for prior entertainment events in the city within the last 12 months; 
c.  Tax or fee delinquency. The applicant is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due; 
d.  Violation of conditions of approval. The applicant has committed, or knowingly allowed agents or employees to commit, three or more violations of the conditional use permit within the last 12 months; 
e.  Illegal activities on premises. The applicant has knowingly or negligently allowed criminal activity to occur at any location of any prior entertainment business events controlled by the applicant. As used in this subsection, the term "criminal activity" shall include the occurrence of acts constituting a felony or which involve moral turpitude or the sale, possession, or unlawful use of a controlled substances or weapons; or 
f.  Illegal transfer of permit. The applicant has attempted to transfer an entertainment business permit in contravention of section 30-131. 
Upon such findings and determinations of full compliance, the police chief shall approve the application. 
(d)  Review deadline. Each city division or department listed in subsection (c) of this section shall notify the business license division of its determination in writing not more than 15 working days after the application was deemed complete by the business license division. 
(e)  Application action; issuance of permit. The business license division manager shall complete either of the following actions within 20 working days of the business license division's receipt of a complete application for an entertainment business permit: 
(1)  Issuance of entertainment business permit. If all reviewing city divisions or departments as stated in this section approve an application, the entertainment business permit shall be issued, and the business license division manager shall mail an entertainment business permit by first class mail to the applicant. 
(2)  Denial of entertainment business permit. If one or more of the reviewing city divisions or departments as stated in this section disapproves the application, an entertainment business permit shall not be issued, and the business license division manager shall so notify the applicant in writing by first class mail. Such notice shall state the grounds for denial of the entertainment business permit and shall state the applicant's right to appeal therefrom. 
(Code 1959, § 24-12; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-129. - Appeal of denial of application or renewal. 
(a)  Generally. After denial of an application or renewal application for any entertainment business permit required by this division, the applicant or permittee may seek review by way of an administrative hearing in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Petition for appeal of denial. If the applicant wishes to challenge the action of the business license division manager, a written appeal petition and a nonrefundable appeal fee, in an amount set by resolution of the city council, must be filed with the city manager within ten calendar days after the action of the business license division manager. However, if the ten calendar days expire on a date that city hall is not open for business, the appeal period shall be extended to the next city business day. Failure to file a timely petition with the city manager, together with the nonrefundable appeal fee, constitutes a complete waiver of the right to appeal and renders the action of the business license division manager final for all purposes. The appeal petition must indicate, in writing, the appellant's objections to the business license division manager's action on the application. 
(c)  Setting the hearing. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the appeal. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within 30 calendar days of receipt of the petition, unless the applicant or permittee consents in writing to an extension. At least ten calendar days prior to such hearing, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the entertainment business permittee by first class mail with a proof of service attached. 
(d)  Format of hearing. All parties involved shall have the right to: 
(1)  Offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; 
(2)  Be represented by counsel; and 
(3)  Confront and cross examine witnesses. 
Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing scheduled under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or witness, provided the applicant or permittee consents in writing. 
(e)  Hearing determination. The hearing officer shall make a final determination as to whether the applicant has met all conditions, restrictions and requirements set forth in this article, supported by written findings, within five working days after the hearing pursuant to this section. No later than three working days of the hearing officer's decision, notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed by first class mail to the appellant. 
(f)  Judicial review. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and the applicant or permittee may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8 or as otherwise permitted by law. The applicant or permittee shall be so notified in the hearing officer's notice of decision. If the applicant or permittee provides written notification to the city of his intent to seek judicial review under Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8, the city attorney shall, in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8(d)(1), prepare, certify and make available the administrative record to the applicant or permittee within five working days of receipt of such written notification or as such term may be modified from time to time by the state. 
(Code 1959, § 24-13; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-130. - Fees. 
It shall be unlawful for any entertainment business to conduct an entertainment activity or event without paying all required fees. The entertainment business permit fee shall recover costs associated with the review and administration of this article and the provision of an areawide security and cleanup program. A deposit fee shall be collected prior to submittal of an application. Additional fees may be required during the term of the entertainment business permit to recover costs associated with provision of the areawide security and cleanup programs. No entertainment business shall conduct an entertainment business activity or event unless all entertainment business permit fees are current. Nonprofit organizations are exempt. 
(Code 1959, § 24-20; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-131. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  Site specific. Entertainment business permits are site specific. A permittee shall not operate an entertainment business under the authority of an entertainment business permit at any place other than the address of the entertainment business activity or event stated in the application for the permit. 
(b)  Transferability. Transfer of ownership or control of an entertainment business permit to another person is prohibited and unlawful. 
(c)  Compliance with article. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this article shall be grounds for the permit to be declared void and unlawful and shall be revocable on this basis. 
(Code 1959, § 24-18; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 30-132—30-150. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Suspension or Revocation 
 
Sec. 30-151. - City's authority to suspend. 
The city may suspend an entertainment business permit under the procedures set forth in sections 30-153 and 30-154 for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days if the hearing officer determines that a permittee has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 24-14; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-152. - City's authority to revoke. 
(a)  Optional revocation. The city may revoke an entertainment business permit, under the procedures set forth in section 30-153, if cause for suspension as stated in section 30-151 arises and the permit has been previously suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  Mandatory revocation. The city shall commence revocation proceedings to revoke an entertainment business permit under the procedures set forth in section if it determines that: 
(1)  False or misleading information. An entertainment business permittee gave false or misleading information or omitted material facts in the documents and materials submitted during the application process; 
(2)  Use of illegal drugs. An entertainment business permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises while responsible for prior entertainment events in the city within the last 12 months; 
(3)  Tax or fee delinquency. An entertainment business permittee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due; 
(4)  Violation of the restrictions and requirements. An entertainment business permittee has committed or allowed agents or employees to commit three or more violations of this article within the last 12 months; 
(5)  Illegal activities on the premises. An entertainment business permittee has knowingly or negligently allowed criminal activity to occur at any location of any prior entertainment business events controlled by the applicant. As used in this subsection, the term "criminal activity" shall include the occurrence of acts constituting a felony or which involve moral turpitude or the sale, possession, or unlawful use of controlled substances or weapons; or 
(6)  Illegal transfer of permit. An entertainment business permittee has attempted to transfer the entertainment business permit to another person in contravention of section 30-131. 
(c)  Duration of revocation. When the city revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for a period of one calendar year from the date of actual revocation, the entertainment business permittee shall not be issued a new entertainment business permit during such one-year revocation period, and no entertainment permit shall be issued for that location during such one-year period. 
(Code 1959, § 24-15; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-153. - Procedure. 
(a)  Scope. This section shall govern the suspension and/or revocation of entertainment business permits issued pursuant to this division. 
(b)  Determination of cause. Whenever any person operating under a valid entertainment business permit violates, causes, permits or allows to be violated any section, condition or requirement of this article or of any permit granted under this division or any other state or municipal law relating to or regulating such business, the city may suspend or revoke such permit under the procedures, provisions and requirements stated in this subdivision. If such cause for suspension or revocation exists, the chief of police, the planning manager or the building and safety division shall file written charges and submit them to the city manager for the setting of a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. 
(c)  Setting the matter for hearing. Upon the receipt of the written charges, the city manager shall appoint a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within 30 days of the filing of the written charges. 
(d)  Notice to appear. The hearing officer shall give notice to the permittee to appear before the hearing officer at the time and place set forth in such notice to show cause why the permit issued to such permittee should not be revoked or suspended. Such notice shall state the grounds for complaint or reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension and shall be served upon the permittee not less than ten calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(e)  Hearing format. The hearing officer shall hold a hearing at the time set and may make evidentiary rulings. The permittee may appear personally or by counsel. All parties involved shall have the right to: 
(1)  Offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; 
(2)  Be represented by counsel; and 
(3)  Confront and cross examine witnesses. 
All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
(f)  Continuation of hearing. Any hearing held under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or witness, in the discretion of the hearing officer. 
(g)  Results of suspension hearing. After holding a hearing to determine whether a suspension is warranted and upon determining that there are sufficient grounds for a suspension, the hearing officer shall impose one of the following penalties: either a suspension or a written warning. The appropriate penalty shall be based upon the severity of the violation. In addition, the hearing officer may, in conjunction with the issuance of a warning or the suspension of a permit, order the permittee to take corrective action. The suspension of the permit shall be for a specified period of time, not to exceed 30 calendar days or the completion of the corrective action, whichever is longer. This subsection does not apply to revocation hearings. 
(h)  Decision of hearing officer. The hearing officer shall, within ten working days from the submission of the matter for decision, render a written decision supported by written findings. Notice of the hearing officer's decision shall be mailed by first class mail to the permittee within five working days by the business license division manager. The decision becomes effective three working days after notice of the decision has been mailed by the city. Any notice of the decision suspending or revoking a permit issued pursuant to this division shall contain the substance of the following statement: 
You are hereby notified that the time within which judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8. 
(i)  Judicial review time limits. Judicial review time limits shall be as follows: 
(1)  The permittee may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8 or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(2)  If the applicant or permittee provides written notification to the city of his intent to seek judicial review under Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8, the city attorney shall, in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8(d)(1), prepare, certify and make available the administrative record to the applicant or permittee within five working days of receipt of such written notification or as such term may be modified from time to time by the state. 
(Code 1959, § 24-16; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 30-154. - Immediate suspension. 
(a)  Authority. The chief of police or building and safety division may suspend any entertainment business permit without previous notice and pending a hearing within 48 hours when it appears to such officials that the immediate suspension of any permit is necessary to prevent an imminent and substantial danger or hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. If an immediate suspension occurs, the chief of police or the building and safety division may, prior to a hearing, make such orders as are necessary to protect the public or other persons from the imminent hazard, including, without limitation, the immediate cessation of the entertainment business activity and the removal of all persons from the structure. 
(b)  Written notice. At the time of the suspension of the permit, the permittee shall be served with a written statement containing the reasons for such suspension and giving notice of the time and place for the hearing thereon before the hearing officer appointed by the city manager. 
(c)  Hearing of charges. The hearing of the charges upon which the suspension was based shall be held not later than 48 hours after such suspension unless an extension of time therefor is requested by the permittee, in which event the hearing will be held not later than 15 days after suspension. 
(d)  Procedure. The remainder of the hearing procedures shall be as set forth in section 30-153. 
(Code 1959, § 24-17; Ord. No. 3935, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 30-155—30-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions and zoning, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Regulation of sexually oriented businesses authorized, Government Code § 65850.4. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult-oriented business means any one of the following: 
(1)  Adult arcade means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors or similar machines, for viewing by one person per machine, are used to show films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult bookstore means an establishment that has 30 percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or of photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult cabaret means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment: 
a.  Which regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; 
b.  Which regularly features persons who appear seminude; and/or 
c.  Shows films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
(4)  Adult hotel/motel means a business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which: 
a.  Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, film, computer-generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period; 
c.  Rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period; or 
d.  Allows a tenant or occupant to rent or subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than six hours. 
(5)  Adult merchandise store means an establishment which is used for the sale of sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia such as the reproduction of human sex organs, dildos, vibrators, sex organ simulators, apparatus alleged to assist in or improve human sexual performance, or other devices or products distinguished or characterized by their exclusive orientation toward specified anatomical areas, excluding contraceptives and items with generally accepted medical, scientific or academic benefits. 
(6)  Adult motion picture theater means a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are featured that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(7)  Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
(8)  Modeling studio means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. The term "modeling studio" does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. The term "modeling studio" further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available specified sexual activities. 
(9)  Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its important business purposes, offers, for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may engage, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specific anatomical areas or seminude. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
Adult-oriented entertainer means any person who, with or without compensation or any other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business. 
Applicant means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this article, including an individual owner; managing partner; officer of a corporation; or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business. 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. 
Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a fulltime, parttime or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not such person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of such business. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Employee permit means an adult-oriented business employee permit required by this article. 
Not limited means those definitions, uses or activities that have no restraints. 
Nudity and a state of nudity mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Operator means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted adult-oriented business. 
Permittee means a person required by this article to have an adult-oriented business regulatory permit or an adult-oriented business employee permit. 
Regularly features means a regular and substantial course of conduct. A regular and substantial course of conduct exists if one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  At least 30 percent of the stock in trade is devoted to adult entertainment maternal, adult entertainment merchandise, or both; provided, however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order businesses or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises. 
(2)  At least 30 percent of the total display area is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise, or both; provided, however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order businesses or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises. 
(3)  The business presents any type of entertainment or performance, live or otherwise, characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or featuring any nude or seminude person on two or more separate days within a 30-day period; three or more separate days within a 60-day period; or seven or more separate days within a 180-day period. 
Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast. 
Sensitive uses refers to property zoned residential, churches, schools, parks or open space centers and day care uses. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human: 
a.  Genitals or pubic region; 
b.  Buttocks; and 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
(3)  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection (1) or (2) of this definition. 
Specified criminal act means and includes the following: 
(1)  Any of the offenses set forth in Penal Code §§ 314, 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) or any related criminal sexual activities. 
(2)  The equivalent of the offenses in subsection (1) of this definition in other jurisdictions outside the state. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering, by oneself or others, and are prohibited: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast. 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including but not limited to intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy. 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsection (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Transfer of ownership or control of an adult-oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for the transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-1; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-192. - Article nonexclusive. 
The sections of this article regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance with this article shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-20; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-193. - Inspection. 
An adult-oriented business applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, the county fire department, planning division, or other local or state agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses at any time it is occupied or open for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his agent or employee is in violation of this section if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-19; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-194. - Register and permit number of employees. 
Every permitted adult-oriented business must maintain a register of all employees working or performing services on the premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or city official. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-14; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-195. - Employment of and services rendered to persons under age of 18 prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ or provide any service for which it requires such permit to any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter or remain within the adult-oriented business any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-18; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Secs. 30-196—30-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 30-216. - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To operate an adult-oriented business without a valid permit (referred to as an "adult-oriented business regulatory permit") issued by the city pursuant to this division. 
(2)  Who operates an adult-oriented business to employ a person to perform services on the premises of the adult-oriented business who does not possess an employee permit issued by the city pursuant to this division. 
(3)  To perform services as an employee of an adult-oriented business without having secured an adult-oriented business employee permit issued by the city pursuant to this division. Only those employees who have significant contact with customers or patrons of the adult-oriented business are required to have an adult-oriented business employee permit pursuant to this division. Employees with significant contact with patrons or customers include, but are not limited to, entertainers, performers, waitpersons, bartenders, salespersons, cashiers, supervisors, managers, ticket sellers and ticket takers. Security guards required by section .58095(F)(8) of the zoning ordinance are not required to secure an employee permit. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-2; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-217. - Employment of persons without permits unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge or in control of an adult-oriented business to employ any person who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult-oriented business employee permit, if such permit is required by section 30-216(3). 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-21; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-218. - Display of permit and identification cards. 
(a)  Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to this division for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the permit may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business. 
(b)  Each adult-oriented business employee shall be required to have a permit issued pursuant to this division. The business license division shall issue the employee permit together with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such entertainer. An adult-oriented business employee shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult-oriented business. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-15; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-219. - Appeal of denial of application or renewal application. 
(a)  After denial of an application or renewal application for any permit required by this division, the applicant or permittee may seek review by way of an administrative hearing in accordance with this section. 
(b)  A written appeal petition and a nonrefundable appeal fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council must be filed with the city manager within ten calendar days after the decision of the business license division; provided, however, that if the ten days expires on a date that city hall is not open for business, the appeal period shall be extended to the next city business day. Failure to file a timely petition, together with the nonrefundable appeal fee, deprives the hearing officer of jurisdiction to hear the appeal. The appeal petition must indicate in what way the appellant contends the business license division's decision was incorrect or must provide extenuating circumstances that the appellant contends would justify reversal or modification of the business license division's decision. 
(c)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within 30 days of receipt of the petition, unless the applicant or permittee consents in writing to an extension. At least ten calendar days prior to such hearing, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant or permittee by first class U.S. mail with a proof of service attached. 
(d)  All parties involved shall have the right to: 
(1)  Offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; 
(2)  Be represented by counsel; and 
(3)  Confront and cross examine witnesses. 
Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or witness, provided the applicant or permittee consents in writing. 
(e)  The hearing officer shall make a final determination supported by written findings within five city business days after the hearing pursuant to this section. No later than three city business days of the hearing officer's decision, notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant. 
(f)  The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and the applicant or permittee may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1094.5—1094.8 or as otherwise permitted by law. The applicant or permittee shall be so notified. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-16; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-220. - Procedure for suspension and/or revocation. 
(a)  This section shall govern the suspension and/or revocation of adult-oriented business regulatory permits and adult-oriented business employee permits issued pursuant to this division. 
(b)  The chief of police and/or the planning division shall determine whether cause exists for the suspension or revocation of a permit pursuant to this division. If cause for suspension or revocation exists, the chief of police or the planning division shall file written charges and submit them to the city manager. 
(c)  Upon the receipt of the written charges, the city manager shall appoint a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within 30 days of the filing of the written charges. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall give notice to the permittee to appear before the hearing officer at the time and place set for such hearing to show cause why the permit issued to the permittee should not be revoked or suspended. Such notice shall state the grounds for the complaint or reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension and shall be served upon the permittee not less than seven city business days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(e)  The hearing officer shall hold a hearing at the time set therefor. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the hearing officer. The permittee may appear personally or by counsel. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
(f)  Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or witness; provided, however, that the hearing held pursuant to subsection (g) of this section may be continued only with the consent of the permittee. 
(g)  A permit may be suspended without notice in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The chief of police, county fire department, business license division, director of public works or county health officer may suspend any permit without previous notice and pending a hearing when it appears to such officer, department or division that the immediate suspension of any permit is necessary for the public health or safety. 
(2)  At the time of the suspension of the permit, the permittee shall be served with a written statement containing the reasons for such suspension and giving notice of the time and place for hearing thereon before the hearing officer appointed by the city manager. 
(3)  The hearing of the charges upon which the suspension was based shall be held not later than 48 hours after such suspension unless an extension of time therefor is requested by the permittee, in which event the hearing will be held not later than 15 days after suspension. 
(h)  After holding a hearing to determine whether a suspension is warranted and upon determining that there are sufficient grounds for a suspension, the hearing officer shall impose one of the following penalties, based upon the severity of the violation: (i) a warning; (ii) suspension of the permit for a specified period, not to exceed 30 days. However, the hearing officer shall suspend the permit if the permittee refuses to allow an inspection of the adult-oriented business pursuant to section 30-193. The hearing officer may, in conjunction with the issuance of a warning or the suspension of a permit, order the permittee to take corrective action. 
(i)  The hearing officer shall, within ten city business days from the submission of the matter for decision, render a written decision supported by findings. Notice of the hearing officer's decision shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee. The decision becomes effective three business days after notice of the decision has been mailed. Any notice of decision suspending or revoking a permit issued pursuant to this article shall contain the substance of the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the time within which judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6." 
(j)  The permittee may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5 et seq. or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-17; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Secs. 30-221—30-235. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Business Regulatory Permit 
 
Sec. 30-236. - Application. 
(a)  Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult-oriented business in the city shall file an application with the business license division upon a form provided by the city. 
(b)  Application requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Adult-oriented business regulatory permits are nontransferable. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his legal name, including any aliases, address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he is at least 18 years of age. 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name and address and the names of all partners, shall state whether the partnership is general or limited, and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement and provide a federal identification number. 
c.  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process and federal identification number. 
d.  If the applicant is an individual, he shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten percent or greater interest in the business shall sign the application. 
e.  If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name with the business license division as part of the application process. 
f.  A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult-oriented business site. 
g.  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed. 
h.  A floor plan showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The floor plan need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
i.  A straight-line drawing (radius map) prepared within 30 days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and the following: 
1.  The property line of any other adult-oriented business within 750 feet of another adult-oriented business property line for which a permit is requested; and 
2.  The property lines of any sensitive use within 1,250 feet of the property line of the adult-oriented business or the property line of a shopping center. 
j.  A site plan showing all offstreet parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required by section .5809-5-E(3) of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by an application filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council, which shall not be refundable. Whenever the city has no resolution in place governing the filing fee, the filing fee shall be that fee set by the resolution governing applications for licenses issued to massage technicians pursuant to article VI of this chapter. Every application and renewal application shall be accompanied by an application fee. 
(c)  The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business regulatory permit. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-3; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-237. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  The business license division shall determine whether the applicant has submitted a complete application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit within one city business day of its submission. An application is complete if it has been fully and properly completed in accordance with this subdivision. If the business license division determines that the applicant has not submitted a complete application, the business license manager shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant not more than ten days to complete the application properly. The applicant may request to withdraw the application in order to provide additional time to complete the required information. However, if the applicant withdraws the application, the review period ends, and the completed application will be reviewed as a new submittal. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complete application and payment of the application fee, the business license division shall submit the information to the chief of police and the planning division and shall immediately stamp the application as received. 
(c)  The chief of police shall conduct an investigation as to whether cause for denial of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit exists pursuant to section 30-238(c). Among other things, the office of the chief of police shall be required to check local and state summary criminal history information, including NCIC, and to certify whether disqualifying criminal history has been discovered. Accordingly, pursuant to Penal Code §§ 11105, 13300, the city council specifically authorizes the chief of police to obtain such information as it relates to disqualifying convictions for specified criminal acts. 
(d)  The planning division shall review and determine whether the proposed adult-oriented business meets the required location criteria of section .5809-5-C and D of the zoning ordinance and that the proposed adult-oriented business has met all of the development standards as required in section .5809-5-E of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-4; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-238. - Action on application; temporary permit; expiration and renewal; appeal of denial. 
(a)  Issuance of temporary permit. Within 15 days of receipt of the completed application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit, regardless of whether the required investigations have been completed, the business license division shall issue a temporary adult-oriented business regulatory permit, unless it has been notified by the planning division that the proposed adult-oriented business does not meet the requirements of section .5809-5 of the zoning ordinance. This temporary permit shall expire after 60 days from the time a complete application has been submitted. This subsection does not authorize an adult-oriented business to operate in contravention of any local, state, or federal laws or regulations concerning fire, health or safety. Upon approving or denying the temporary permit, the business license division shall notify the applicant as follows: 
(1)  The business license division shall write or stamp "temporary permit granted" or "temporary permit denied" on the application and shall date and sign such notation; 
(2)  Notice of the temporary permit approval or denial shall be given to the applicant in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service within two city business days of the date of the decision; 
(3)  If the temporary permit is denied, the business license division shall attach a statement of reasons for the denial to the notice, and the statement of reasons shall be prepared by the planning division; and 
(4)  If a temporary permit is denied, the application for the adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall be deemed denied, and the applicant shall be so notified. 
(b)  Granting of permit. Within 60 days of the receipt of a complete application, the business license division shall grant the application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit, unless it is notified by the chief of police or the planning division that a reason for denial listed in subsection (c) of this section exists. 
(c)  Denial of application. The application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult-oriented business regulatory permit is required does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the city, county, or state or the property, building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business does not comply with the location or development standards of section .5809-5 of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The applicant or the agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager of the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business regulatory permit. 
(3)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(4)  The required application fee has not been paid. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense. 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, if the conviction is of a felony offense. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant. 
(6)  The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance or court order. 
(d)  Permit fee. An adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall not be issued unless the permittee has paid the required permit fee. The permit fee shall be set by a resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Expiration and renewal of permit. Each adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the business license division a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee, a copy of the permit to be renewed, and a list of all employees and entertainers. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this division for investigation and action upon applications for regulatory permits. 
(f)  Appeal of denial. Any applicant denied a permit pursuant to this section may seek review of the denial by way of the administrative review process set forth in section 30-219. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-5; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-239. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city may suspend an adult-oriented business regulatory permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a permittee has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article. 
(b)  The city shall suspend an adult-oriented business regulatory permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that: 
(1)  The permittee or any agent or employee of the permittee has refused to allow an inspection of the adult-oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(2)  The permittee has knowingly allowed an employee to violate any section of this article. 
(c)  The city shall follow the procedures set forth in section 30-220 before suspending a permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-6; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-240. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city may revoke an adult-oriented business regulatory permit if cause for the suspension pursuant to section 30-239 arises and the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The city shall revoke an adult-oriented business permit if it determines that: 
(1)  An operator gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  An operator has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  An operator has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  An operator knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the operator's license was suspended; 
(5)  Except for an adult motel, an operator has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; 
(6)  The adult-oriented business is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due; 
(7)  The operator has committed or knowingly allowed an employee to commit multiple infractions of this article; 
(8)  An operator has knowingly allowed an employee, while on the premises, to commit a specified criminal act; or 
(9)  The operator has attempted to transfer the adult-oriented business regulatory permit or the adult-oriented business in contravention of section 30-241. 
(c)  When the city revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the permittee or operator shall not be issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the operator may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(d)  The city shall follow the procedures set forth in section 30-220 before revoking a permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-7; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-241. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  An operator shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the permit. 
(b)  An operator shall not transfer or assign ownership or control of an adult-oriented business to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the business license division stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the business license division in accordance with section 30-236 and a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council and all required approvals have been granted in accordance with section 30-238 to ensure that the transferee would have been entitled to the issuance of the original permit. 
(c)  No permit may be transferred if the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked. 
(d)  Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is declared void, and the permit shall be revocable. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-8; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Secs. 30-242—30-255. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Employee Permit 
 
Sec. 30-256. - Application. 
(a)  The business license division shall grant, deny and renew applications for adult-oriented business employee permits, which are required pursuant to section 30-216. 
(b)  Application requirements are as follows: 
(1)  The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the business license division. An original and two copies of the completed and notarized signature permit application shall be filed with the business license division. 
(2)  The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
a.  The applicant's legal name and any other names, including stage names and aliases, used by the applicant. 
b.  The applicant's age, date and place of birth. 
c.  The applicant's height, weight, hair and eye color. 
d.  The applicant's present residence address and telephone number. 
e.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a specified criminal act and, if so, when. 
f.  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute or otherwise authorized by the laws of any jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution. 
g.  The applicant's state driver's license or identification number. 
h.  Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
i.  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department and three color photographs clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(c)  The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. Whenever the city has no resolution in place governing the application fees, the amount of such fee shall be the fee set forth in the city council resolution governing license application fees for massage technicians regulated by article VI of this chapter. Every application and renewal application shall be accompanied by an application fee. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-9; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3962, § 4, 10-7-2002)  
Sec. 30-257. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  The business license division shall determine whether the applicant for an adult-oriented business employee permit has submitted a complete application within one city business day of its submission. An application is complete if it has been fully and properly completed in accordance with the terms of this division. If the business license division determines that the applicant has not submitted a complete application, the business license manager shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant not more than ten days to complete the application properly. The applicant may request to withdraw the application in order to provide additional time to complete the required information. However, if the applicant withdraws the application, the review period ends, and the completed application will be reviewed as a new submittal. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complete application and payment of the application fee, the business license division shall submit the information to the chief of police and shall immediately stamp the application as received. 
(c)  The chief of police shall conduct an investigation as to whether cause for denial of an adult-oriented business employee permit exists pursuant to section 30-258(c). Among other things, the office of the chief of police shall be required to check local and state summary criminal history information, including NCIC, and to certify whether disqualifying criminal history has been discovered. Accordingly, pursuant to Penal Code §§ 11105, 13300, the city council specifically authorizes the chief of police to obtain such information as it relates to disqualifying convictions for specified criminal acts. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-10; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-258. - Action on application; temporary permit; denial; expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Issuance of temporary permit. Upon receipt of a complete application for an adult-oriented business employee permit and payment of the application fee, the business license division shall issue the applicant a temporary adult-oriented business employee permit. This temporary permit shall entitle the applicant to immediately begin working or performing on the premises of the adult-oriented business listed on the application. This temporary permit shall expire 60 days after being issued. 
(b)  Granting of permit. Within 60 days of the receipt of a complete application, the business license division shall grant the application for an adult-oriented business employee permit, unless it is notified by the chief of police that a reason for denial listed in subsection (c) of this section exists. 
(c)  Denial. An application for an adult-oriented business employee permit shall be denied if one or more of the following applies to the applicant or the application: 
(1)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application. 
(2)  The applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(3)  The adult-oriented business employee permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or local law. 
(4)  The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute in the five years prior to the filing of the application. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense. 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, if the conviction is of a felony offense. 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date the applicant received the earlier of two or more convictions, if the convictions are of misdemeanor offenses. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant. 
(d)  Fee. An adult-oriented business employee permit shall not be issued unless the permittee has paid the required permit fee. The permit fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Validity. An employee permit is only valid at the adult-oriented business listed on the permittee's application. 
(f)  Expiration and renewal. Each adult-oriented business employee permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the business license division a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When applications for renewal are made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit shall not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this subdivision for applications for permits. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-11; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-259. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city may suspend an adult-oriented business employee permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that an employee has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article. 
(b)  The city shall suspend an employee permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that the employee has refused to allow an inspection of the adult-oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(c)  The city shall follow the procedures set forth in section 30-220 before suspending an employee permit issued pursuant to this subdivision. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-12; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 30-260. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city may revoke an adult-oriented business employee permit if: 
(1)  It determines that the employee permittee has violated or is not in compliance with this article; 
(2)  the employee permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months; or 
(3)  It determines that the employee permittee has committed multiple infractions of this article. 
(b)  The city shall revoke an adult-oriented entertainer permit if it determines that: 
(1)  An employee permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process. 
(2)  The employee permittee has committed a specified criminal act during the time which he is permitted to work or perform as an adult-oriented business employee. 
(c)  When the city revokes an employee permit, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the employee permittee shall not be issued an employee permit for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(d)  The city shall follow the procedures set forth in section 30-220 before revoking an employee permit pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1959, § 14.5-13; Ord. No. 3873, § 3 (part))  
Secs. 30-261—30-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BINGO[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Bingo, Penal Code § 326.5. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-291. - Conditions and requirements. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 19, Article IV of the State Constitution and Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.5, the game of bingo may be played within the city, but only under the conditions set forth in the Penal Code and this chapter, to the extent it is consistent with State Law. The term "bingo," as used in this article, shall be as defined in Penal Code § 326.5(o), and shall include "remote caller bingo games," as defined and authorized pursuant to section 30-324 of this Code, unless otherwise stated. 
(b)  The game may be conducted only by an organization that is exempted from the payment of bank and corporation taxes by Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701l or 23701w, a mobile home park association, a senior citizen organization, or a charitable organization affiliated with a school district, provided that the proceeds of such games be used only for charitable purposes, and must be in possession of a valid bingo license issued by the business license division. 
(c)  No minors under the age of 18 shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(d)  An organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require that the property be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, such organization; provided, however, that only one organization licensed to play bingo shall use the property to conduct bingo games. 
(e)  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of an authorized organization. 
(f)  A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. This subsection does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at a bingo game by the organization conducting the game. 
(g)  No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(h)  With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account of the charitable nonprofit corporation and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
(1)  Such proceeds may be used for prizes. 
(2)  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed 20 percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes or $2,000.00 per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property; overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment and administrative expenses; and the hiring of security personnel. 
(3)  Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees. 
(i)  Each bingo game shall be conducted by a manager who shall be responsible for the operation of the bingo game. The manager shall be present at all times during the playing of any bingo game and he or she and all of his or her staff shall be identified by a distinctive insignia or badge indicating the organization and his name and title. 
(j)  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(k)  The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed the total value permitted by State Law in cash or kind or both for each separate game which is held. 
(l)  No organization authorized by this article to play bingo shall conduct bingo games more often than two days per calendar week. 
(m)  No organization authorized by this article to play bingo shall conduct bingo games between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(n)  The city manager may promulgate additional rules and regulations for the conduct of bingo by licensees in furtherance of the regulation of bingo games set forth in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-1; Ord. No. 2992, §§ 1—3, 1980; Ord. No. 2861, § 1; Ord. No. 3094, § 1; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-292. - Senior citizen organizations. 
(a)  The sections of this article regulating the playing of bingo in the city shall apply to the playing of bingo by any senior citizen organization, except as follows: 
(1)  All senior citizen organizations playing bingo for recreational purposes shall be exempt from the payment of bingo license fees. 
(2)  Senior citizen organizations playing bingo in public recreational facilities for recreational purposes may be granted bingo licenses for periods up to one year. Such organizations shall conduct bingo only between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and shall not conduct bingo more than one day per week, nor shall any bingo session exceed six continuous hours. 
(b)  The following definitions shall apply to senior citizen organizations playing bingo for recreational purposes only: 
Recreational purposes means the playing of bingo where no bingo card shall exceed the cost of $0.25, no person may purchase more than six bingo cards during any bingo session, no person may play more than six bingo cards during any game, all prizes shall be limited to goods only, and no prize awarded during any bingo game shall exceed the retail cash value of $5.00. 
"Senior citizen organization" means any organization whose members are at least 50 years of age. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-10; Ord. No. 2935, § 1; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Secs. 30-293—30-315. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-316. - Application required. 
Any nonprofit charitable organization, mobile home park association, senior citizen organization or charitable organization affiliated with a school district, desiring to obtain a license to play bingo shall make application to the business license division. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-2; Ord. No. 2861, § 2; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-317. - Information required on application. 
(a)  All applicants for a bingo license shall submit the following information under penalty of perjury: 
(1)  The name of the organization, its address specifically showing any fee or leasehold interest in the premises, the names and addresses of its officers and directors, proof that the organization is an organization authorized to play bingo pursuant to Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.5, and the name and address and title of each member of such organization who will operate and staff the bingo games. 
(2)  A statement that each of the members of such organization who will operate and staff the bingo games has had no criminal convictions or, alternatively, setting forth each criminal conviction incurred by each such member, except for minor traffic violations. 
(b)  The business license division may add additional requirements to the application form which in its opinion are necessary to adequately investigate the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-3; Ord. No. 2861, § 3; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-318. - Denial and appeal. 
The business license division shall refuse to issue a license to play bingo to any nonprofit charitable organization, mobile home park association, senior citizen organization or charitable organization affiliated with a school district, which does not completely fill out the application form. The business license division shall also refuse to issue such license if the application, on its face, shows a noncompliance with Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.5 or if any member of the organization or association who will operate and staff the bingo game has been convicted of any crime relating to gambling or any crime of moral turpitude. Such refusal may be appealed by the organization or association to the city manager within ten days after notice of such refusal is mailed to the organization or association by the business license division. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-4; Ord. No. 2861, § 3; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-319. - Term; renewal. 
Each license to play bingo shall automatically expire one year after its issuance unless the organization or association submits a new application to play bingo within 30 days prior to the expiration date of the license, which shall be subject to the same scrutiny by the business license division as a new license application. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-5; Ord. No. 2861, § 4; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-320. - Fee. 
An annual license fee of $50.00 shall be imposed on each organization or association which the city authorizes to conduct bingo games. If an application for a new license or renewal license is denied, one-half of such fee paid shall be refunded to the organization or association. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-6; Ord. No. 2861, § 5; Ord. No. 2992, § 4; Ord. No. 3549, § 1; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-321. - Revocation. 
The license authorizing any organization or association to play bingo may be revoked for cause after a ten-day notice is given and after a hearing is held before the city manager. A conviction of any person who is a member of the organization or association for violation of any provision of Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.5 or any person who is convicted of a crime of moral turpitude while operating a bingo game of the organization or association shall be sufficient but not the exclusive cause to revoke the license of the organization or association. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-7; Ord. No. 2861, § 6; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-322. - Warning required. 
Such license issued to a organization or association to play bingo shall bear the warning in boldface type substantially as follows: 
"THIS BINGO LICENSE IS ISSUED PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 326.3 AND/OR 326.5, PENAL CODE. CARE SHOULD BE TAKEN BY THE LICENSEE TO CONFORM TO EACH PROVISION OF SAID CODE SECTIONS UNDER PAIN OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTION AND/OR INJUNCTION. THIS LICENSE MAY BE REVOKED FOR CAUSE, PURSUANT TO CODE CHAPTER 30, ARTICLE V. THIS LICENSE SHALL BE REVOKED WITHOUT CAUSE IF THE CITY REPEALS CODE CHAPTER 30, ARTICLE V." 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-8; Ord. No. 2861, § 7; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-323. - Audit and inspection; report of proceeds required. 
By the acceptance of a license to play bingo in the city, each organization or association agrees to allow a representative of the city to audit and inspect the financial books, records and receipts of each such organization or association at any reasonable time without prior notice, and it shall also report all proceeds of bingo games to the city on the forms and in the manner required by the business license division. 
(Code 1959, § 14.6-9; Ord. No. 2861, § 8; Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-324. - Remote caller bingo games authorized. 
(a)  "Remote caller bingo games," as defined in Penal Code § 326.3(u)(1), may be lawfully played in the city pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.4, and this chapter, and not otherwise. In addition, remote caller bingo games shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter to the extent such provisions are consistent with State Law. 
(b)  Those organizations listed in section 30-291 of this Code are eligible to apply to the city for a permit to conduct remote caller bingo games in the city, provided that (i) the organization has been incorporated or in existence for three years or more, (ii) the receipts of the game shall be used only for charitable purposes, and (iii) the operation of bingo is not the primary purpose for which the organization is organized. 
(c)  The application for a remote caller bingo game permit shall be in a form similar to the application for a traditional bingo permit pursuant to section 30-317 of this Code. The application shall be accompanied by satisfactory evidence that the applicant organization meets the eligibility requirements of sections 30-291 and subdivision (b) of this section. The application shall include a statement that the applicant organization agrees to conduct remote caller bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.4 and this chapter, and acknowledges that the permit to conduct remote caller bingo games may be revoked upon violation of any such provisions. 
(Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 30-325. - Additional conditions for remote caller bingo game permits. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, each remote caller bingo game permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following additional conditions: 
(a)  Remote caller bingo games shall not be conducted by any organization more than two days during any week. 
(b)  The organization is responsible for ensuring that the conditions of this chapter and Penal Code §§ 326.3 and 326.4 are complied with by the organization and its officers and members. A violation of any one or more of those conditions or provisions shall constitute cause for the revocation of the organization's permit pursuant to section 30-321 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4142, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Secs. 30-326—30-355. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MASSAGE[4] 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4191, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 2014, repealed the former Art. VI., Div. 1, §§ 30-356—30-362, and Div. 2, §§ 30-386—30-395 and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959, § 14.3-1—14.3-16, 14.3-18, 14.3-20; Ord. No. 2320, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2334, §§ 1 (part)—3; Ord. No. 2335, § 1; Ord. No. 2660, § 1—3, 5; Ord. No. 2821, § 1—8; Ord. No. 3055, § 1; Ord. No. 3084, § 1—3. 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate massage, Government Code § 51030. 
 
Sec. 30-356. - Declaration of purpose and intent. 
(a)  This article establishes new permitting standards intended to comply with California law and establish health and safety guidelines for massage establishments. 
(b)  This article is not intended to be exclusive. Compliance shall not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal services businesses including, without limitation, all zoning applications; business license regulations; building, fire, electrical, and plumbing codes; and health and safety code laws and regulations applicable to professional or personal services businesses. 
(c)  This article establishes a local regulatory system that allows state certified massage therapists and massage practitioners to operate within the city. This article provides regulations for the enforcement of the state law and city code through reasonable inspections and investigations. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-357. - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this article. Words and phrases not defined by this article have the meaning set forth elsewhere in this Code, the Business and Professions Code, or Government Code. 
California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) means the California Massage Therapy Council created pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 4600.5. 
Certified massage practitioner means a person who is currently certified as a massage practitioner by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for compensation. 
Certified massage therapist means a person who is currently certified as a massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for compensation. 
City means the City of Pomona. 
Director means the director of community development or such other director designated by the city manager. 
Massage means any method of applying pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment, herb infused water or other similar preparations. 
Massage establishment means and includes any business, parlor, room, place or institution, where massage is given or administered by a massage technician as a service of the business establishment. 
Massage technician means any person that is a certified massage therapist or certified massage practitioner, and gives, performs or administers a massage for any form of consideration. 
Person means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations or other forms of business organization or group. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes all of the following: 
(a)  Fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas; 
(b)  Sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(c)  Masturbation; or 
(d)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any specified sexual activity listed in this definition. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-358. - Administration. 
The director is authorized to administer this article and to promulgate administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-359. - Certifications required. 
(a)  Massage establishment. Owners, operators, and managers of massage establishments shall not allow or provide massages to be administered or performed by any person other than a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist holding a valid, current certification from the CAMTC. 
(b)  Massage technician. It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on the business or activities of a massage technician without a certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist. 
(c)  Off-premises massage service. It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, or maintain an off-premise massage service in the city unless all massage technicians employed by the off-premises massage service hold a valid, current certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-360. - Business license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, manage or otherwise conduct business as a massage establishment, or to act in any capacity as a massage technician, either directly or indirectly, without obtaining a City of Pomona business license. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-361. - Massage establishment owner background check required. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to operate a massage establishment, that owns or will own five percent or more of the massage establishment, and that is not a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist, must submit an application to the director for an investigation of the applicant's background and history. A nonrefundable fee, in an amount set by resolution, shall accompany the submission of each application to defray the cost of investigation, inspection and enforcement of this article. An annual nonrefundable renewal fee shall be charged to defray associated costs of investigation, inspection and enforcement. 
(b)  Each applicant for a background check must submit the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  Applicant's present address and telephone number. 
(3)  Applicant's driver's license number and social security number. 
(4)  The proposed address of the massage establishment. 
(5)  Each residence and business address of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive dates for each address. 
(6)  Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(7)  Applicant's height, weight, hair color, and eye color. 
(8)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within four months preceding the date of the application. 
(9)  Applicant's business, occupation and employment history for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(10)  The business license or permit history of the applicant, including: 
a.  Whether the applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended; and 
b.  Whether the applicant had any professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended and the reason(s) for the revocation or suspension. 
(11)  All criminal convictions and a statement of the dates and places (city and state) of such convictions. 
(12)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation must be set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation and names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application must set forth the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including the limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it must furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to corporate applicants will apply. The applicant corporation or partnership must designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such person must complete and sign all application forms required of any individual applicant under this article. 
(13)  The full legal names and other names used, the present addresses and telephone numbers, driver's license numbers, and social security numbers, and state certificates from the CAMTC or transitional licenses for all massage technicians who will be working as employees or independent contractors at each massage establishment location. The applicant must provide the director with any changes in the massage technicians that work at the massage establishment during the permit period within 10 working days of each change. 
(14)  The director may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when needed for the purpose of verifying identification. 
(15)  Such other identification and information as may be required by the director in order to verify the information to be included in the application. 
(c)  The city is allowed a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, in which to investigate the information on the application. During the investigation of the background information, a city representative including, without limitation, a member of the police department, fire department, building and safety division, planning division, or any authorized representative thereof, may inspect, with or without notice during regular business hours, the proposed place of business to determine whether it conforms to the requirements of this article. Upon completion of the inspection, the city representative must inform the director in writing of the findings of the inspection. 
(d)  Background clearance will be issued, within 60 days of receipt of the application, to any applicant who has furnished all of the information required by this section in the application for such license, provided: 
(1)  The applicant has not made a material false statement in the application and that all massage technicians who will be working as employees or independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location possesses certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist. 
(2)  The applicant, if an individual, or in the case of an applicant which is a corporation or partnership, any of its officers, directors, holders or five percent or more of the corporation's stock, has not, within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following offenses: Penal Code §§ 243.4, 261, 266a through 266j, 267, 314 to 316, 318, or 647(a, b, d); any offense requiring registration under Penal Code § 290 or Health and Safety Code § 11590; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code §§ 11054 to 11058, as amended; or any offense in another state which, if committed in California, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; or any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft, embezzlement or moral turpitude; 
(3)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; and 
(4)  The applicant has not had a massage technician, massage establishment, escort service, nude entertainment, nude photo studio or similar type of license or permit suspended within one year or revoked within three years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances or that mitigating circumstances exist since the revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-362. - Additional requirements. 
Before operating a massage establishment in the city, massage establishment owners must comply with all applicable codes adopted by the city, including, without limitation, the building, electrical, and plumbing codes. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-363. - Display of permit. 
Any owner of a massage establishment or off-premise massage service must display the CAMTC certificates for all massage technicians prominently in a conspicuous place, capable of being viewed by customers or city representatives, at every location where massage is performed or conducted. For off-premise massage services, massage workers must also carry a copy of their CAMTC certificate and display it to customers upon request. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-364. - Prohibited conduct. 
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off-premise massage services, or massage technicians, to conduct or allow any of the following activities: 
(a)  It is unlawful for any massage technician or any other employee working in a massage establishment or for an off-premise massage service, or customers, patrons, or guests of the establishment or service, to engage in any specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage establishment or the off-premise massage location. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any massage technician or other employee of a massage establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in the presence of any patron, customer, or guest. 
(c)  In the course of administering the massage, it is unlawful for any massage technician or other massage establishment employee to make intentional physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any customer, patron or guest. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-365. - Facilities and operations. 
It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate unless the massage establishment premises and operation comply with the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Signs. A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, however, that all such signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of the zoning ordinance or any adopted specific plan area regulations. Any posted signs which are in a language other than English shall also be posted in English. 
(b)  Each service offered, the price thereof, and the duration of each service shall be posted in English and such other languages as may be convenient to communicate such service, in a conspicuous location in each massage establishment. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. Nothing herein prohibits patrons from paying gratuities. 
(c)  Lighting. Minimum lighting must be provided in accordance with the California Building Code, as adopted by this code, and, in addition, at least one unobstructed artificial light of not less than 900 lumens must be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron. 
(d)  Ventilation. Minimum ventilation must be provided in accordance with the California Building Code, as adopted by the City Code. 
(e)  Disinfection of instruments. Instruments used for massage must be disinfected before each use. Where instruments for massage are employed, adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available during all hours of operation. 
(f)  Water. Hot and cold running water must be provided at all times. 
(g)  Linen storage. Closed cabinets must be utilized for the storage of clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be removed and stored in a separate container until laundered. 
(h)  Dressing and toilet facilities. Separate dressing and separate toilet facilities must be provided for male and female patrons. This condition does not apply to massage establishments that offer foot massage services and provide no other form of massage services or other type of activity regulated by this article. 
(i)  Sanitary conditions. All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and vapor rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be kept in good repair and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(j)  Clean linen. Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be provided for patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens is permitted. 
(k)  Compliance with laws. The premises to be used must at all times comply with all applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
(l)  The premises licensed as a massage establishment shall not be used for any other business or purpose. Any room in which a massage establishment provides massage services may not be used for residential sleeping purposes. 
(m)  A register of all individuals employed as massage technicians, and copies of their current CAMTC certifications and massage technician business licenses, must be maintained and available for inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
(n)  Each person present in any area of the massage establishment, other than the waiting area or other areas open to any member of the public, shall be a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist or the massage establishment owner. 
(o)  The permits and certifications required by this srticle must be displayed in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises. 
(p)  Massage establishments shall be open for business only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. A massage started at any time before 10:30 p.m. shall nevertheless terminate at 10:30pm. The hours of operation shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in any front window clearly visible from the outside of the massage establishment. Patrons and visitors shall only be in the massage establishment during business hours. 
(q)  No food or beverage shall be sold, given away, or served on the premises of a massage establishment, nor shall there be conducted on any such premises any non-massage business. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-366. - Exceptions. 
This article does not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no CAMTC certification is required of such persons, while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(a)  Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in the state of California. 
(b)  Barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists with respect to scalp massage, who are duly permitted pursuant to Business and Professions Code §§ 7301, et seq. , in accordance with the limitations of their permits. 
(c)  Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the state of California. 
(d)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in the state of California, or provide professional services in lawful compliance with Corporations Code § 13401 (a). 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-367. - Public nuisance abatement. 
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney is authorized, in addition to or in lieu of any other legal or criminal proceedings, to commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment of such massage establishment in the manner provided by law. The city attorney may seek a court order to grant such relief to abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-368. - Revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. In addition to the grounds for business license revocation set forth in chapter 50, article VIII, division 2 of this Code, the director or city attorney may revoke business licenses issued to massage technicians or massage establishments for one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or deceit. That the applicant practiced fraud or deceit in obtaining an approval under this article; 
(2)  Inspections. That the applicant has refused, delayed, or interfered with, inspections or compliance verification by representatives of the city, county, or state. 
(3)  Violation of chapter. That the massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee violated a provision or provisions of this article; 
(4)  Criminal conviction. That the massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense described in this article; 
(5)  Improperly maintained facilities. That the facilities and operations of the massage establishment are not kept in compliance with this article, and that the owner or operator has failed to promptly remedy any deficiency of which they have been notified. For purposes of this subsection, "notice" means notice given personally or by leaving notice at the massage establishment premises, or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address designated by the massage technician or establishment in accordance with this article; 
(6)  Employment of uncertified technicians. That the massage establishment has employed, allowed or permitted an uncertified person to perform massage in the massage establishment; 
(7)  Error. That the approval was issued in error; 
(8)  Civil penalties. Assessment of three or more civil penalties as provided by this article during any six month period; or 
(9)  Prohibited conduct. A massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee or agent has been found to have engaged in prohibited conduct in violation of this article. 
(b)  Notice and hearing of revocation. Notice and hearing for the revocation of a massage technician's or massage establishment's business license shall be pursuant to chapter 50, article VIII, division 2 of this Code (Section 50-381, et seq. ). 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 30-369. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article is liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney for an amount up to $500.00 per violation. Such person is also liable for reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred by the city attorney in any civil proceeding filed to enforce this article. 
(b)  Enforcing this article through civil action may be filed as an alternative to criminal enforcement. Civil enforcement does not require the violation to be knowing or willful. A civil action cannot be filed if the person is being criminally prosecuted. 
(c)  Each violation of this article is a separate offense subject to the civil penalty. 
(d)  The city attorney may settle any civil enforcement before or after to the filing of a civil action by imposing a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding the potential civil liability, including attorneys' fees, set forth in this section. If such civil penalty is paid in full, the city attorney can agree not to file civil or criminal actions or, if action has already been filed, may dismiss such action. Imposition of all civil penalties is public record. 
(e)  All civil fines must be deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Secs. 30-370—30-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC DANCES, PUBLIC DANCEHALLS AND DANCING ACADEMIES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Contracts for dance studio lessons and other services, Code of Civil Procedure § 1812.50 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-431. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dancing academy means a regularly established place of business or entertainment where instructions in dancing and dancing lessons are given or taught, and a fee is charged for such instructions or lessons or other consideration is paid or received. 
Private dance means a dance which is limited to those persons individually invited to which no admission charge is made or a dance conducted by a bona fide club, society or association, organized or incorporated for benevolent, charitable, dramatic, literary or dancing purposes, having an established membership and which holds meetings other than such dances at regular stated intervals and when the proceeds, if any, of such dance are used for the purposes of such club, society or organization. 
Public dance means a dance open to the public for an admittance fee or charge and which is held on one day only. 
Public dancehall means a place open to the public upon the payment of an admittance fee wherein music is provided and people are allowed to dance at regular intervals or on regular days of the week. 
Public dancing place means a place where music is provided and the public is permitted to dance without payment of a fee. 
(Code 1959, § 23-1; Ord. No. 1567, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-432. - Scope of article. 
This article shall not apply to any private dance; provided, however, that this article shall apply when invitations or tickets for admission to such dance are sold publicly or to the public generally. 
(Code 1959, § 23-2; Ord. No. 1567, § 1)  
Sec. 30-433. - Police protection. 
When the police chief requires that police protection be provided for any dance, the person managing, controlling or carrying on such dance must arrange for such protection with the chief of police. Payment will be made to the city at the rates established by the city council if police officers are provided. 
(Code 1959, § 23-11; Ord. No. 1567, § 1; Ord. No. 3040, § 1)  
Sec. 30-434. - Access of officers. 
The chief of police or fire chief shall, at all times, have free access to and egress from any place in which a public dance, school of dancing or dancing academy is being conducted, and all dancing shall be stopped and the place vacated at any time upon an order of the chief of police or fire chief. 
(Code 1959, § 23-14; Ord. No. 908, § 218)  
Sec. 30-435. - Indecent conduct. 
(a)  Any person owning, controlling, managing, conducting or holding a public dance, school of dancing, or dancing academy who causes, permits or allows in or at any such place or yard or premises connected therewith any passion dance or any lewd or lascivious dance is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who, at a public dance, school of dancing, or dancing academy, dances any passion, lewd or lascivious dance or so dances in any yard or premises connected therewith is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, §§ 23-12, 23-13; Ord. No. 908, §§ 211, 212)  
Sec. 30-436. - Nudity. 
No person in charge of any public dance, school of dancing or dancing academy shall allow any person to appear nude in any public place at such dance, school or academy.  
Sec. 30-437. - Admission by certain minors in public dancehall. 
(a)  The definitions of section 30-431 do not apply to this section. 
(b)  Any person owning or managing a public dancehall who causes or permits any person under the age of 13 years to enter or remain in such public dancehall, unless such minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1959, § 16-41; Ord. No. 3283, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 30-438—30-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-461. - Required. 
Any person who carries on, conducts, holds, or manages a public dancehall, public dance, public dancing place or dancing academy shall first file an application with the business license division in the manner set forth in this division and shall be issued a license before commencing operations. 
(Code 1959, § 23-3; Ord. No. 1567, § 1)  
Sec. 30-462. - Application contents. 
Any person or his duly authorized representative who applies for a license to carry on, conduct, hold or manage a public dancehall, public dance, public dancing place or dancing academy shall file an application in triplicate with the business license division signed under oath setting forth the following: 
(1)  The nature and type of operation. 
(2)  The location. 
(3)  The dates of operation. 
(4)  A statement that all sections of this Code, city ordinances and state codes will be complied with and the rooms used for dancing will be properly lighted. 
(Code 1959, § 23-4; Ord. No. 1567, § 1)  
Sec. 30-463. - Approval prerequisite to issuance. 
The business license division, upon receipt of the completed application for the license required under this division and payment of the correct license fee, shall transmit one copy of the application to the chief of police and one copy to the fire chief. Upon receiving notice from the chief of police and the fire chief of approval, the business license division shall issue the license as applied for. 
(Code 1959, § 23-5; Ord. No. 1567, § 1)  
Sec. 30-464. - Standards of approval. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of the permit required under this division if he determines the general welfare of the community will not be injured. In determining whether or not the general welfare of the community will be injured, he shall take into account the reputation of the person applying for the license and whether or not the applicant has a criminal record and, if so, the number and nature of any violation of law occurring at or in the vicinity of any dancing activity conducted by the applicant in the city prior to such consideration. He is also to consider the location and time where and when dancing is proposed to be held. No approval may be granted by the chief of police if the applicant or any person interested in or having any control of any part of the management of such dancing activity has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any act of violence, except the city council may waive this restriction upon appeal for good cause. 
(b)  The fire chief shall grant approval of the application if the location at which the dancing activity is to be conducted complies with all applicable sections of this Code, city ordinances and state codes under his jurisdiction. 
(Code 1959, § 23-6; Ord. No. 1567, § 1)  
Sec. 30-465. - Appeal from disapproval of application. 
If the police chief or fire chief disapproves the application for the license required under this division, the business license division shall notify the applicant at once of the applicant's right of appeal to the city council. The applicant may petition the council in a written statement setting forth all the facts upon which the petitioner relies, his name and address and a request for relief from the action of the police chief or fire chief. A copy of the statement shall be directed to the police chief or fire chief and the original filed with the business license division. The business license division shall notify the council, who shall set a date of hearing upon the matter. The hearing date shall be set within 21 days of filing the appeal. The business license division shall give written notice to the petitioner and the chief of police or fire chief of the hearing date, ten days prior to the hearing date. The decision of the council shall be rendered within 14 days after the hearing, and the decision shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 23-7; Ord. No. 1567, § 1)  
Sec. 30-466. - Fee schedule. 
The fees for a license to conduct any dancing activity shall be payable in advance under the rates set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 23-10; Ord. No. 1567, § 1; amended during 6/90 supplement; amended during 6/91 supplement; amended during 9/92 supplement; amended during 9/93 supplement; amended during 6/94 supplement; amended during 6/95 supplement; amended during 6/96 supplement; amended during 6/97 supplement; amended during 6/98 supplement; amended during 6/99 supplement; amended during 6/00 supplement; amended during 6/01 supplement; amended during 1/07 supplement)  
Sec. 30-467. - Revocation generally. 
If any person holding a license issued under this division shall violate any section of this article or shall permit or allow any illegal or disorderly conduct in or near a place where dancing is held, the chief of police may revoke or condition such license by giving written notice of the revocation or condition to the holder of such permit 72 hours before the effective hour of such revocation. 
(Code 1959, § 23-8; Ord. No. 1567, § 1)  
Sec. 30-468. - Appeal of revocation. 
If the license required by this division is revoked, the procedure for appeal shall be that set forth in section 30-465. 
(Code 1959, § 23-9; Ord. No. 1567, § 1)  
Secs. 30-469—30-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RENTAL UNITS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Substandard rental housing, § 74-231 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 30-501—30-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EVICTION PROGRAM FOR DRUG- OR GANG-RELATED ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 30-521. - Purpose and intent. 
The eviction program for drug- and gang-related crimes is intended to assist owners and managers of residential rental units in keeping their properties drug and crime free. This program shall pertain to those offenses specifically listed in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 5-60; Ord. No. 3906, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-522. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled substance means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor as listed in the California Uniform Controlled Substance Act (Health and Safety Code § 11000 et seq.). 
Drug-related nuisance means any activity related to the possession, sale, use, or manufacture of a controlled substance that creates an unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, and/or safety of residents of the premises. Such activity includes but is not limited to any activity commonly associated with illegal drug dealing, such as noise, steady traffic day and night to a particular unit, barricaded units, the display or observance of weapons, drug loitering as defined in Health and Safety Code § 11532, or other drug-related occurrences when taken as a whole tend to substantially affect or interfere with any other tenant's beneficial use and enjoyment of any rented property. 
Gang-related crime means any crime in which the perpetrator is a known member of a gang or any crime motivated by gang membership in which the victim or the intended victim of the crime is known to be a member of a gang. 
Illegal drug activity means a violation of any provision of Health and Safety Code div. 10, ch. 6 (Health and Safety Code § 11350 et seq.) and Health and Safety Code div. 10, ch. 6.5 (Health and Safety Code § 11400 et seq.). 
Landlord means any owner of record, lessor, or sublessor, including any person, who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit or the agent, manager, representative or successor of any of the foregoing. 
Premises means any rental unit and the land on which it and any other buildings of a complex are located and common areas, including but not limited to garage facilities, streets, alleyways, stairwells, elevators and, as the context permits or requires, any public or private property, which is immediately adjacent to any of such areas. 
Rental unit means any dwelling, including, but not limited to, any single-family residence, multifamily residence, duplex, and/or condominium, which is rented or offered for rent for residential occupancy in the city. This term also includes any mobile home, whether rent is paid for the mobile home, the land upon which the mobile home is located or both. It also means any recreational vehicle, as defined in Code of Civil Procedure § 799.24, if located in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, whether rent is paid for the recreation vehicle, the land upon which it is located or both. 
Tenant means any tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee or any person entitled to use or occupancy of a rental unit or any other person residing in the rental unit. 
(Code 1959, § 5-61; Ord. No. 3906, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-523. - Administrative procedures. 
The city manager may promulgate such administrative procedures as may be necessary to implement this division. 
(Code 1959, § 5-63; Ord. No. 3906, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-524. - Duties of landlord. 
(a)  Under this division a landlord shall not cause or knowingly permit any premises under his control to be used or maintained for any illegal drug activity or gang-related crime or in such a manner as to constitute a drug-related nuisance. 
(b)  A landlord shall not cause or knowingly permit any tenant to use or occupy premises under the landlord's control, if the tenant commits, permits, maintains or is involved in any illegal drug activity, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises. 
(Code 1959, § 5-62; Ord. No. 3906, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-525. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Provided that the owner of record or agent thereof and any known manager of a premises has been served with a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, advising that the chief of police has determined that the landlord is in violation of section 3-524(a) and/or (b) and has failed to comply with the subsection within 30 business days of the date of service of such notice or to file and appeal within such period as provided in this section, the city may file an action for injunctive relief or utilize any other remedy provided by the law to compel compliance, including but not limited to all remedies available to abate a nuisance. For purpose of this section, the written notice shall also identify the offending tenant(s), unit number if applicable, the specific violation(s), and provide sufficient documentation describing facts necessary to show a violation of Pomona City Code section 30-524(a) and (b), or the nuisance or illegal purpose provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure section 1161, subdivision (4), and shall further state that the landlord is required to serve and diligently prosecute either a three-day notice to quit or a 30-day notice to vacate. 
(b)  No rental unit vacated pursuant to the provisions of this section may be re-rented, leased or otherwise reoccupied by the prosecuted tenant prior to the expiration of a 12-month period following the vacation of the rental unit by the tenant, nor shall the landlord rent any other rental unit located within the city to such prosecuted tenant within such 12-month period. The required notice shall also state that, within such 30-day period, the landlord may file a written appeal of the determination of violation with the city manager, who shall cause the matter to be set for a hearing. Written notice of the date and time of such hearing shall be served by first class mail addressed to the landlord's last known business address. The city manager shall thereafter conduct an evidentiary hearing to determine whether the police chief's determination is supported by substantial evidence. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager may affirm, reverse, or reverse subject to conditions of the police chief's determination of violation. The city manager's decision shall be based upon written findings and shall be final. 
(c)  Any individual attempting to diligently prosecute a three-day notice to quit or 30-day notice to vacate pursuant to this section may request that the chief of police produce one or more police officers or employees with personal knowledge of the matters indicated in the notice described in subdivision (b) of this section. Upon the filing of such request with the city, the chief of police shall direct the appropriate police officer or employee with such personal knowledge to appear in any legal proceedings concerning the diligent prosecution of a three-day notice to quit or 30-day notice to vacate. The failure to produce a police officer or employee with sufficient personal knowledge shall relieve the requesting individual of any obligation to prosecute a three-day notice to quit or 30-day notice to vacate which is otherwise required pursuant to this section; provided, however, that any such request must be filed with the city clerk no sooner than 72 hours prior to the time scheduled for the legal proceeding. 
(d)  The following definitions apply to the terms used herein: 
(1)  "Sufficient documentation" shall include, but is not limited to, any one or combination of the following: (i) police reports, (ii) police officer or witness affidavits, or (iii) documented observations of any witness or informant willing to testify before a court of law; provided that any such documentation is disclosable pursuant to the requirements of the California Public Records Act (Government Code §§ 6250 et. seq.). 
(2)  The term "diligently prosecute" means exercising a reasonable effort to legally effectuate a three -day notice to quit or a 30-day notice to vacate the rented premises. Failure to succeed in causing the premises to be vacated shall not constitute a failure to diligently prosecute, provided that the landlord exercised reasonable effort in such prosecution. 
(Code 1959, § 5-65; Ord. No. 3906, § 1(part); Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 5-2-2005)  
Sec. 30-526. - Lien authorized. 
Any judgment for money given pursuant to this division, including permitted fees and costs, may be recorded as a lien against the subject's property in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00. If multiple defendants exist, they shall be jointly and severally liable for any payment so ordered. 
(Code 1959, § 5-66; Ord. No. 3906, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-527. - Recovery of possession by landlord. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of any ordinance to the contrary, a landlord may bring an action to recover possession of a rental unit upon any of the following: 
(1)  The tenant is committing or permitting to exist any illegal drug activity, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises; or 
(2)  The tenant has been convicted of a crime wherein the underlying offense involves illegal drug activity, any drug-related nuisance activity or a gang-related crime on the premises. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Government Code § 68097.2(b), a public entity may waive all or part of the costs incurred in furnishing the testimony of a peace officer in an unlawful detainer action brought by a landlord to recover possession of a rental unit pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1959, § 5-64; Ord. No. 3906, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-528. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any section or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. Any person violating any section of this division or failing to comply with any part of its requirements shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For three or less violations occurring within any 12-consecutive-month period, a violation of this division shall be deemed to be an infraction. 
(2)  The fourth and any subsequent violations of the same section occurring within any 12-consecutive-month period shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 5-67; Ord. No. 3906, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-529. - Civil remedies available. 
The violation of any of the sections of this division shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of a restraining order, by preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Code 1959, § 5-68; Ord. No. 3906, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 30-530—30-550. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MOBILE HOME RENT CONTROLS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Mobile home rent controls, Code of Civil Procedure § 798.45 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-551. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affected homeowner means any mobile home owner whose rent payment is affected by any proposed rent adjustment and excludes those mobile home owners who are exempt pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure § 798.17, Code of Civil Procedure § 798.21 or other law. Those mobile home owners whose written rental agreement terminates at any time during a calendar year shall also be an affected homeowner during that year. Tenants of an affected homeowner shall also be an affected home owner for purposes of this division, provided that the mobile home owner is not residing in the mobile home. There shall be one designated affected homeowner per mobile home space. 
Board refers to the mobile home hearing rent board. Such board shall consist of a panel of three members, including the rent administrator, the appointee by the community development director and the appointee by the city manager. 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) means the Consumer Price Index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for all urban consumers for the Los Angeles/Anaheim/Riverside Metropolitan Area. If the Consumer Price Index is discontinued or revised while this division is in effect, such other government index or computation with which it is replaced shall be used in order to obtain substantially the same result as would be obtained if the Consumer Price Index had not been discontinued or revised. 
Mobile home means a vehicle designed or used for human habitation when used as a place of residence where such vehicle conforms to applicable state rules and regulations. 
Mobile home owner means any person entitled under the terms of a rental agreement, whether verbal or written, to the use or occupancy of a mobile home space. There shall be one designated homeowner per mobile home space. 
Mobile home park means an area of land where two or more mobile home sites are rented or held out for rent to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. A mobile home park shall not include land and/or premises used primarily for the rental of spaces for recreational vehicle uses. 
Mobile home space means a site within a mobile home park rented or offered for rent for the location and installation of a mobile home and accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto. 
Mobile home rent administrator (MRA) means the person designated by the city manager, which designee is under the direction of the community development director, to establish policies, administer and enforce this division. 
Park owner means a person who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use or occupancy of spaces in a mobile home park or an agent or representative authorized to rent on behalf of such person. 
Park services means reasonable incidental services, including but not limited to repairs and maintenance, but shall not include capital improvements. Any fee or charge for park services shall be consistent with Code of Civil Procedure div. 2, pt. 2, title 2, ch. 2.5, art. 4 (Code of Civil Procedure § 798.30 et seq.), and other applicable State Law or court decisions. 
Rent means the consideration charged solely for the use and occupancy of a mobile home space in a park and shall not include any amount paid for the use of the mobile home dwelling unit or for facilities or amenities in a park, other than a mobile home space, or any other fees or charges regulated by State Laws and case decisions. 
Tenancy means the right of a homeowner to the use of a site within a mobile home park on which to locate, maintain, and occupy a mobile home, site improvements, and accessory structures for human habitation, including the use of services and facilities of the park. 
(Code 1959, § 15-2; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3822, §§ 1, 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-552. - Findings and purpose. 
The city council hereby finds and declares, as the purpose of this division, as follows: 
(1)  The state has recognized, by the adoption of the Mobile Home Residency Law (Code of Civil Procedure § 798 et seq.), and the city council likewise has recognized that tenants of mobile home parks, unlike apartment tenants or residents of other rental stock, are in the unique position of having made a substantial investment in a residence, the space for which is rented or leased as distinguished from owned. The physical removal and relocation of a mobile home from a rented or leased space within a mobile home park can be accomplished only at substantial cost and inconvenience with the concurrent ability to find another location, and, in many instances, the removal requires a separation of the mobile home unit from appurtenances which have been made permanent, thus creating severe damage and depreciation in value to the mobile home. 
(2)  Pursuant to studies and hearings conducted by the city council and city staff, the city council has determined it necessary and in the public interest to establish a mechanism to assist in the resolution of disputes that may arise from time to time between tenants and management of mobile home parks regarding the rates charged for the rental of a mobile home space. 
(3)  There is, within the city and surrounding areas, a shortage of spaces for the location of mobile homes, resulting in a low vacancy rate. 
(4)  Because of the shortage and potential for rapidly rising rates, regulation is necessary to ensure that economic hardship to a substantial number of mobile home park tenants in the city does not occur. 
(5)  Therefore, the city council does accordingly find and declare that it is necessary to establish a means to provide protection to mobile home park tenants from unreasonable rent increases, while at the same time recognizing the need of mobile home park management to receive a fair return and to receive rent increases sufficient to cover increased costs of repairs, maintenance, service, insurance, upkeep, and other amenities permitted by law. 
(6)  The city council further finds and declares that the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived will not have a significant, substantial or adverse effect on the physical environment of the community because enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived involves no deviation from the general plan and no change in the use of any property within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 15-1; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-553. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any resident aggrieved by the willful violation of this division may sue thereon and recover actual damages plus a civil penalty. 
(b)  Any mobile home park owner or representative who receives or retains any payment of rent in excess of that permitted under this division shall be liable to the resident from whom such payment is received or retained for damages and civil penalties in the amount of $200.00 or three times the amount of the payment so received or retained which exceeds the maximum lawful space rent, whichever is greater. 
(c)  In addition to any civil penalty provided under this division, any person who willfully and unlawfully violates this division may be in violation of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 15-9; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-554. - Refusal to pay illegal rent. 
A tenant may refuse to pay any rent which exceeds the maximum annual increase as set forth in section 30-558. The fact the rent attempted to be collected exceeds the maximum annual increase shall be a defense in any action brought to recover rent or possession of a mobile home space. 
(Code 1959, § 15-10; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-555. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This division shall apply to all mobile home tenancies in mobile home parks located in the city, except the following: 
(1)  Tenancies in mobile home parks of four spaces or fewer. 
(2)  Mobile home parks owned exclusively by the tenants. 
(3)  Tenancies which are exempt from local ordinances, rules, regulations or initiative measures adopted by any local governmental entity pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure § 798.17, Code of Civil Procedure § 798.21 or other law, except as provided and defined in this division. 
(b)  This division shall not apply to parks which are established and operated for primary purpose of renting land and/or spaces for recreational vehicle uses. 
(Code 1959, § 15-3; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-556. - Duties of mobile home rent administrator. 
In addition to the specific duties described elsewhere in this division, the mobile home rent administrator (MRA) shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Adopt procedures and guidelines, approved by the city council, for the implementation of this division. 
(2)  Take all reasonable and necessary measures to effect the purposes, intent and enforcement of this division. 
(3)  Formulate and order to be filed on an annual basis a full and complete listing of all tenants and mobile home owners within each mobile home park located within the city. Contained on this form shall be all information necessary for the purposes of this division, including but not limited to addresses, amounts of rents, dates first rented space, last rent increase, longterm lease tenants. The mobile home rent administrator shall have the authority to establish appropriate penalties for noncompliance with this requirement. 
(Code 1959, § 15-4; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-557. - Maximum annual increase. 
Under this division, the maximum annual allowable increase, on an annual basis, for rent, park services fees, and charges, or any combination of such shall not exceed five percent or the "CPI percentage increase" as described herein, whichever is the lesser of the two. The "CPI percentage increase" shall be based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI)(as described in section 30-551), and shall be derived by subtracting the "prior year index" from the "new year index", then dividing the result by the "prior year index", then multiplying the result by 100. (See equation below). The "new year index" shall be the index published for the month of January of the year in which the calculation is being applied will take effect. The "prior year index" shall be the index published for the month of January for the year prior to the year in which the calculation being applied will take effect. 
CPI percentage increase = 
[(New Year Index - Prior Year Index) ° 
Prior Year Index] × 100. 
(Code 1959, § 15-5; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4069, § 1, 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 30-558. - Notification of rent increases; annual limitation. 
(a)  Not later than 60 calendar days before an increase in rent is to become effective pursuant to this division, an owner shall provide a written notice of intent to raise rent to homeowners affected by or subject to such increase. No rent increase shall be valid in the absence of the timely service of such notice of intent. 
(b)  An owner shall be limited to one proposed rent increase per affected homeowner's space during a calendar year, irrespective of whether such proposed rent increase becomes effective pursuant to the mediation/arbitration procedures set forth in this division. 
(c)  Any notice of rent increase shall include, in addition to all notices required by law, a notice of tenant's rights, as provided for and established by this division. The mobile home rent administrator shall develop and make available to each mobile home park owner the form entitled "Notice of Tenant's Rights." any attempted rent increase which does not include the notice of tenant's rights shall be invalid as not complying with this division. 
(Code 1959, § 15-6; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-559. - Maintenance of park services. 
No mobile home park owner shall reduce or eliminate any park service to any mobile home space unless and until the cost savings resulting therefrom is passed on to the mobile home owners in a rent adjustment approved pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1959, § 15-7; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-560. - Compliance with State Law. 
Rent increases granted under this division shall not be effective and shall not be demanded, accepted or retained until the park owner or his agent has given all notices required by State Law and by this division. 
(Code 1959, § 15-8; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-561. - Vacancy control. 
Notwithstanding the limitation on rent increases otherwise set forth in this division, upon any change in the ownership of the mobile home that is on a mobile home space, the rent for the mobile home space may not be increased without limit. When a mobile home becomes vacant or the ownership of a mobile home is transferred, the park owner may raise the monthly rent no greater than $25.00 above the highest rent for a space in the mobile home park, but no further increases may occur on that space for 12 months. A change in ownership shall not include any of the following: 
(1)  A transfer to a conservator of the person and/or of the estate of a tenant; 
(2)  A transfer which takes effect upon the death of a spouse; 
(3)  A transfer to a spouse or former spouse in connection with a property settlement agreement or decree of dissolution of marriage or legal separation; or 
(4)  The creation, transfer, or termination solely between spouses of any co-owner's interest. 
(Code 1959, § 15-11; Ord. No. 3652, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3702, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-562. - Maximum rent adjustments. 
(a)  The mobile home hearing rent board may make individual rent adjustments, either upward or downward, of the maximum rent established as the base rent for rent-controlled units under this division. The board shall receive petitions from landlords and tenants for such adjustments. It shall be presumed that the net operating income produced by the property during the base year provided a fair return (fair net operating income). Landlords shall be entitled to earn a just and reasonable return and to maintain and increase their base year net operating income. 
(b)  It may be determined that the base year net operating income yielded other than a fair return, in which case the base year net operating income may be adjusted accordingly. In order to make such a determination, the board must make at least one of the following findings: 
(1)  The landlord's operating and maintenance expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years; or 
(2)  The rent on the base date was disproportionately low. 
(c)  The net operating income is the gross property income minus operating expenses exclusive of debt service. 
(d)  The board may receive relevant evidence demonstrating that a landlord is not receiving a just and reasonable return under the provisions of the net operating income formula so that the application of the formula may be modified to provide a just and reasonable return. 
(e)  In reviewing such petitions for adjustments, the board shall also consider relevant factors, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Increases or decreases in property taxes; 
(2)  Unavoidable increases or decreases in operating and maintenance expenses; 
(3)  Capital improvement of the rent-controlled unit, as distinguished from ordinary repair, replacement and maintenance; 
(4)  Increases or decreases in living space, furniture, furnishings or equipment; 
(5)  Substantial deterioration of the rent-controlled unit other than as a result of ordinary wear and tear; and 
(6)  Failure on the part of the landlord to provide adequate housing services. 
(Code 1959, § 15-14; Ord. No. 3822, § 4 (part))  
Sec. 30-563. - Maximum rent adjustment hearings. 
(a)  Petitions. Under this division the mobile home hearing rent board shall consider an adjustment of rent for an individual rent-controlled unit filed by the landlord or tenant of such a unit. No such adjustment shall be granted until after the board considers the petition at an adjustment hearing. 
(b)  Notice. The board shall notify the landlord, if the petition was filed by the tenant, or the tenant, if the petition was filed by the landlord, of the receipt of such a petition. The board shall schedule a hearing no earlier than the 16th day after the postmark of the notice of the hearing sent to the parties and shall notify both parties as to the time, date and place of the hearing. Hearings shall be scheduled for times most convenient for all parties, including evenings and weekends. Hearings may be postponed or continued for good cause, provided that all parties receive timely notice of such action. 
(c)  Records. The board may require either party to a rent adjustment petition to provide it with all pertinent books, records and papers. Such documents shall be made available to the parties involved at least seven days prior to the hearing at the office of the board. 
(d)  Open hearings. All rent adjustment hearings shall be open to the public. 
(e)  Decisions. The board shall make a final decision no later than 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing. No rent adjustment shall be granted unless supported by the preponderance of the evidence submitted at the hearing. All parties to a hearing shall be sent a notice of the board's decision and a copy of the findings. At the same time, parties to the proceeding shall also be notified of their right to judicial review. 
(f)  Consolidation. The board may consolidate petitions relating to rent-controlled units in the same mobile home park with the written consent of a majority of the tenants, and all such petitions may be considered in a single hearing. 
(g)  Repetition. Notwithstanding any other subsection of this section, the board may, without holding a hearing, refuse to adjust a maximum rent level upward for an individual rental unit if a hearing has been held with regard to the rental level of such unit within the prior 12 months. 
(h)  Inadequate or false information. If information filed in a petition for rent adjustment or in additional submissions filed at the request of the board is inadequate or false, no action shall be taken on such petition until the deficiency is remedied. 
(i)  Right to assistance. All parties to a hearing may have assistance in presenting evidence and developing their position from attorneys, legal workers, tenant union representatives or any other persons designated by such parties. 
(j)  Hearing record. The board shall make available for inspection and copying by any person an official record which shall constitute the exclusive record for the decision on the issues at the hearing. The record of the hearing or any part of one shall be obtainable for the cost of copying. The record of the hearing shall include the following: 
(1)  All exhibits, papers and documents required to be filed or accepted into evidence during the proceeding; 
(2)  A list of participants present; 
(3)  A summary of all testimony accepted in the proceeding; 
(4)  A statement of all materials officially noticed; 
(5)  All findings of fact; 
(6)  The ruling on each exception or objection, if any are presented; 
(7)  All recommended decisions, orders or rulings; 
(8)  All final decisions and/or orders; and 
(9)  The reasons for each recommended and each final decision order or ruling. 
(Code 1959, § 15-15; Ord. No. 3822, § 4 (part))  
Secs. 30-564—30-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SOLICITORS AND PANHANDLERS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-601. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alms means and includes charitable donations, contributions, money or other thing of value. 
Civic parking area means publicly owned property which is designated and/or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one or more governmental and/or public buildings within the Civic Plaza. 
Civic Plaza or Civic Center Plaza means and refers to that area bounded by Mission Boulevard to the north, Seventh Street to the south, Garey Avenue to the east, and Park Avenue to the west. 
Commercial parking area means privately owned property which is designated and/or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one or more commercial and/or professional establishments. 
Panhandling means and includes the activity of requesting, enticing, begging, or asking for alms. This term shall not include those individuals who are licensed to engage in the business of solicitation within the city pursuant to this article. 
Solicit, ask or beg means and includes using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value, or soliciting the sale of goods or services. 
Solicitor includes any person who, traveling by foot or by vehicle, solicits orders for or sells any merchandise, including magazines and food, or who solicits to perform or performs any type of service. 
(Code 1959, § 19-1; Ord. No. 3240, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3843, § 2; Ord. No. 4034, § 1, 8-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-602. - Violation. 
A violation of this article shall constitute an infraction. 
(Code 1959, § 19-12; Ord. No. 3240, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3843, §§ 3, 7)  
Sec. 30-603. - Hours during which residential solicitation prohibited. 
No solicitor shall visit or seek entrance to any dwelling unit for the purpose of selling any product or service where a sign is posted stating "no solicitors or agents" or words of similar import. Furthermore, no solicitor shall visit or seek entrance to any dwelling for the purpose of selling any product or service between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless permission is first obtained from the occupant of such unit by prearranged appointment prior to coming upon the premises of such unit. 
(Code 1959, § 19-7; Ord. No. 3240, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-604. - Solicitation in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any licensed solicitor to solicit or attempt to solicit business while standing in any portion of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, highways, sidewalks and driveways, from any person traveling in a vehicle along a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public streets, highways or driveways. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any licensed solicitor, while the occupant of any vehicle, to solicit or attempt to solicit business from any person who is within the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, a public street, highway, sidewalk or driveway. 
(Code 1959, § 19-8; Ord. No. 3843, § 3)  
Sec. 30-605. - Panhandling in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, while standing in any portion of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, highways, sidewalks and driveways, to panhandle or attempt to panhandle from any person travelling in a vehicle along a public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, highways or driveways. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, while the occupant of any vehicle, to panhandle or attempt to panhandle from any person who is within the public right-of-way, including but not limited to a public street, highway, sidewalk or driveway. 
(Code 1959, § 19-9; Ord. No. 3843, § 4)  
Sec. 30-606. - Panhandling in unauthorized locations within commercial parking areas. 
(a)  No person shall panhandle or attempt to panhandle from a location within a commercial parking area other than an area within or served by such parking area which is authorized by the property owner or the property owner's authorized representative for such panhandling. 
(b)  This section shall only apply to commercial parking areas where all of the following has occurred: 
(1)  The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area establishes a written policy which provides areas for lawful panhandling in locations which are accessible to the public and do not interfere with normal business operations of the commercial premises; 
(2)  A copy of such policy is submitted to the city planner to be maintained in city files; and 
(3)  The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such commercial parking area. The notice shall be not less than 18 by 24 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and shall not exceed, in total area, six square feet. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO ENGAGE IN PANHANDLING AND/OR THE SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS OF MONEY OR OTHER PROPERTY IN AREAS OF THIS PARKING LOT WHICH ARE NOT APPROVED FOR SUCH ACTIVITY BY THE PROPERTY OWNER. Pomona City Code section 30-606. 
(Code 1959, § 19-10; Ord. No. 3843, § 5)  
Sec. 30-607. - Panhandling in certain locations. 
It is unlawful for any person to panhandle or attempt to panhandle in any of the following locations: 
(1)  Within 25 feet of any bus stop; 
(2)  Within 25 feet of the entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan, or other financial institution building during the normal business hours that such financial institution is open to the public; 
(3)  Within 25 feet of any automated teller machine, cash disbursal machine, outdoor money changing machine, or any other outdoor machine or device which disburses cash; 
(4)  Within 25 feet of the entrance or exit of any church, temple, synagogue, or other house of worship during the normal hours that such facility is open to the public. 
(5)  Within the walkways leading from any civic parking area to any facilities located in the Civic Plaza, and within 25 feet of any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any governmental and/or public building located in the Civic Plaza. 
(Code 1959, § 19-11; Ord. No. 3843, § 6; Ord. No. 4034, § 2, 8-1-2005)  
Sec. 30-608. - Aggressive panhandling and solicitation. 
(a)  No panhandler or licensed solicitor shall solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner within the City of Pomona. 
(b)  Aggressive manner shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to (i) fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or (ii) otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
(2)  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting, asking or begging; 
(3)  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
(4)  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting, asking or begging; 
(5)  Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or 
(6)  Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction either before, during, or after solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 4034, § 3, 8-1-2005)  
Secs. 30-609—30-630. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOLICITOR'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-631. - Required; term. 
No person shall engage in the business of solicitor within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be for a calendar quarter. 
(Code 1959, § 19-2; Ord. No. 3240, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-632. - Application; investigation fee. 
(a)  The applicant for a solicitor's license must file with the business license division a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the business license division, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  The name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's address, both legal and local. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of it and the license number. 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches and showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, except minor traffic violations; the nature of the offense; and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee shall be charged to cover the cost of processing the license. 
(Code 1959, § 19-3; Ord. No. 3240, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-633. - Investigation; issuance or denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application for the solicitor's license referred to in section 30-632, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, and the duplicate shall be kept in the office of the business license division. The police department shall investigate the applicant's criminal history, and it may require that the applicant be fingerprinted. 
(b)  The business license division shall deny the license if the applicant's moral character and business responsibility are unsatisfactory and shall grant the license if such character and responsibility are satisfactory. The business license division shall base its decision on objective facts as shown on the license application, the report of the police department, and other evidence brought to its attention by the city or the applicant. The decision of the business license division shall be final. 
(c)  The business license division shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Code 1959, § 19-4; Ord. No. 3240, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-634. - Expiration. 
All quarterly licenses issued under this division shall expire on the last day of the calendar quarter. 
(Code 1959, § 19-5; Ord. No. 3240, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-635. - Display. 
Solicitors shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any person. 
(Code 1959, § 19-6; Ord. No. 3240, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 30-636—30-670. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FOOT AND PUSHCART VENDORS 
 
Sec. 30-671. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director means the director of finance. 
Foot vendor means any person selling, intending to sell, displaying or soliciting any food items, goods, wares, merchandise, or other nonfood items which are carried on his person in a basket, back pack, box or other device used to carry goods. 
Pushcart means any human-propelled wheeled vehicle which contains food items; goods, wares or merchandise; or other nonfood items sold or solicited. 
Pushcart vendor means any person selling, intending to sell, displaying or soliciting any food items, goods, wares, merchandise or other nonfood items from a pushcart. 
Vendor and vending mean offering food, beverage, or product of any kind for sale from a pushcart on any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or unenclosed place open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including the movement or standing of a pushcart for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of products. 
(Code 1959, § 28-410; Ord. No. 3640, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3834, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-672. - Impoundment of pushcarts. 
A pushcart may be impounded by a police officer or by any other person authorized to enforce this article pursuant to this Code, in the course of an arrest of the operator for a violation of this Code, when the pushcart is to be used as evidence of the violation. 
(Code 1959, § 28-415; Ord. No. 3640, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-673. - Nuisance operation of pushcart. 
Any pushcart operated contrary to this article shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this article, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating a pushcart contrary to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 28-414; Ord. No. 3640, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-674. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, or product from any pushcart, portable box, stand, bag or similar container on any street, parkway, or sidewalk or in any unenclosed area open to the general public. 
(b)  No person shall employ, direct or otherwise cause any other person to vend or offer to vend any food, beverage or product in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  No foot vendor shall sell food items, goods, wares, merchandise or other nonfood items on any public street or sidewalk or other public place or building within the city. No foot vendor shall sell food; nonfood items; or any other goods, wares or merchandise from privately owned property without prior written permission of the owner. Any vendor receiving such permission must comply with all other sections of this Code and zoning ordinances and all other applicable state and federal laws. 
(d)  The general prohibitions contained in this section do not apply to fundraising activities conducted by any city-licensed nonprofit and/or charitable organization. 
(e)  No fundraising vending activities by any city-licensed nonprofit and/or charitable organization shall be conducted on any street, sidewalk, highway or public place before 9:00 a.m. or later than 6:00 p.m. during periods of standard time or later than 8:00 p.m. during periods of daylight saving time. 
(Code 1959, § 28-411; Ord. No. 3640, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3834, § 2)  
Secs. 30-675—30-710. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - VENDING FROM VEHICLES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 30-711. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public right-of-way means any portion of a public street right-of-way which is set apart by curbs, barriers or markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel. 
Public street means that portion of a public street designated as such, which is improved, designed or ordinarily used by the public for the primary purpose of vehicular travel. 
(Code 1959, § 28-310(c); Ord. No. 3426, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-712. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all persons who engage in the sale or who offer the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise from vehicles. 
(Code 1959, § 28-310(b); Ord. No. 3426, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-713. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority. This article shall be enforced by any duly authorized city employee or officer, including but not limited to inspectors of the municipal code enforcement division and police department officers. 
(b)  Confiscation of merchandise. Any merchandise offered for sale that has not been listed pursuant to section 30-716(2)b.6. or is not a normal incident to such product as listed may be confiscated by the enforcing officer. 
(c)  Spot inspections. For cause or as incident to a policy of ongoing inspection, duly authorized city employees may make an onstreet inspection of the vehicle. Such inspections shall be reasonable in scope and shall be limited to such duration as is reasonably required to ensure that the applicable regulations are being conformed to by the operator. 
(Code 1959, § 28-313; Ord. No. 3426, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-714. - Fees and appeal procedure. 
(a)  Fees. For the purposes of this article, fees shall be imposed as follows: 
(1)  Inspection and operator's permit. All fees for the vehicle inspection and the operator's permit shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Reinspection. If a vehicle does not conform to the requirements applicable for such vehicle and the applicant wishes to correct the deficiencies specified in the initial inspection, the reinspection fee shall be one-half of the fee charged for the initial inspection. 
(b)  Appeals. Any appeal from the denial or revocation of a business license or vendor's permit shall be conducted in a manner as set forth in sections 50-346 through 50-348 and 50-381 through 50-389. 
(Code 1959, § 28-314; Ord. No. 3426, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-715. - Purpose and general prohibition. 
It is the purpose of this article to protect citizens of the city from the intrusion of unsafe, unhealthful and unsightly vehicles utilized for the purpose of street vending and deem it unlawful for any person to conduct the sale of consumable and/or nonconsumable products on any public place, public street, or right-of-way within the city. As such, no person shall sell, engage in sales, or offer to sell any goods, wares or merchandise in any public place, public street, or public right-of-way within the city except for the following: 
(1)  Catering truck vendors; 
(2)  Ice cream truck vendors; or 
(3)  Vendors of foodstuff products directly to a consumer. 
(Code 1959, § 28-310(a); Ord. No. 3426, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 30-716. - Procedures and requirements for licensing. 
Each firm, operator and vehicle conducting or being utilized for the purpose of street vending shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Principal place of business licensing. Licensing of the principal place of business shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  All principal places of business of persons conducting street vending located in the city shall obtain and maintain current a city business license. 
b.  Each principal place of business of persons conducting street vending shall have a current and valid county health permit. 
(2)  Vehicle licensing. Vehicle licensing requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  All vehicles shall have a business license that shall be specifically and solely applicable to the vehicle for which such license is requested. The license shall not be transferable to any other vehicle. The proof of possession of a current and valid business license for the vehicle shall be a decal sticker, permanently affixed to the vehicle, that has been issued by the city. 
b.  As a precondition to issuance of a vehicle individual business license, the applicant shall submit to the business license division the following: 
1.  Proof of vehicle insurance. 
2.  Proof of current vehicle registration. 
3.  Proof of a valid county health permit for the vehicle. 
4.  The name and current address of an adult who may be reached in an emergency or other incident involving the vehicle. 
5.  The address of the site where the vehicle and the products are stored during nonbusiness hours. If applicable, the applicant shall also provide proof of a valid city home occupation permit. 
6.  A schedule of the products to be offered for sale in the vehicle. 
c.  The police department shall inspect and approve each vending vehicle. The police department shall approve a vehicle if it conforms to the following criteria: 
1.  The vehicle conforms to all Vehicle Code requirements. 
2.  The vehicle is a step-van, pickup truck, or commercially designed vehicle for the specific purpose of vending which has a minimum frame capacity of one-half ton. 
3.  The interior surfaces of the vehicle are smooth, washable, and impervious to penetration by liquids. 
4.  The vehicle points of entry are able to be locked and unlocked from the interior. 
5.  Commercially designed storage equipment, for the storage of consumable products, is present and in a proper working condition. 
6.  The vehicle has mirrors, as required by the Vehicle Code, to ensure adequate rear vision, and the vehicle shall have a functioning, automatically activated backing-up warning device. A vehicle having clear glass windows at the rear of the vehicle must also meet the rear vision requirement of the Vehicle Code. 
7.  The vehicle exterior identifies the business name, address, and telephone number. The required information shall be displayed on both the rear and the vending side of the vehicle and shall be communicated by block letters and numbers that are not less than three inches nor more than five inches in height and width. 
8.  Product advertising on the vehicle exterior shall be limited to one menu board. Such menu board shall not exceed the dimensions of 24 inches in width and 36 inches in height and shall be located on the vending side of the vehicle. 
9.  Vending shall be conducted either on the righthand side of vehicle or from the rear. 
(3)  Operator licensing. Each person who operates or conducts commercial transactions from a vending vehicle shall have a valid vehicle vendor's permit. The applicant shall be issued the vehicle vendor's permit upon submittal to and approval by the fire department, code enforcement division, of the following: 
a.  Proof of the current state driver's license. 
b.  A true printout from the department of motor vehicles that details the driving record of the applicant. The applicant shall not be denied a permit, unless the record indicates the operator will pose a substantial risk to the public health, safety or welfare. 
c.  Proof of valid comprehensive automobile insurance. 
The vehicle vendor's permit shall be issued by the fire department and shall be in the form of a laminated plastic badge that sets forth the name and photograph of the person to whom the permit is issued. Each person to whom a permit is issued shall wear it at all times during which he is conducting business. The vendor's permit shall be placed in a manner so as to allow for convenient observation by the public. 
(Code 1959, § 28-311; Ord. No. 3426, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3932, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 30-717. - Restrictions on vending operations. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct vehicle vending operations in a manner that does not conform to the following: 
(1)  There shall be compliance with all applicable law. 
(2)  Sales or operation of a vehicle may be conducted only by a person licensed by the city. 
(3)  Sales may be conducted only from a licensed vehicle. 
(4)  All perishable foodstuffs must be properly stored in the commercially designed storage equipment appropriate for such consumable. 
(5)  The vehicle interior must be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition. 
(6)  No purchasers shall be allowed to enter into the interior of the vehicle. 
(7)  Vending vehicle sales shall be permitted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(8)  No vending vehicle shall park less than: 
a.  Thirty feet from any street corner; or 
b.  Three hundred feet from any public park or any school, whether public or private. 
(9)  Vendors are not exempt from Vehicle Code § 22502(a) and must legally park at the curb, during the conduct of business. Vendors shall not double park or in any way impede traffic, as set forth in Vehicle Code § 22400. 
(10)  Vehicles shall stop and park for the purposes of conducting business only if requested to do so by a bona fide purchaser. Such business-related stopping shall be limited in duration to the time required to actually commence and conclude the transaction, but in no case shall the duration of a stop exceed ten minutes at any single location. Every change of location shall be at least 50 linear feet away from the previous location. 
(11)  No vendor shall operate any equipment or device that emits an audible output in a manner that violates article VII of chapter 18. 
(12)  No vendor shall sell any item in violation of sections 34-281 and 34-282 of the Pomona City Code. 
(Code 1959, § 28-312; Ord. No. 3426, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4071, § 1, 9-16-2006)  
Secs. 30-718—30-750. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - YARD SALES 
 
Sec. 30-751. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Occasional sale means the sale of tangible personal property in a residential zone as defined by the city zoning ordinance or upon premises zoned for another use, providing the actual and principal current use of such premises is for residential purposes, when such sale is advertised by means of an advertisement in a newspaper or sign on or off such property designating such sale as a "yard sale," "patio sale," "lot sale," "garage sale" or of words having similar import or meaning or in the alternative when such advertisement or sign advertises the sale of four or more items upon such premises or where in fact four or more items are sold upon such residential property within a one-day period. The term "occasional sale" does not include rummage sales by nonprofit organizations licensed to do business in the city which obtain a temporary use permit as required by section .583 of the zoning ordinance. 
Seller of property at an occasional sale means any and all of the following: 
(1)  The person actually selling the personal property at an occasional sale; 
(2)  The tenant of the premises where an occasional sale is conducted; and 
(3)  The owner of the premises where an occasional sale is conducted, if such owner occupies such premises. 
(Code 1959, § 14-40; Ord. No. 2495, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2853, § 2; Ord. No. 3226, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3760, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-752. - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided, any violation of conducting an occasional sale, except as permitted by and pursuant to this article, shall be an infraction. A person who violates the same section of this article more than three times within one year shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 14-47; Ord. No. 3226, § 2; Ord. No. 3760, § 8)  
Sec. 30-753. - Time limits. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) herein, occasional sales may only be conducted on the first weekend of the months of March, June, September and December. For the purposes of this subsection, the term weekend means the first consecutive Friday, Saturday and Sunday of said months. 
(b)  Occasional sales shall only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  If rainy weather conditions exist on either Friday or Saturday of the first weekend of the designated months, occasional sales may be conducted on the following consecutive Saturday and Sunday. In the event rainy weather conditions exist on Friday or Saturday of the first weekend of the designated months and on the subsequent Saturday or Sunday, an alternate Saturday and Sunday may be designated by the city council. 
(d)  During years in which the Monday immediately following first weekend of September, as defined above, coincides with the United States observance of the Labor Day Holiday, occasional sales may be conducted on the following consecutive Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. 
(Code 1959, § 14-41; Ord. No. 2495, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2853, § 2; Ord. No. 3226, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3760, § 1; Ord. No. 4097, § 1, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 4211 , § 1, 11-2-2015)  
Sec. 30-754. - Signs. 
(a)  Two unlighted signs will be permitted, not exceeding six square feet in area each, advertising an occasional sale. 
(b)  Occasional sale advertising signs may not be posted on telephone poles, streetlights, traffic signs, sidewalks or any other structures in the public right-of-way. Occasional sale signs must be placed or posted on private property only. 
(c)  Such signs shall only be displayed during the period of such sale as indicated in section 30-753. 
(d)  All signs which do not comply with this section shall be declared a nuisance and are subject to immediate abatement by code/zoning manager. 
(Code 1959, § 14-45; Ord. No. 2853, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3226, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3760, § 6)  
Secs. 30-755—30-780. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - SHARED DOCKLESS MICRO-MOBILITY DEVICE BUSINESSES; E-SCOOTERS AND E-BICYCLES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4259 , § 2, adopted May 6, 2019, added a new Art. XIII, §§ 30-755—30-758, to the Code; however, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. XIII, §§ 30-781—30-784, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of allowing future expansion of the Code. 
 
Sec. 30-781. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit shared dockless micro-mobility devices from being placed in the public right-of-way or on public property, operated in the public right-of-way, or offered for use anywhere in the city until such regulations may be adopted so as to address potential nuisance conditions and safety concerns related to the operation of shared dockless micro-mobility devices. 
(Ord. No. 4259 , § 2, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 30-782. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Electric bicycle is a bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts. 
(1)  A "class 1 electric bicycle," or "low-speed pedal-assisted electric bicycle," is a bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling, and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour. 
(2)  A "class 2 electric bicycle," or "low-speed throttle-assisted electric bicycle," is a bicycle equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel the bicycle, and that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour. 
(3)  A "class 3 electric bicycle," or "speed pedal-assisted electric bicycle," is a bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling, and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour, and equipped with a speedometer. 
Motorized bicycle or moped is a two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, or having no pedals if powered solely by electrical energy, and an automatic transmission and a motor that produces less than four gross brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour on level ground. 
Motorized scooter means a two- or three-wheeled device that has handlebars, a floorboard designed to be stood upon when riding, and is powered by a motor. 
Scooter means a two- or three-wheeled device that has handlebars, a floorboard designed to be stood upon when riding. 
Shared dockless micro-mobility devices shall mean any wheeled device that has handlebars, and is designed to be either powered by an electric motor or other power source, or to be powered by human propulsion, that is accessed via an on-demand portal, whether through a smart-phone, access code, I.D. card, or similar method, and is operated by a public, private, or non-profit entity that owns, manages, maintains and ensures devices for shared use by members, which are available to members in unstaffed, self-service locations. 
Shared dockless micro-mobility device operator shall mean an individual or a public, private, or non-profit entity that manages shared dockless micro-mobility devices. 
(Ord. No. 4259 , § 2, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 30-783. - General requirements. 
It is unlawful to provide, place, or offer for use shared dockless micro-mobility devices, or to operate a shared dockless micro-mobility device in any street or public right-of-way or other public place within the city in which the public has the right of travel. 
(a)  The city council hereby authorizes all officers and employees of the city who have the duty to enforce city ordinances and this Code to cite persons for violation of such ordinances and this Code, and are hereby authorized to impound the shared dockless micro-mobility devices of any person or shared dockless micro-mobility devices operator violating the provisions of this chapter. Devices shall be subject to an impound fee established by city council resolution. 
(b)  The city manager may promulgate regulations for the notification to the operator and return of the devices to the operator and as may otherwise be necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4259 , § 2, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 30-784. - Violations. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be subject to criminal sanctions, civil actions, and administrative citations pursuant to section 50-357. 
(b)  Violations of this article are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(c)  In the event a motorized scooter is impounded pursuant to section 30-757(a), the motorized scooter share program operator shall pay the administrative costs incurred by the city in impounding the motorized scooter, if any, in addition to any applicable penalties imposed pursuant to subsection (a) above. 
(d)  All remedies prescribed under this article are cumulative and the election of one or more remedies does not bar the city from the pursuit of any other remedy to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 4259 , § 2, 5-6-2019)  
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Violation of written promises to appear. 
(a)  Any person willfully violating a written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(b)  When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail, as provided in Penal Code § 853.1, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within 20 days after his failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than the magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, within 20 days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
(Code 1959, § 1-10; Ord. No. 1515, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code §§ 853.7, 853.8.  
Sec. 34-2. - Ephedrine sales and purchases. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Count means the number of pills, tablets, capsules, or individual units of a substance contained within an individual package, box or container. 
Customer means any person who purchases or acquires the products described in this section, or persons who are present for the purchase or acquisition of the products described in this section. 
Ephedrine means any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal, that contains ephedrine, ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine, pseudo- ephedrine hydrochloride, or pseudo- 
ephedrine sulfate. 
Retailer means any retail business, company, corporation, person, employee or associate who furnishes, distributes, sells or gives away products described in this section. 
Sell means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, or supply, whether for monetary gain or not. 
(b)  No retailer shall sell to a single customer more than three packages, per transaction, of a product containing ephedrine where the total count exceeds 100. 
(c)  No customer shall acquire more than three packages of a product, per day, containing ephedrine. No customer shall acquire, per day, products containing ephedrine where the total count exceeds 100. 
(d)  Every retailer who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment which sells products containing ephedrine shall post a sign in a conspicuous location in or around the products. In communities where English may not be the predominant language, retail establishments located in such a community shall post such sign in English or in the predominant language spoken in that community. The sign, regardless of the language, shall be no less than 8½ inches by 11 inches in size and shall state the following: 
"IT IS ILLEGAL TO PURCHASE MORE THAN THREE PACKAGES OF EPHEDRINE PRODUCTS PER DAY OR EPHEDRINE PRODUCTS WHERE THE COUNT EXCEEDS 100." 
(Code 1959, §§ 16-52.1—16-52.3; Ord. No. 3868, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 34-3. - Storage of vehicles. 
(a)  No motor vehicle shall be stored or parked on private property in any zoning district except in an enclosed building unless such vehicle is capable of movement under its own power. 
(b)  Motor homes, boats, camper bodies, boat trailers, travel trailers and other trailers, and recreational vehicles (RV's) stored or parked on private property in any zoning district shall be located on an approved cement or asphalt surface, pursuant to section 58-234, to the rear of the front yard setback or beyond the street side yard setback area and screened with a six-foot-high wall as defined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(c)  It is recognized that the physical attributes of properties, including size, shape, and location of existing structure, may prohibit access for recreational vehicles beyond the front yard setback. It is further recognized that residents must, insofar as possible, be protected from unnecessary traffic hazards and negative aesthetic impacts. To accommodate these competing interests, the following exceptions to subsection (b) of this section have been developed: 
(1)  The provisions in this subsection pertaining to exceptions are applicable only to recreational vehicles which are capable of movement by their own power only and apply in all zoning districts except for the Phillips Ranch Specific Plan Zone or to properties which are regulated by covenants, conditions, and restrictions which prohibit the storage of recreational vehicles within front yard setbacks. The city planner shall consider all reasonable alternate sites within the parcel involved, including, if feasible, the rear or side yards, to avoid, to the extent feasible, the location of designated parking areas in areas visible from the public street. Such alternate sites shall be eliminated from consideration only when the side yard is insufficient in width to accommodate the width of a recreational vehicle and there is no other rear yard access to the site such as via an adjacent side street or alley. No recreational vehicle shall be granted an exception unless such vehicle is registered to an individual who resides at the property for which the exception is requested. If such is the case, the vehicle shall be stored at all times in an area designated by the city planner. In no case shall the designated location obstruct access to a garage or carport area. Such spaces shall be known as designated parking areas. In approving a designated parking area, the city planner must find that all requirements of section 58-234 are met and that the storage of the recreational vehicle within a designated parking area will not encroach into the public right-of-way, prohibit service to utility equipment or obstruct the visibility of oncoming pedestrian/vehicular traffic. The city planner may also impose conditions to ensure that community health, safety and welfare standards are met. Further, the city planner may specify the dimensions and location of such designated parking area; establish appropriate conditions for screening, including walls, shrubbery, or other material; and establish other conditions deemed reasonably necessary to protect the value of other properties in the immediate neighborhood. 
(2)  The owner of a recreational vehicle who seeks to have such vehicle qualified for an exception shall apply for a permit. The permit will be valid only for the recreational vehicle listed in each application. Subsequent recreational vehicles purchased will require a new permit. The permit process shall be set forth in accordance with the following: 
a.  The applicant shall submit to the city planner a written application along with the following documentation: 
1.  The department of motor vehicle registration for the recreational vehicle for which the exception is requested. 
2.  A plot plan showing existing conditions of the property and the proposed designated parking area. 
3.  A radius map and list consisting of property and business owners' names and mailing addresses for all properties within a radius of 150 feet from the external boundaries of the property of the proposed designated parking area. 
b.  Upon receipt of a complete application package, the city planner shall prepare written notice which states the name of the applicant, the proposed location and that a site plan and supporting documents are available for public inspection at the offices of the city planning division. The notice shall state that interested persons may submit written comments to the city planner within five working days from the mailing date of such notice. 
c.  Copies of the application and site plan shall be routed to the public works/traffic division. The traffic division shall review the application to ensure that the storage of the recreational vehicle will not create a visibility hazard for traffic. 
d.  The city planner shall determine if the requested application warrants the exception and which, if any, restrictions may be conditioned with the approval in accordance with the following: 
1.  Approved request. If the application is approved, the city planner shall issue a permit, in the form of a decal, which shall be placed on either the lower left corner of the rear window or on the left side of the rear bumper. 
2.  Denied request. If the request is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial pursuant to the process set forth in this Code. 
3.  Appeal. The decision of the city planner shall be final, unless a written appeal is filed with the planning division within ten days after the written decision by the city planner. The applicant and property owners within a 150-foot radius from the proposed storage vehicles may appeal the decision of the city planner to the planning commission. The appeal shall be considered by the planning commission as a consent item. The decision of the planning commission shall be final, unless a written appeal to the city council is filed with the planning division within ten days of the planning commission's decision. A member of the city council may request an appeal of the planning commission's decision. Any councilmember who requests a review before the city council must request and obtain a majority vote of the city council in order to set the appeal for a public hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
e.  A permit shall be revoked by the city planner if any of the following restrictions are violated: 
1.  The vehicle shall be parked within the area designated for recreational vehicle storage. 
2.  The vehicle's appearance shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner. 
3.  The vehicle shall be registered to an occupant of the subject property. 
f.  Each applicant for a designated parking permit shall pay a nonrefundable application fee to cover the cost of processing and public noticing of such application. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 16-12; Ord. No. 3423, § 3; Ord. No. 3585, § 1; Ord. No. 3839, § 3; Ord. No. 3876, § 3) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58.  
Sec. 34-4. - Handbills. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Handbill means a printed (including all forms of reproduced writing) paper or circular, which is circulated or distributed, other than by the United States Postal Service, for the purpose of advertising for sale or lease goods, wares, merchandise or services or soliciting support or opposition to any public issue, religious belief or political figure or party, partisan or nonpartisan. A handbill does not include newspapers. 
Newspaper means any periodical published primarily for the dissemination of news and intelligence of a general character, which is printed and published at regular intervals. 
(b)  The distribution of handbills shall be permitted only if done by securely affixing them to a doorknob, gate, gatepost, or other suitable hardware or similar stationary object in the area around the door or gate in such a manner that the handbills are unlikely to fall, be blown from, or scattered about the premises. The distribution of handbills upon parked vehicles shall be permitted only if done by securely affixing the handbills to the vehicle in such a manner that the handbills are unlikely to fall or be blown from the vehicle. 
(c)  No handbills shall be distributed if there is a conspicuous sign stating "no handbills" or other similar language indicating that the occupant or owner does not desire to receive such material or if the occupant or owner has verbally communicated such. 
(d)  No handbills shall be left on the ground or left upon vacant property, yards, driveways, porches, parkways, sidewalks, or streets without being securely affixed to a doorknob, gate, gatepost, or other suitable hardware or similar stationary object in the area around the door or gate in such a manner that the handbills are unlikely to fall, be blown from, or scattered about the premises. 
(Code 1959, §§ 3-5, 3-6; Ord. No. 908, § 420; Ord. No. 2526, § 1; Ord. No. 3417, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3423, § 1; Ord. No. 3480, § 4 (part))  
Sec. 34-5. - Deposit of human waste in public place. 
(a)  No person shall deposit, by means of urination or defecation, any human waste material in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view or upon the surface of the ground or upon any premises, lot or in any building, basement or in any public street or into any standing water, stream or excavation or public place other than a proper toilet or portable toilet. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "human waste material" shall be defined as human urine discharged from the body or human fecal material defecated from the rectum. 
(Code 1959, § 16-29; Ord. No. 3068, § 1) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46.  
Sec. 34-6. - Sale of admission passes. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale, upon any property of an owner or operator of a fair, trade show or similar event, any admission pass to such event, unless he has first procured the permission of such owner or operator. 
(Code 1959, § 16-45; Ord. No. 3443, § 1)  
Secs. 34-7—34-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES USED IN COMMISSION OF PROSTITUTION OR ILLEGAL DUMPING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4164, § 1, adopted August 6, 2012, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 34-41—34-48, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3964, §§ 2(16-100)—(16-107), 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 3995, § 1, 9-21-2003. 
 
Sec. 34-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance vehicle means any vehicle used to: 
(1)  Commit one or more of the following acts related to prostitution: pimping (Penal Code section 266h), pandering (Penal Code section 266i), or solicitation (Penal Code section 647(b)); or 
(2)  Dump refuse or waste material in violation of Penal Code section 374.3(h) (Unlawful dumping of refuse on public or private property in a quantity more than one cubic yard), section 62-592 of the Pomona City Code (depositing or burial of solid waste), section 62-590 of the Pomona City Code (unlawful deposit of waste), or section 46-11 of the Pomona City Code (dumping materials on streets). 
Such vehicle shall be declared a nuisance, and the vehicle may be impounded, abated as provided in this article. Any person or his servant, agent, or employee who owns, leases, conducts or maintains any vehicle used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this definition is guilty of a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-42. - Seizure and impoundment of vehicle. 
A vehicle shall be seized and impounded pursuant to this subsection upon the occurrence of both of the following: 
(1)  A valid arrest of the driver of a vehicle for the commission or attempted commission of an act that violates Sections 266h, 266i, or 647(b) of the California Penal Code; and 
(2)  At the time of the arrest, the owner or operator of the vehicle had a prior conviction for the same offense within the past three years. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-43. - Impoundment period. 
Impoundment shall be for a period of 30 days. Any period during which a vehicle is subjected to storage pursuant to this subsection shall be included as part of the period of impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-44. - Notice to owner; post-storage hearing. 
(a)  Within two working days after impoundment, the city shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the legal and registered owner(s) of the vehicle at the address obtained from the department of motor vehicles that the vehicle has been impounded. The notice shall also inform the owner of an opportunity for a post-storage hearing to determine the validity of the storage or to determine mitigating circumstances establishing that the vehicle should be released. 
(b)  The notice shall include all of the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the agency providing the notice; 
(2)  The location of the place of storage and description of the vehicle that shall include, if available, the model or make, the manufacturer, the license plate number, and the mileage; 
(3)  The authority and purpose for the removal of the vehicle; and 
(4)  A statement that, in order to receive a post-storage hearing, the owner(s), or their agent(s), shall request the hearing in person, writing or by telephone within ten (10) days of the date appearing on the notice. 
(c)  The city shall be prohibited from charging for more than five days of storage if it fails to notify the legal owner within two working days after the impoundment when the legal owner redeems the impounded vehicle. 
(d)  The post-storage hearing shall be conducted within 48 hours of the request for hearing, excluding weekends and holidays. Failure of the legal and registered owners, or their respective agents, to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the post-storage hearing requirement. 
(e)  The city may designate one of its own officers or employees to conduct the hearing if that hearing officer is not the same person who directed the seizure of the vehicle. 
(f)  The hearing officer shall establish whether there are reasonable grounds for the storage of the vehicle and mitigating circumstances establishing that the vehicle should be released. If it is determined at the post-storage hearing that there are no reasonable grounds for the storage of the vehicle, the city shall be responsible for the costs incurred for towing and storage. 
(g)  The city shall maintain a published telephone number that provides information 24 hours a day regarding the impoundment of vehicles and the rights of legal and registered owners to request a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-45. - Release to registered owner prior to end of impoundment period. 
(a)  A vehicle impounded pursuant to section 34-42 shall be released to the registered owner, or the registered owner's agent, prior to the end of the impoundment period under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The driver of the impounded vehicle was arrested without probable cause; 
(2)  The vehicle is a stolen vehicle; 
(3)  The vehicle is subject to bailment and was driven by an unlicensed employee of a business establishment including a parking service or repair garage; 
(4)  The driver of the vehicle is not the sole registered owner of the vehicle and the vehicle is being released to another registered owner of the vehicle who agrees not to allow the driver to use the vehicle until after the end of the impoundment period; 
(5)  The registered owner of the vehicle was neither the driver nor passenger of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, or was unaware that the driver was using the vehicle to engage in activities subject to Sections 266h, 266i, 647(b), or 374.3(h) of the California Penal Code, or Sections 62-592, 62-590, or 46-11 of the Pomona City Code; or 
(6)  A spouse, registered domestic partner, or other affected third party objects to the impoundment of the vehicle on the grounds that it would create a hardship if the subject vehicle is the sole vehicle in a household, and that hardship outweighs the seriousness and severity of the act in which the vehicle was used. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a motor vehicle is released prior to the end of the impoundment period because the driver was arrested without probable cause, neither the arrested person nor the registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the towing and storage charges. 
(c)  Except as provided herein in subsection 34-45(b), the registered owner or his or her agent shall be responsible for all towing and storage charges related to the impoundment of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-46. - Release to legal owner prior to end of impoundment period. 
(a)  A vehicle impounded pursuant to section 34-42 shall be released to the legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, prior to the end of the impoundment period if both of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The legal owner is a motor vehicle dealer, bank, credit union, acceptance corporation, or other licensed financial institution legally operating in California, or is another person who is not the registered owner and holds a security interest in the vehicle; and 
(2)  The legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, pays all of the towing and storage fees related to the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle. 
(b)  No lien sale processing fees shall be charged to the legal owner who redeems the vehicle prior to the fifteenth (15th) day of the impoundment period. Neither the city, the impounding agency, nor any person having possession of the vehicle shall collect from the legal owner as described in subsection 34-46(a)(1) of this section, or the legal owner's agent, any administrative charges imposed pursuant to Section 22850.5 of the California Vehicle Code, unless the legal owner voluntarily requested a post-storage hearing. 
(c)  The legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, shall present the following documentation to the Pomona Police Department, impounding agency, person in possession of the vehicle, or any person acting on behalf of those agencies: 
(1)  A copy of the assignment as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 7500.1 of the Business and Professions Code; 
(2)  A release of liability from the Pomona Police Department ; 
(3)  A government-issued photographic identification card; and 
(4)  Any one of the following as determined by the legal owner or the legal owner's agent: 
a.  A certificate of repossession for the vehicle; 
b.  A security agreement for the vehicle; or 
c.  Title (whether or not paperless or electronic) showing proof of legal ownership for the vehicle. 
(d)  Any documents presented may be originals, photocopies, or facsimile copies, or may be transmitted electronically. The Pomona Police Department, impounding agency, or any person acting on behalf of those agencies shall not require any documents to be notarized. 
(e)  Agent of legal owner. The Pomona Police Department, or any person acting on its behalf may require the agent of the legal owner to produce a photocopy or facsimile copy of its repossession agency license or registration issued pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 7500) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, or to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Pomona Police Department that the agent is exempt from licensure pursuant to Section 7500.2 or 7500.3 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(f)  A city, county, city and county, or state agency shall not require a legal owner or a legal owner's agent to request a post-storage hearing as a requirement for release of the vehicle to the legal owner or the legal owner's agent. 
(g)  The Pomona Police Department or the impounding agency or any person acting on behalf of these agencies shall not require any documents other than those specified in subsection 34-46(c) for the release of the vehicle. The legal owner or the legal owner's agent shall be given a copy of any documents he or she is required to sign, except for a vehicle evidentiary hold log book. 
(h)  The Pomona Police Department, the impounding agency, or any person acting on behalf of these agencies, or any person in possession of the vehicle may photocopy and retain the copies of any documents presented by the legal owner or legal owner's agent. 
(i)  The legal owner shall indemnify and hold harmless a storage facility from any claims arising out of the release of the vehicle to the legal owner or the legal owner's agent and from any damage to the vehicle after its release including the reasonable costs associated with defending any such claims. 
(j)  The legal owner, who meets the requirements for release of a vehicle pursuant to subsection 34-46(a), or the legal owner's agent, shall not release the vehicle to the registered owner of the vehicle, or the registered owner's agent (unless the registered owner is a rental car agency) until after the termination of the impoundment period. 
(k)  Prior to relinquishing the vehicle to the registered owner, the legal owner may require the registered owner to pay all towing and storage charges related to the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-47. - Release to rental car agency prior to end of impoundment period. 
(a)  A vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to section 34-42 shall be released to a rental car agency prior to the end of the impoundment period if: 
(1)  The agency is either the legal owner or registered owner of the vehicle; and 
(2)  The agency pays all towing and storage fees related to the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle. 
(b)  The rental car agency may continue to rent the vehicle upon recovery of the vehicle. The rental car agency, however, shall not rent another vehicle to the driver of the vehicle that was seized until the impoundment period has expired. 
(c)  The rental car agency may require the person to whom the vehicle was rented to pay all towing and storage charges related to the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-48. - Operators of storage facilities. 
(a)  A person operating or in charge of a storage facility where vehicles are stored pursuant to section 34-42 shall accept a valid bank credit card or cash for payment of towing, storage and related fees by a legal or registered owner, or the owner's agent, claiming the vehicle. A credit or debit card shall be in the name of the person presenting the card. For purposes of this subsection, "credit card" is defined as in subsection (a) of Section 1747.02 of the Civil Code and does not include a credit card issued by a retail seller. 
(b)  A person operating or in charge of a storage facility, as described in subsection 34-48(a), who violates subsection 34-48(a) shall be civilly liable to the owner of the vehicle or the person who tendered the fees for four times the amount of the towing, storage and related fees. 
(c)  A person operating or in charge of a storage facility, as described in subsection 34-48(a), shall have sufficient funds on the premises of the primary storage facility during normal business hours to accommodate, and make change for, a reasonable monetary transaction. 
(d)  Credit charges for towing and storage services shall comply with Section 1748.1 of the Civil Code. Law enforcement agencies may include the costs of providing for payment by credit when making agreements with towing companies on rates. 
(e)  A failure by a storage facility to comply with any applicable conditions of this subsection shall not affect the right of the legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, to retrieve the vehicle if all conditions required of the legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, for the release of the vehicle are satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-49. - Costs and fees. 
Costs and fees incurred by the city, or at the discretion of the city, pursuant to this section shall be set by resolution or ordinance as authorized by Section 22850.5 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 34-50. - Non-exclusive remedy. 
This section is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for prostitution. It supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statues and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
Secs. 34-51—34-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-81. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  Any person who discharges, causes, permits or allows to be discharged any firearm, simulated firearm, airgun, air pistol or slungshot is guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not include nor apply to the following: 
(1)  Peace officers when acting in line of duty. 
(2)  Members of the armed forces of the United States or national guard, while acting in the line of duty. 
(3)  Persons exercising their rights of self-defense or defense of others. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section may be waived when it appears, following a complete investigation by the chief of police, that a person proposes to make a legitimate use of firearms for purposes of supervised competition and related uses: provided, however, that any person proposing any such use of firearms within the city shall first make application to the chief of police for a permit therefor. The chief of police may issue a permit to any person proposing to use firearms for purposes consistent with this subsection, provided a careful investigation discloses that such use will be consistent with the public health and safety. When a permit is issued to a person for the use of firearms within the city, such use, at all times, shall be subject to regulations laid down by the chief of police. No person shall be issued a permit pursuant to this subsection until such time as the chief of police has established regulations pertaining to the use of firearms to be made by such person. Any violation of regulations established by the chief of police in connection with the use of firearms shall be cause for immediate revocation of any permit issued in accordance with this subsection. 
(Code 1959, §§ 10-1, 10-2; Ord. No. 908, § 226; Ord. No. 1388) 
State Law reference— Firearms, Penal Code § 12000 et seq.  
Sec. 34-82. - Records of ammunition sales. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ammunition means projectiles expelled by force of an explosion, for use in pistols and revolvers, as defined in Penal Code § 12001, notwithstanding that the ammunition may also be used in rifles. 
Vendor means any individual, gun store, retail or department store, gun show participant, firm or corporation engaged in the sale of ammunition. 
(b)  Every vendor shall maintain records pertaining to ammunition sales prescribed by this section on the premises and in the manner prescribed in this section. The record shall show the following: 
(1)  The date of the transaction; 
(2)  The purchaser's name, address and date of birth; 
(3)  The purchaser's driver's license number or other identification and the state where issued; 
(4)  The brand of ammunition purchased; 
(5)  The type and amount of ammunition purchased; and 
(6)  The purchaser's signature. 
(c)  The information required by subsection (b) of this section shall be completed in the log book at the time of the purchase. 
(d)  The record shall be maintained in chronological order by date of sale of the ammunition and shall be retained on the licensed premises of the licensee for a period of two years following the date of the purchase of the ammunition. 
(e)  At the direction of the police chief, police officers may enter the premises of any licensed vendor of ammunition during regular business hours for the purpose of examining or inspecting any record required by this section. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any licensed vendor or person engaged in the retail sale of ammunition knowingly to make a false entry in or fail to make appropriate entry or fail to properly maintain any such record or refuse to exhibit the ammunition sales log to a police officer immediately upon request for such inspection. 
(Code 1959, § 16-50.1—16-50.3; Ord. No. 3842, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 3883, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— Ammunition, Penal Code § 12320 et seq.  
Sec. 34-83. - Abandonment of certain chests or boxes. 
Every person who discards or abandons, in any place accessible to children, any chest or box having a capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more, with an attached lid or door which may be opened and fastened shut by means of an attached latch, or, being the owner, lessee or manager of such place, knowingly permits such abandoned or discarded chest or box to remain therein in such condition is guilty of a misdemeanor. This section does not prohibit or cover any act prohibited by Penal Code § 402b, which relates to refrigerators and iceboxes, or prohibited by any other state statute. 
(Code 1959, § 16-1; Ord. No. 1228, § 1)  
Secs. 34-84—34-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Fireworks, Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-111. - Responsibility of parent. 
(a)  Any parent, foster parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any child under the age of 18 years who allows, permits or suffers such child to fire, shoot, discharge, set off or explode any torpedo, rocket, firecracker, squib or blank cartridge, or any fireworks whatsoever or anything containing any portion of chloride of potash, mixture of sulfur, saltpeter, or any substance of any explosive nature, except paper caps as defined in section 34-112(a), is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any parent, foster parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any child under the age of 18 years who allows, permits or suffers such child to possess paper caps on the premises of any public place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 10-3; Ord. No. 908, § 232; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 4071, § 3, 9-16-2006)  
Sec. 34-112. - Discharge generally. 
(a)  Any person who fires, shoots, discharges, sets off or explodes any torpedo, rocket, firecracker, squib, fireworks, blank cartridges, or anything containing any portion of chloride of potash, mixture of sulfur or saltpeter, or any substance of any explosive nature, except toy torpedoes specifically designed for use only with toy pistol caps as defined in section 34-112(b) containing not more than 0.25 grain of explosive compound to each paper cap, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  For purposes of this division, "paper cap" shall mean anything containing any portion of chloride of potash, mixture of sulfur or saltpeter, or any substance of any explosive nature containing not more than 0.25 grain of explosive compound to each charge, which is specifically designed for use with a toy percussive device to ignite or set off such charge, regardless if such charge is packaged and/or sold as single charges encased in paper or plastic or in a roll, strip, or other package. 
(c)  Any person who discharges a paper cap as defined in section 34-112(b) in the public right of way, in any public place, or in any other place other than that person's place of residence, except where such person has the express authority of the owner of such other private premises, shall be guilty of an infractoin. 
(Code 1959, § 10-4; Ord. No. 908, § 230; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 3077, § 1; Ord. No. 4071, § 4, 9-16-2006)  
Sec. 34-113. - Sale. 
(a)  Any person who sells, gives away, canvasses, or solicits for the sale of any torpedoes, rockets, firecrackers, squibs, blank cartridges, or any fireworks whatsoever, except paper caps as specified in section 34-112(b), is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  No person shall sell smoke bombs, stink bombs, or cap balls, or paper caps, as defined in 34-112(b), to any person under the age of 18 years of age prior to 3:15 p.m. each weekday. 
(Code 1959, § 10-5; Ord. No. 908, § 231; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 4071, § 5, 9-16-2006)  
Secs. 34-114—34-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER  
DIVISION 1. - ALCHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4120, § 1, adopted May 18, 2009, amended §§ 34-151, 34-152 in its entirety to read as herein set out in Div. 1. Former Div. 1, §§ 34-151, 34-152, pertained to drinking alcoholic beverages in public places and possession of opened alcoholic beverage containers on certain posted premises, and derived from Code 1959, §§ 16-2, 16-3, 16-31; Ord. No. 908, §§ 300, 301; Ord. No. 1321; Ord. No. 3211, § 1. 
 
Sec. 34-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
ABC means the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for the State of California. 
Open container means any bottle, can, jug, box or other receptacle which is open or has been opened and contains any alcoholic beverage. 
City means the City of Pomona. 
City buildings means structures or buildings owned, leased or controlled by the City of Pomona. 
Public property means any property owned or controlled by the City of Pomona, including but not limited to, a street, bike path, alley, parking lot, or public park. 
(Ord. No. 4120, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 34-152. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Any person who drinks any alcoholic beverage in any public place is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless expressly permitted pursuant to the terms of a license issued by the ABC or unless otherwise permitted by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4120, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 34-153. - Possession of opened alcoholic beverage containers. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage in a city building or on public property in the city, unless expressly permitted pursuant to the terms of a license issued by the ABC or unless otherwise permitted by this Code. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(b)  No person who has in his possession an open container of any alcoholic beverage shall enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Business and Professions Code div. 9 (Business and Professions Code § 23000 et seq.) or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(1)  As used in subsection (b) of this section, the term "posted premises" means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises on which clearly visible notices indicate to the patrons of the licensee and parking lot and to persons on the public sidewalk that subsection (b) of this section and Penal Code § 647e(a) are applicable. 
(2)  Each retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee in the city shall post notice on its premises substantially providing as follows: 
"NOTICE: POSSESSION OF OPENED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS ON THESE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. CAL. PENAL CODE § 647E. POMONA CITY CODE SECTION 34-153." 
The number, size, design and location of such notices shall be subject to the approval of the chief of police. If a licensee fails to post notice as directed by the chief of police after 30 days' written notice to do so, the premises shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. 
(3)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(4) of this section, the owner or possessor of any property open to the public, other than a retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment, may cause the property to be posted with the notice described in subsection (b)(2) of this section. Upon such posting, subsection (b) of this section shall apply to the property, notwithstanding the fact that the property is not occupied by a retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee. 
(4)  This section shall not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises. 
(Ord. No. 4120, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 34-154. - Preemption by state law. 
This division shall not be construed or interpreted as applicable to any act or acts regulated by state law, but shall be limited to permitted subject of local regulation not preempted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 4120, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
DIVISION 2. - LOITERING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Due to amendments in Ord. No. 4120, Ordinance No. 4124, § 1, adopted October 5, 2009, renumbered § 34-153, 34-154 as 34-155, 34-156 in a new Division 2 as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 34-155. - Loitering. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "signs prohibiting loitering" shall mean signs which are not less than one square foot in area bearing the words "LOITERING PROHIBITED" in letters not less than two inches high posted conspicuously on the property. 
(b)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to loiter upon property which is posted with signs prohibiting loitering if such property is one of the following kind, class or type: 
(1)  Property of any company or agency supplying water, gas, electricity or any other essential service. 
(2)  Property belonging to the public used for a highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk. 
(3)  Property used for an industrial or manufacturing plant. 
(4)  Property used for the entrance of any church, hall, theater or place of public assemblage. 
(5)  Property, whether public or private, used as a parking lot. 
(6)  Property used as a means of ingress or egress to or from any lawful business or service performed by a governmental agency. 
(Code 1959, § 16-7; Ord. No. 910, § 92; Ord. No. 1841, § 1; Ord. No. 4124, § 1, 10-5-2009)  
Sec. 34-156. - Loitering prohibited on private parking lots. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "loitering" is defined as follows: Entering, remaining, loitering, prowling or wandering about, whether in a motor vehicle or on foot, upon property of another without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof. 
(b)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to loiter, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, upon any private parking lot or private property surrounding a commercial establishment when a notice has been posted or has been caused to be posted by the owner of such property at the entrance to such private parking lot or area surrounding any such commercial area, in letters not less than three inches in height, "LOITERING PROHIBITED," and below such notice on the same sign in letters not less than one inch in height a statement in substantially the following form: 
"VIOLATION OF THIS NOTICE CONSTITUTES A MISDEMEANOR—SECTION 34-156." 
(Code 1959, § 16-26; Ord. No. 2414, § 1; Ord. No. 4124, § 1, 10-5-2009)  
Secs. 34-157—34-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SOLICITATION OF EMPLOYMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 4124, § 1, adopted October 5, 2009, renumbered this division as Division 3. 
 
Sec. 34-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Day labor center means that center operated for the purposes of solicitation of and solicitation for employment. 
Employment means any offer or exchange or consideration for labor, industry or other personal activities, including parttime or temporary services, for wages or other compensations. 
Nonresidential parking areas means all private property comprising the parking area adjoining nonresidential premises, including, but not limited to, driveways, setbacks and portions that are landscaped. 
Public area means any property of the city maintained for park, city hall or other civic purposes. 
Solicit and hire mean any request, offer, announcement, endorsement or other action or gesture which induces another person to reasonably believe that his services are being sought or are made available for hire, whether or not an actual employment relationship is created. 
Street and highway mean all of the areas dedicated to public use for public purposes and include, but are not limited to, roadways, parkways, medians, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and other public ways. 
Vehicle means a vehicle as defined in Vehicle Code § 670. 
(Code 1959, § 19.1-2; Ord. No. 3814, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-182. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to regulate the time, place and manner of the solicitation of and the solicitation for employment on streets and highways, public access and nonresidential parking areas. This division is not intended to restrict the right of free speech or alternative channels of communication, but to ensure the protection of public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 19.1-1; Ord. No. 3814, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 34-183. - Solicitation on streets and highways. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the solicitation of and solicitation for employment on any street or highway. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any portion of any street or highway designated by resolution of the city council and conspicuously signed and posted in both English and Spanish languages where solicitation of and solicitation for employment is to be permitted. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit a business establishment or property owner from soliciting or hiring employment at or on his or its premises. For the purpose of this section, vehicles and other similar types of mobile locations shall not be considered a business establishment or premises. 
(Code 1959, § 19.1-3; Ord. No. 3814, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46.  
Sec. 34-184. - Solicitation on public areas. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the solicitation of or solicitation for employment on any public area. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any portion of any public area designated by resolution of the city council and conspicuously signed and posted, in both the English and Spanish languages, where solicitation of and solicitation for employment are to be permitted. 
(Code 1959, § 19.1-4; Ord. No. 3814, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 34-185. - Solicitation within nonresidential parking areas. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the solicitation of or solicitation for employment on any nonresidential parking area, other than to perform the employment on or for the owner or occupants of the adjoining premises. 
(b)  This section shall not be operative unless the owner, the owner's agent or the person in lawful possession of the nonresidential parking area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to each nonresidential parking area not less than 18 by 24 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to exceed six square feet in total area. The contents of such notice shall be in substantially the following form, in both the English and Spanish languages: 
"IT IS A MISDEMEANOR TO ENGAGE IN THE SOLICITATION OF OR SOLICITATION FOR EMPLOYMENT OTHER THAN TO PERFORM THE EMPLOYMENT ON OR FOR THE OWNER OR OCCUPANTS OF THE PREMISES." 
(Code 1959, § 19.1-5; Ord. No. 3814, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 34-186. - Solicitation at day labor center. 
It is lawful for any person to engage in the solicitation of or solicitation for employment at the designated day labor center. 
(Code 1959, § 19.1-6; Ord. No. 3814, § 1 (part))  
DIVISION 4. - SOCIAL HOST ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 34-187. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Alcohol means any ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
Juvenile means any person under 18 years of age. 
Loud or unruly gathering means any party or gathering of two or more persons at or on a residence or other private gathering of two or more persons at or on a residence or other private property upon which loud or unruly conduct occurs. Such loud and unruly conduct includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Excessive noise prohibited under section 18-301 et seq. of the Pomona City Code; 
(2)  Excessive traffic; 
(3)  Obstruction of public streets or crowds that have spilled into public streets; 
(4)  Service to or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any underage person, except as permitted by state law; 
(5)  Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of the peace; 
(6)  Vandalism; 
(7)  Litter; and 
(8)  Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or the general welfare. 
A loud and unruly gathering shall constitute a public nuisance. 
Residence or other private property means a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
Responsible person means a person or persons with a right of possession in the residence or other private property on which a loud or unruly gathering is conducted, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  An owner of the residence or other private property; 
(2)  A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property; 
(3)  The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering; 
(4)  The person(s) in charge of the residence or other private property; 
(5)  The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts, or controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering. 
If a responsible person for the gathering is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to section 14-171 et seq. of the Pomona City Code. To incur liability for response costs imposed by the Pomona City Code, the responsible person for the loud or unruly gathering need not be present at such gathering resulting in the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs. 
Underage person means any person under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 4126, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 34-188. - Responsibility for proper property management. 
Every owner, occupant, lessee or holder of any possessory interest of a residence or other private property within the City of Pomona is required to maintain, manage and supervise the property and all persons thereon in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this division. The owner of the property remains liable for such violations regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding the property. 
(Ord. No. 4126, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 34-189. - Penalties for violation of ordinance. 
(a)  It shall be a misdemeanor for any responsible person to knowingly conduct, aid, allow, permit, condone or otherwise facilitate a loud or unruly gathering at a residence or other private property, unless charged as an infraction by the district attorney, city attorney or city prosecutor. 
(b)  Fines for a violation charged as an infraction. 
(1)  A first violation of this section shall be punishable by a $100.00 fine. 
(2)  A second violation of this section at the same residence or other private property, or by the same responsible person, within a 12-month period shall be punishable by a fine of $200.00. 
(3)  A third or subsequent violation of this section at the same residence or other private property, or by the same responsible person, within a 12-month period shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00. 
(c)  The fines prescribed at subsection (b) are in addition to any response costs that may be assessed pursuant to section 14-171 et seq. of the Pomona City Code. 
(d)  The second, third or subsequent violation fines prescribed at subsection (b)(2) and (b)(3) are payable whether or not the responsible person for such loud or unruly gathering is different from the responsible person for any prior loud or unruly gathering at the residence or other private property. 
(e)  The fine schedule prescribed at subsection (b) is a "rolling schedule" meaning that in calculating the fine payable the police department, city attorney, city prosecutor, or district attorney shall count backward starting from the date of the most recent loud or unruly gathering to determine how many prior loud or unruly gatherings have taken place at the residence or other private property in question during the statutory 12-month period. A warning given pursuant to this division shall remain in effect for the residence or other private property at a given address until a full 12-month period has elapsed during which there have been no response to a loud or unruly gathering at that residence or other private property. 
(Ord. No. 4126, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Secs. 34-190—34-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 
 
Sec. 34-221. - Nudity and public indecency. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public place means any location frequented by the public or where the public is present or likely to be present or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. The term "public places" include, but are not limited to, streets; sidewalks; parks; beaches; business and commercial establishments, whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement; bottle clubs; hotels; motels; restaurants; nightclubs; country clubs; cabarets; and meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social, fraternal, or similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place. A public place shall not include enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctor's offices, portions of hospitals and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home and the sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein; nor shall it include a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class operated by: (i) a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or (ii) a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college. 
Theater means a building, room, hall or other place having permanently fixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, established primarily or devoted to theatrical performances. 
(b)  It is a misdemeanor for a person knowingly and intentionally, in a public place, to: 
(1)  Engage in actual or simulated sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, excretory functions or other ultimate sex acts; 
(2)  Appear in a state of nudity; or 
(3)  Fondle the genitals of himself or another person. 
(c)  Nudity in public places shall be permitted within a bona fide theater for theatrical performances only. 
(d)  Any person who employs, procures, permits or assists any person to engage in conduct prohibited by subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, §§ 14.4-1—14.4-4; Ord. No. 3880, § 3 (part)) 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, Penal Code § 314 et seq.  
Secs. 34-222—34-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 4038, § 1, adopted September 19, 2005, repealed and replaced Art. VI in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959, §§ 16-42.1—16-42.6; Ord. No. 3886, § 1(part); Ord. No. 3945, § 1(16-49), 2-11-2002. 
 
DIVISION 1. - NIGHT TIME CURFEW 
 
Sec. 34-260. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide a curfew for those persons under the age of 18 in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare. The city council finds that there has been an increase in juvenile violence and criminal activity, that persons under the age of 18 are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activities and be victims of perpetrators of crime, and that the city has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control and responsibility over minor children and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 34-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 11:59 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means: (a) a person who, under court order, is guardian of the person of a minor; (b) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court of law; or (c) a person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is (a) a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor; or (b) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court of law; or (c) a person of at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protected loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 34-262. - Curfew restrictions for minors. 
It is unlawful for any minor to be present and to remain in any public place or on the premises of an establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 34-263. - Parental responsibility. 
It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, allow the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of an establishment within the city during the curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 34-264. - Exceptions; defenses. 
It is an exception to the rule of section 34-262 and defense to the prosecution under Section 34-262 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in a legitimate employment activity or going to or returning home from a legitimate employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved or acting in response to an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence which is immediately adjacent to the minor's residence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, sports, amusement, entertainment or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, sports, amusement, entertainment or other recreational activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly, subject, however, to all other applicable laws, rules and regulations; or 
(9)  Emancipated in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 34-265. - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent defender's age and reason for being in a public place or establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and the totality of the circumstances, no exception or defense under subsection (1) of this section is present. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 34-266. - Penalty for violations. 
A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by the imprisonment in the county jail of the County of Los Angeles or the city jail of the City of Pomona as the committing magistrate may direct for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
DIVISION 2. - DAY TIME CURFEW (TRUANCY) 
 
Sec. 34-267. - Loitering of minors during school hours. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuing education, to be in or upon a public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public place or public building, place of amusement or eating establishment or vacant lot during the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. on days when the minor's school is in session. This section does not apply when the minor: 
(1)  Is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; 
(2)  Is on an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person have care or custody of the minor; 
(3)  Is going or coming directly from or to his place of gainful employment or to or from a medical appointment; 
(4)  Has permission to leave the school campus for lunch or a school-related activity and has in his possession, a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit; 
(5)  Is exempt by law from compulsory education or compulsory continuation education; or 
(6)  Is authorized to be absent from his school pursuant to the provisions of Education Code § 48205 or any other applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 34-268. - Minor daytime curfew and willful misconduct; cost recovery. 
(a)  Determination by a court. When, based on a finding of civil liability or criminal conviction for violations of curfew pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 625.5, daytime, curfew (truancy) or willful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code § 602 a minor under 18 years of age is detained for a period of time in excess of one hour and such detention requires the supervision of the juvenile offender by police department employees, the parent or legal guardian having custody or control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing such personnel over and above the services normally provided by the police department. 
(b)  Determination by chief of police. As determined by the chief of police, the parent or legal guardian of a minor committing any public offense amounting to an act of willful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code § 602, where police personnel provide services relating to the detention, processing or supervision of minors that are over and above the normal services usually provided by the police department, may be assessed and billed for the cost of providing such personnel for such services beyond those normally provided by the police department. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this section, may within 15 days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of the charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal the billing. Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the city manager, as the hearing officer. Within ten days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. Upon filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the police services shall be suspended until notice of decision of the hearing officer is given. If the appeal is denied, in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within 30 days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 9-19-2005)  
Secs. 34-269—34-279. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESTRICTION OF SALE OF ITEMS TO MINORS 
 
Sec. 34-280. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to limit the sale to persons under the age of 18 certain items that have been determined to pose a threat to the safety and general welfare. The city council finds that there has been an increase in the number of incidents, particularly near school facilities and during school hours, involving dangerous and disruptive items. 
(Ord. No. 4071, § 2, 9-16-2006)  
Sec. 34-281. - Restricted items. 
No person or business shall sell, provide, give away, canvass, or solicit for the sale of any of the following items to any person under the age of 18 years of age prior to those times listed in section 34-282: 
(1)  Pop-rock candy, 
(2)  Smoke bombs, 
(3)  Stink bombs, 
(4)  Toy pistol caps, as defined in section 34-112(b), 
(5)  Cap balls, 
(6)  Toy cap guns, 
(7)  Laser pointers, 
(8)  Toy guns, 
(9)  Dart guns, 
(10)  Slingshots, 
(11)  Toy knives, and 
(12)  Lighters. 
(Ord. No. 4071, § 2, 9-16-2006)  
Sec. 34-282. - Restricted times of sales. 
No person or business shall sell, provide, give away, canvass, or solicit for the sale of any items listed in section 34-281 to any person under the age of 18 years of age prior to 3:15 p.m. each weekday, and after 8:00 p.m. on any day of the week. 
(Ord. No. 4071, § 2, 9-16-2006)  
Secs. 34-283—34-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS 
 
Sec. 34-291. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a "criminal street gang" as that term is defined in Penal Code § 186.22(f) or who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a "criminal street gang" to loiter or idle in a "public place" as defined in subsection (b) of this section, under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang's dominance over certain territory in order to intimidate nonmembers of the gang from entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area; 
(2)  With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or other unlawful activity. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "public place" means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of business, to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any "public place" also includes the front yard area, driveway, walkway of any private residence, business or apartment house. 
(Ord. No. 3991, § 16-8.1, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-292. - Powers of law enforcement officers not limited. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed in any way to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in the absence of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3991, § 16-8.2, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-293. - Parental control. 
Any parent, legal guardian, or other adult person authorized to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the provisions of subsection 34-291(a) is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3991, § 16-8.3, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 34-294. - Penalty. 
Violation of subsection 34-291(a) shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 3991, § 16-8.4, 7-21-2003)  
Secs. 34-295—34-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LOCAL REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-700. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Child or children or youth shall mean a person or persons under the age of 18 years of age. 
Duplex shall mean a residential land use for a building containing two dwelling units. 
Hotel or motel shall mean a commercial land use for a rental of six or more guest rooms or suites for primarily temporary residency for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days. 
Inn shall mean a commercial land use for the rental of five or fewer guest rooms or suits primarily for temporary residency for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days. 
Multi-family dwelling shall mean a building designed for permanent residency for three or more families living independently of each other. This includes apartment houses and condominiums, but does not include hotels, motels, or inns. 
Multi-unit residential shall mean a residential land use with a series of buildings designed for permanent residency for two or more families living independently of each other. This shall include "granny flats" and multiple separate structures on a single lot or legal parcel. 
Permanent resident shall mean any person who, as of a given date, obtained the right to occupy a dwelling including but not limited to a single-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling, duplex dwelling, hotel, motel, or inn for more than 30 consecutive days. 
Responsible party shall mean the property owner and/or owner's authorized agent. 
Sensitive use site shall mean any the following: 
(1)  Bus stop, as used herein shall mean a location designated for the regularly-scheduled boarding and departing of bus passengers for bus service offered to children attending school or to the general public. 
(2)  Rail station, as used herein shall mean a location designated for the regularly-scheduled boarding and departing of rail passengers for rail-based transportation service offered to children attending school or to the general public. 
(3)  Arcade, as used herein shall mean any of the following: 
a.  Establishments frequented by children that provide more than five video or electronic games, including computer games that require coins, tokens, or any other form of payment, to play; 
b.  Any establishment frequented by children providing amusement facilities which include, but are not limited to, pinball machines, shooting galleries, electronic or video type skill games; 
c.  Any business frequented by children at which amusement rides are offered which are subject to any tax imposed by any section of Chapter 50, Article IV of this Code (sections 50-131 to 50-168); and/or 
d.  Any business frequented by children providing a billiard room or coin-actuated machine, including, but not limited to, electronic game machines, machines vending any goods, wares or merchandise operated by coins by value greater than $0.10, coin-operated photo machines and subject to a license tax as provided in section 50-412 of this Code. 
(4)  Child care center, as used herein shall mean any of the following: 
a.  A day care center, as defined at Health and Safety Code § 1596.76; 
b.  A child care and development facility, as defined at Education Code § 8208; and/or 
c.  Facilities that provide non-medical care and supervision of children, including infants, toddlers, preschoolers, and school-age children for a period of less than 24 hours consecutively and are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services. 
(5)  Children's retail store, as used herein shall mean establishments or places of business dedicating at least 80 percent of floor space to consumer items directed at children, such as children's toys, clothing, shoes, eyewear, hats, jewelry and fashion accessories, books, hobby or special interest items, games, musical instruments, sporting goods, bicycles, scooters, music recordings, dance supplies, art and art supplies, candy, and other similar items directed toward children. 
(6)  Community center or cultural center, as used herein shall mean multi-purpose meeting and recreational facilities typically consisting of one or more meeting or multi-purpose rooms, kitchen and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for use by various groups for such activities as meetings, parties, receptions, and dances, i.e. a rental banquet hall. 
(7)  Cyber café, as used herein shall mean an establishment frequented by children that provides more than four computers and/or other electronic devices for access to the Internet, e-mail, video games, or computer software programs which are networked (via LAN or WAN) which function as a client/server program, and which seeks compensation in any form from users. Cyber café is synonymous with PC café, internet café, or cyber centers. 
(8)  Health club providing childcare services, as used herein shall mean facilities that provide for sport, exercise, and health related activities, group classes, and personal instruction and training, and childcare for children of patrons while using the facilities. Additional facilities may include pool/spa/sauna, tennis courts, racquetball/handball courts, weight and exercise equipment, etc. Additional uses may include retail sales of exercise clothing, accessories, food and beverages, and membership sales. This definition does not include facilities that provide yoga, Pilates, or similar type of studio (see Studio). 
(9)  Movie theater, as used herein shall mean establishments that are designed for the showing of motion pictures. Additional uses may include the sale of concession food items and non-alcoholic beverages. 
(10)  Museum, as used herein shall mean public or quasi-public facilities such as aquariums, arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historical sites and exhibits that can be viewed by the public. Accessory uses include such uses as restaurants, cafeterias, and gift shops. 
(11)  Non-traditional school, as used herein shall mean any of the following: 
a.  A public or private pre-school; 
b.  A Montessori School; 
c.  A home school which has filed an affidavit or statement with the state superintendent of public instruction for the current year, pursuant to Education Code § 33190, and which provides regularly-scheduled home schooling to children as an alternative to their attendance of other public or private schools; and/or 
d.  A school approved by the State of California as a charter school. 
(12)  Studio, as used herein shall mean small-scale facilities that typically provide for the teaching or tutoring of children including, but not limited to, the arts; music, drama, production rehearsal; dance instruction; photography instruction, and the processing of photographs produced by users of the studio facilities; martial arts training; or gymnastics instruction. This definition does not include larger facilities, such as a learning center. 
(13)  Sports center, as used herein shall mean any of the following: 
a.  A location designed for accommodating sports or recreational activities which is frequented by children, seasonally or otherwise, including but not limited to playgrounds, skate parks, baseball fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, soccer fields, swimming facilities, karate studios, dance and/or ballet studios, and other sports or recreational facilities frequented by children, regardless of whether such location is publicly or privately owned. Facilities open to members of a common interest development or homeowners association in which such facility exists shall be considered a sensitive use site. All other facilities open to the general public not otherwise addressed herein which are located in residential zones not open to the general public shall not be included in such definition of sports center. 
b.  A facility, frequented by children, which provides a wide range of recreational activities including, but not limited to, roller or ice rinks, skateboard, miniature golf, golf course, golf driving range, batting cages, go-karts, rock climbing. Additional uses at such facilities such as food concessions and retail sales of items related to the activity such as clothing and accessories and sundries are intended to be included as part of the definition and scope of sports center. Facilities open to members of a common interest development or homeowners association in which such facility exists shall be considered a sensitive use site. Facilities located within residential zones and not open to the general public, shall not be included in such definition of sports center, unless otherwise addressed herein. 
(14)  Traditional school, as used herein shall mean any of the following: 
a.  A private school, meaning any private education facility that provides education for grades kindergarten through the 12th grade and are not affiliated with a local school district; 
b.  A public school, meaning any public educational institutions providing instruction to kindergarten through the 12th grade; and/or 
c.  A community college, technical school, public or private college, university or professional school granting associate arts degrees, certificates, undergraduate and graduate degrees. 
(15)  Tutoring center or learning center, as used herein shall mean any of the following: 
a.  A location at which a public or private organization offers regularly-scheduled tutoring and/or educational instruction to children for purposes of supplementing the regular school instruction of the children; and/or 
b.  Establishments that provide for the teaching or tutoring of school-aged children in general or specific academic subjects on an individual basis or in groups. Establishments are not affiliated with public or private schools. Services are intended to supplement and be in addition to normal school teachings and are not intended to replace or substitute for public or private school. 
(16)  Youth center, as used herein shall mean a location at which a public or private organization provides mentorship, educational and/or recreational programs to children on a regularly-scheduled basis, for purposes of social, educational, artistic, athletic, or community enrichment. Examples of youth centers include, but are not limited to, Boys and Girls Club facilities, YMCA facilities, and similar locations. 
Sensitive use site parcel boundary shall mean the legal boundary of the parcel or parcels occupied by the sensitive use site, whether such site occupies the entire parcel or any portion thereof. 
Sex offender shall mean any person for whom registration would be required for crimes committed by such person pursuant to the California "Sex Offender Registration Act," California Penal Code § 290 et seq., regardless of whether that person is on parole or probation. 
Single-family dwelling shall mean one permanent residential dwelling located on a single lot with yard areas that separate that dwelling from other dwellings. 
Temporary resident shall mean any person who, for a period of 30 days or less, obtained the right to occupy a dwelling including but not limited to a hotel, motel or inn. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008)  
Sec. 34-701. - Penalty; nuisance; recovery of abatement expenses. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person violating sections 34-705, 34-713 or 34-717 of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail for up to one year, or both such fine and confinement. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which a violation occurs. 
(b)  Offenses constituting nuisances. Any duplex, hotel, motel, inn, multi-family dwelling, or single-family dwelling operated or maintained in a manner inconsistent with the occupancy requirements of this article or the restrictions of Penal Code § 3003.5 is declared to be unlawful and is defined as and declared to be public nuisances per se that are injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(c)  Civil action authorized. The city attorney, or his/her designee, is authorized to bring a civil action in order to enforce any of the provisions of Penal Code § 3003.5(a) or (b), or this division. Such action may be for injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or other relief sufficient to prevent the continued violation of those provisions. 
(d)  Recovery of nuisance abatement expenses. 
(1)  In any civil action or proceeding, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding, including, but not limited to those brought to abate a public nuisance, the prevailing party will be entitled to recovery of all costs, attorney's fees and expenses, provided that attorneys' fees will only be available in those actions or proceedings in which the city has provided notice at the commencement of such action or proceeding that it intends to seek and recover its own attorneys' fees. In no action or proceeding will an award of attorneys' fees exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. 
(2)  Moneys due the city pursuant to this article may be recovered in an appropriate civil action. Alternatively, such liability may be enforced by special assessment proceedings against the parcel of land upon which the nuisance existed, which proceedings must be conducted in a manner substantively similar to proceedings prescribed in section 18-31 et seq. of the Pomona City Code relating to assessment for abatement of property nuisances. 
(e)  Criminal penalties do not satisfy administrative or civil actions. Neither the arrest, prosecution, conviction, imprisonment, or payment of any fine for the violation of this article shall satisfy or diminish the authority of the city to institute administrative or civil actions seeking enforcement of any or all of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008)  
Sec. 34-702. - Summary of requirements. 
The city attorney, or his/her designee, shall prepare a summary of the requirements in this article for distribution to sex offenders residing in the city. The summary shall be distributed to each such sex offender at the time of his/her initial registration and each subsequent annual registration. The police chief, or his/her designee, shall keep a log of all sex offenders to whom the summary is provided. Nothing in this section shall create an affirmative defense due to lack of receipt of such notice. Nothing in this article is a directive to not fulfill or otherwise shall prevent the police chief from fulfilling duties required under state law regarding receiving registration materials from sex offenders. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008)  
Sec. 34-703. - Timing of application of this article. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, this article shall apply to all sex offenders who locate within the City of Pomona after the effective date of this chapter, and to all responsible parties who allow occupancy by a sex offender within the City of Pomona after the effective date of this chapter. Nothing in this article is intended to limit the obligations of a sex offender to comply with the requirements of state law, including, but not limited to Penal Code § 3003.5. 
It is intended that this article shall apply to all sex offenders without regard to probationary status, parole status, or date(s) of conviction or release from jail, prison, or confinement, and without regard to whether residency was established before or after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008)  
Sec. 34-704. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 34-705. - Unlawful residency. 
(a)  This subsection (a) repealed by Ordinance No. 4203. 
(b)  Residency exclusions. 
(1)  Single-family dwelling. No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a single-family dwelling already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
(2)  Multi-family dwelling. No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a multi-family dwelling already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
(3)  Duplex dwelling. No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a duplex dwelling already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
(4)  Multi-unit residential. No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a duplex dwelling already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
(5)  Hotel/motel/inn. No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a guest room of a hotel, motel, or inn already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
(6)  Hotel/motel/inn—Permanent resident. No sex offender shall be a permanent resident in any guest room of a hotel, motel or inn wherein a separate and distinct guest room is already occupied by a sex offender as a permanent resident. 
(c)  [Factors.] For purposes of this division, the following factors shall be considered in determining whether a location is an individual's residence: 
(1)  The length of time that the individual intends to occupy the location; 
(2)  The length of time the individual has occupied the location; 
(3)  The individual's ownership or leasehold interest in the location; 
(4)  The extent of personal property stored or maintained by the individual at the location; 
(5)  The extent to which the individual represents to others that the location is his or her residence; 
(6)  The routine performance of every-day life tasks at the location, such as eating, sleeping, cooking, bathing, and personal care; 
(7)  The extent to which others identify the location as the individual's residence; and 
(8)  The extent to which the location is utilized for voter registration, mail delivery, tax collection, and other governmental and/or commercial purposes. 
(d)  [Transient residency status.] Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of this article, individuals maintaining "transient" residency status, changing location in order to evade declaration or determination of place of residence, or otherwise not declaring a permanent place of residence, shall be considered as having established such residence at all places within the city associated with criteria in section 34-705(b) that such person has been affiliated with on a temporary basis within the preceding 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008; Ord. No. 4203, § 3, 6-1-2015)  
Secs. 34-706—30-712. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4203, § 4, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed § 34-706, which pertained to measurement of distance and derived from Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; and Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008.  
Sec. 34-713. - Responsible party violation; accessory. 
(a)  Responsible party violation—Single-family dwellings. No responsible party shall knowingly rent a single-family dwelling to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
(b)  Responsible party violation—Multi-family dwellings. No responsible party shall knowingly rent a unit within a multi-family dwelling to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
(c)  Responsible party violation—Multi-family dwellings multiple units. No responsible party shall knowingly rent more than one unit within a multi-family dwelling to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy. 
(d)  Responsible party violation—Duplex dwellings. No responsible party shall knowingly rent a unit within a duplex dwelling to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
(e)  Responsible party violation—Duplex dwellings multiple units. No responsible party shall knowingly rent more than one unit within a duplex dwelling to or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy. 
(f)  Responsible party violation—Multi-unit residential. No responsible party shall knowingly rent a unit within a multi-unit residential dwelling to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. 
(g)  Responsible party violation—Multi-unit residential multiple units. No responsible party shall knowingly rent more than one unit within a multi-unit residential dwelling or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by more than one sex offender during any given period of tenancy. 
(h)  Responsible party violation—Hotel/motel/inn. No responsible party shall knowingly rent a guest room in a hotel, motel, or inn, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
(i)  Responsible party violation—Hotel/motel/inn permanent resident. No responsible party shall knowingly rent more than one guest room in a hotel, motel, or inn to, or allow occupancy as a permanent or temporary resident by, more than one sex offender as a permanent resident. 
(j)  Accessory. No responsible party, individual, or entity shall actively and knowingly assist a sex offender's continued violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008)  
Sec. 34-714. - Report of violation. 
The police chief, or his/her designee, shall report to the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, Division of Parole, any occurrence of a sex offender who is a parolee and is determined to be in violation of Penal Code § 3003.5(a), or the provisions of this division. Penal Code § 3003.5(a) shall be supplemental, and not an alternative, to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008; Ord. No. 4203, § 5, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 34-715. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following sex offenders: 
(a)  Sex offenders who are children (until such individuals reach the age of majority). 
(b)  Sex offenders who are exercising their First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly. 
(c)  Sex offenders who are confined to and reside at a prison or mental health facility. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008; Ord. No. 4203, § 6, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 34-716. - Conflict with other Code provisions. 
If a conflict occurs between any provision of this division and any other provision of the Pomona City Code, including the Pomona Zoning Ordinance, the requirements set forth in this division shall control. 
(Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008)  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4189, § 2, adopted July 7, 2015, repealed Div. 3, §§ 34-717—34-719, which pertained to sex offender loitering restrictions and derived from Ord. No. 4102, § 3, 5-5-2008; and Ord. No. 4103, § 3, 5-27-2008. 
 
Secs. 34-717—34-799. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PROHIBITION OF MARIJUANA DELIVERY 
 
Sec. 34-800. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Marijuana delivery or delivery shall mean the commercial delivery, transfer or transport, or arranging for the delivery, transfer or transport, or the use of any technology platform to arrange for or facilitate the commercial delivery, transfer or transport of any marijuana, marijuana edibles, and/or marijuana products to or from any location within the jurisdictional limits of the city, and any and all associated business and/or operational activities. 
(Ord. No. 4217 , § 2, 2-22-2016)  
Sec. 34-801. - Prohibition. 
Marijuana delivery by any person or entity, including but not limited to, clinics, collectives, cooperatives and dispensaries, is prohibited in the city. The city shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any activity prohibited by this Article IX. 
(Ord. No. 4217 , § 2, 2-22-2016)  
Sec. 34-802. - Public nuisance. 
Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist or occur, in violation of any provision of this Article IX shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 731, City Code sections 1-7 and 2-1182, or any other remedy available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4217 , § 2, 2-22-2016)  
Sec. 34-803. - Enforcement. 
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this Article IX, the city may bring any other enforcement available under sections 1-7 and 2-1182, or any other remedy available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4217 , § 2, 2-22-2016)  
Secs. 34-804—34-899. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - MARIJUANA REGULATION—INDOOR PERSONAL CULTIVATION PERMIT; SMOKING PROHIBITION 
 
Sec. 34-900. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Accessory structure shall mean a fully enclosed, lawful structure that is physically detached from, and secondary and incidental to, the existing primary structure of a private residence, as that term is defined herein. 
California Adult Use of Marijuana Act shall mean and refer to the provisions of California law added by Proposition 64, approved by California voters at the election occurring on November 8, 2016. 
Cannabis means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. The terms "marijuana" and "cannabis" shall be synonymous and have the same meaning. 
Cannabis products shall mean cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
City shall mean the City of Pomona. 
Code shall mean the Pomona City Code, including all laws, ordinances, and regulations adopted and incorporated therein. 
Commercial cannabis activity shall mean the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products, whether the cannabis or cannabis products is for medical or recreational purposes. Commercial cannabis activity is meant to include all cannabis related activities for which a state license is required, pursuant to applicable state laws, as they may be amended from time to time. 
Cultivation shall mean any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
Delivery shall mean the transfer of cannabis, including the use of any technology platform to arrange for or facilitate the transfer of cannabis, by any business, cooperative, or collective, whether or not carried on for profit, to or from any location within the city. 
Electronic smoking device means an electronic or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of marijuana, hashish, honey oil, cannabis infused wax, nicotine or other substances, whether as a vapor or a gas. Electronic smoking device includes, but is not limited to, any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. Electronic smoking device does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease. 
Indoor shall mean entirely within and inside a lawfully existing private residence, residential structure, or accessory structure. 
Marijuana products shall mean marijuana that has undergone a process whereby marijuana plant material has been transformed into a derivative product or concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
Manufacture means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. 
Outdoor shall mean any location within the city that is not within a lawfully existing fully enclosed structure. 
Permittee shall mean any real person having been issued and maintaining a valid personal cultivation permit under this article. 
Personal cultivation permit or permit shall mean and refer to the permit issued by the city under this article authorizing permittees to possess, plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, and process cannabis produced by the plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence. 
Private residence shall mean a legally existing house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling, and inclusive of any rooms, garages, or structures physically attached thereto. A lawful accessory structure located on the same parcel as a private residence shall be considered a part of that private residence. 
Smoke means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts. 
Smoking means engaging in the act that generates smoke, such as, but not limited to: (a) possessing a lighted pipe, bong, carb, hookah pipe, cigar, joint, blunt, or a lighted cigarette of any kind; (b) operating an electronic smoking device; or (c) lighting or igniting a hookah pipe, a cigar, an electronic smoking device, a bong, a carb, a joint, a blunt, a pipe, or a cigarette of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 4242 , § 4, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 34-901. - Cultivation prohibitions. 
(a)  Marijuana cultivation without a permit. Marijuana cultivation shall be prohibited within the city and considered unlawful to the extent it is unlawful under state law, with the exception of personal cannabis cultivation of no more than six plants in a private residence by first securing a permit pursuant to section 34-902. 
(b)  Outdoor cultivation. The outdoor cultivation of cannabis is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Commercial cultivation. Any commercial cannabis activity, including cultivation of cannabis is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4242 , § 4, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 34-902. - Indoor personal marijuana cultivation. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to enact and enforce reasonable regulations to reasonably regulate the ability of an individual 21 years of age or older to possess, plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process, for personal, noncommercial use, not more than six cannabis plants indoors and to possess the cannabis produced by the plants, all in accordance with the Adult Use of Marijuana Act of 2016 and, specifically, Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2 of the Health and Safety Code. The cultivation of cannabis for personal noncommercial and recreational use may only take place in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Indoor personal cultivation; permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process cannabis, cannabis plants, or the cannabis produced by the plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence, without first obtaining and maintaining a valid indoor personal cultivation permit under this article. 
(c)  Indoor personal cultivation permit. 
(1)  Application. Every person required to have a personal cultivation permit under this article shall make an application therefor, in a form prescribed by the development services director of the city. Such application shall include the written permission, including notarized signatures, of the legal owner(s) consenting to the indoor personal cultivation of cannabis on the private residence. Upon the payment of the fee established by resolution or ordinance of the city council, and upon determination that none of the grounds for denial as specified in section 34-902(g)(1) exist, the development services director shall issue to such person a permit which shall contain: 
a.  The name of the person to whom the permit is issued. 
b.  The permit number issued. 
c.  The address of the private residence for which the permit has been issued. 
d.  The date of expiration of such permit. 
e.  Any conditions imposed by the city, if in addition to those proscribed in this article. 
f.  If the private residence is leased or rented private residence to the permittee, the name of the property owner(s) whom gave the express, written consent for the cannabis cultivation activities pursuant to this article. 
g.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary to process the application for permit (e.g., diagram, etc.). 
(2)  No more than one permit per private residence unit shall be issued and maintained at any one time, regardless of the number of persons dwelling or residing in the private residence unit or upon the grounds thereof. Each legal residential unit on a lot containing more than one legal residential unit shall be considered a separate grounds of a residential unit for purposes of this article. 
(3)  Due to the privacy concerns associated with the use and cultivation of cannabis outweighing the public benefit in disclosure of information contained in application for cultivation permits, such application and permit and the personal information contained therein (including address) shall not be considered a disclosable public record. 
(d)  Indoor personal cultivation regulations. 
(1)  Permittees issued a personal cultivation permit under this article shall, at all times, conduct the activities authorized by said permit in strict accordance with the requirements of this section, article, the California Adult Use of Marijuana Act, and all other applicable state law in California, whichever is more restrictive, as well as any conditions of approval imposed by the city. 
a.  All planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, and processing (or similar actions) of cannabis plants, and the cannabis produced by the plants, shall be conducted entirely within the interior of a private residence or accessory structure. 
b.  The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping, and sanitation facilities with proper ingress and egress. Kitchens, bathrooms or primary bedrooms of a residence shall not be used for cannabis cultivation where such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of meals, sleeping and bathing. 
c.  Cultivation of cannabis shall not displace required off-street parking. 
d.  No permittee shall exercise or engage in any of the activities authorized by a personal cultivation permit, or otherwise engage in the planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, and processing or cannabis plants, and the cannabis produced by the plants, except upon the grounds of a private residence of which the permittee is owner of the private residence, or a lawful, permanent resident of the residence who entered into a written lease agreement with the owner of the premises. For purposes of this paragraph, a lawful, permanent resident shall mean any permittee who, as of a given date, obtained the lawful right to occupy the private residence for more than 30 consecutive days. 
e.  No cannabis may be cultivated in a leased or rented private residence without the prior express, written consent of the property owner. Said permittee shall obtain the written permission, including notarized signatures, of the legal owner(s) consenting to the indoor personal cultivation of cannabis on the private residence. 
f.  Not more than six cannabis plants (of any size, maturity, or stage of life from germination through dispersal, harvest, or death) may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed upon the grounds of any single private residence. Pre-germination, cultivation/growth, harvest, and post-harvest activities are not authorized to be done off of the premises for which a permit is issued. 
g.  All living cannabis plants, and any cannabis produced by the plants in excess of 28.5 grams, shall be kept within the private residence or accessory structure in a locked and secured space. 
h.  No living cannabis plants, cannabis cultivation activities, cannabis, cannabis products, or equipment, shall be visible, and no odor, light, heat, or other environmental impacts associated with personal cultivation shall be detectable, from a public place, right-of-way, neighboring public or private property, or beyond the bounds of the grounds of the private residence at any time. 
i.  All structures and buildings, or portions thereof, of a private residence used to cultivate cannabis pursuant to this article shall, at all times, comply with all applicable laws and provisions concerning building and construction of structures, including, without limitation, the Pomona Zoning Ordinance, as well as building and building regulations, pursuant to chapter 74 of this Code, and the adopted and incorporated California Building Standards Code, as amended from time to time. 
j.  The indoor use of generators and/or gas products, including, without limitation, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas shall be prohibited for the cultivation and/or processing of cannabis. 
k.  Not more potable water than is reasonably necessary to sustain six living plants shall be utilized for cultivation. 
l.  The lighting used for cultivation shall not exceed 1,200 watts. 
m.  No nuisance shall be caused or maintained on the grounds of the private residence. 
(2)  As a condition of approval of any application for any personal cultivation permit, the development services director may, in his or her discretion, impose additional requirements and restrictions in addition to those expressly set forth in this section, to the extent such additional requirements and restrictions are necessary to ensure activities authorized by a personal cultivation permit are exercised in a manner that preserves and protects the public interest. In imposing such additional requirements and restrictions, the development services director may consider such factors as the proximity of the private residence to sensitive land uses, the physical characteristics of the grounds of the private residence, and other relevant matters. 
(e)  Enforcement and inspection authority. 
(1)  Upon 72-hour written notice, the development services director, or assignee, and any city police officer or code enforcement officer, shall have the right to enter into and upon the grounds of any private residence, and into or upon a private residence or accessory structure, for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article for purposes of conducting an inspection to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article, this Code, state law, and the Adult Use of Marijuana Act. A permittee's refusal to allow said inspection shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall make reasonable efforts to schedule and conduct the inspection authorized by this section at the date and time agreeable to be the permittee; provided that if the city makes reasonable efforts with a permittee to establish an agreeable date and time for an inspection, the failure of refusal of a permittee to establish an inspection date and time may be construed as a refusal to allow the inspection. 
(3)  This section shall not limit or be interpreted as limiting the authority of the city or any representative thereof to enter upon or into the grounds of a private residence, or the private residence itself, as otherwise may be authorized by law or pursuant to a court-issued warrant. 
(f)  Sale or transfer of marijuana from permitted plants prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or permittee to sell, or otherwise transfer for any consideration whatsoever, cannabis plants, cannabis, or cannabis products produced by the permitted plants, to any other person. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person or permittee to sell, transfer, give away, or provide access to cannabis plants, cannabis, or cannabis products produced by the permitted plants, to any person under the age of 21. 
(g)  Grounds for permit denial. 
(1)  Grounds for denial. The development services director shall deny any application for a permit or for the renewal thereof if the development services director makes any of the following determinations: 
a.  The applicant has not first obtained or has not maintained in full force and effect the permit required under this article prior to engaging in the activities authorized by the permit. 
b.  The private residence or accessory structure used, or proposed to be used, to engage in the activities fails to comply with all applicable health, safety, zoning, fire, building and safety laws and regulations. 
c.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for the permit, in the application for or renewal of the permit. 
d.  The applicant is in violation of a provision of this Code or owes taxes, fees, or penalties pursuant to this article or any other provision of this Code. 
e.  The applicant of a new permit, or for the renewal thereof, has had a permit denied or revoked by the city within the preceding 12 months. 
f.  The applicant has failed to provide information required for processing of such application. 
(2)  Notice of denial. Upon determination of the existence of any factors or conditions specified in section 34-902(g)(1) hereinabove, the development services director shall advise the applicant by sending to the applicant a notice of denial in writing by U.S. mail within ten business days of such determination. Failure to receive such notice of denial shall not constitute a permit being deemed approved. The notice of denial shall state the development services director's findings and/or determinations that justify denial of the permit application, and shall include a summary of the evidence upon which such findings and/or determinations are based. 
(h)  Permit—Posting or storage. Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be posted, kept, stored, or maintained in the private residence or accessory structure for which the permit was issued, and shall remain so posted, kept, stored, or maintained during the period the permit remains in force and be ready for inspection upon request by the development services director or assignee, any city police officer, or any code enforcement officer. 
(i)  Permit—Duration and renewal. 
(1)  Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance. 
(2)  Permits issued pursuant to this article may be renewed upon the filing of an application therefore with the development services director. The application for renewal shall be in substantially the same form as an application for an original permit. It shall be issued or denied in a like manner as in the case of the original permit. 
(j)  Permit fees. A filing and processing fee, in an amount established by resolution or ordinance of the city council, shall be submitted with each application for an original permit, or applications for permit renewals. The fee provided for in this section is imposed to cover the cost of processing and reviewing permit applications, and to cover the cost of site inspections provided for in this article. The fee provided for in this section may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(k)  Transfer of permit prohibited. No permit issued pursuant to this article shall be transferrable or assignable to any other person. The activities authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this article shall only be conducted inside the private residence or accessory structure for which the permit was issued. 
(l)  Permit revocation. 
(1)  Grounds for revocation. The development services director shall revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article, if the development services director makes any of the following findings or determinations: 
a.  There exists any ground for denial of the permit issued pursuant to this article. 
b.  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit or in any report required to be filed by law. 
c.  The permittee has violated or is violating any condition of approval imposed on such permit, or upon any other entitlement granted by the city or other government agency. 
d.  The permittee has violated or is violating any ordinance, law, or regulation of the city, Los Angeles County, or state of California in the course of exercising any rights under the permit. 
e.  The permittee has been held liable for, or has been convicted of, any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance resulting from any act performed in exercising any rights under the permit. 
f.  The continued activities under the permit would endanger, disrupt or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city or its inhabitants, or constitute a public nuisance. 
(2)  Order of revocation. The development services director shall serve a written order of revocation upon the permittee the grounds for revocation and informing the permittee of his/her appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting appeal). The order shall also advise the licensee/permittee of the effective date of the revocation. 
(3)  Effectiveness of order. Any permit revoked pursuant to the provisions of this article shall become effective, and the permittee shall cease all activities authorized under such permit, no later than ten calendar days from the service of the order of revocation. Where an appeal is timely filed in accordance with the provisions of this article, the notice of revocation shall be stayed pending the city manager's, or an appointed hearing officer's, resolution of the appeal pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(m)  Appeal of permit application denial or revocation of a permit. The denial of any application for a permit, or the revocation of a city-issued permit, may be appealed to a hearing officer as appointed by the city manager, and such appeal shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in section 30-129 of this Code. The applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative actions or decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 4242 , § 4, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 34-903. - Marijuana smoking and use. 
(a)  No person shall smoke or ingest cannabis in any public place. Public place shall include but not be limited to the front yard of a residence, or any balcony, patio, yard, or other non-enclosed portion of a property able to be viewed from public property, right-of-way, or another public place. 
(b)  No odor or other environmental impact associated with the smoking of cannabis in a private residence shall be detectable, from a public place, right-of-way, neighboring public or private property, or beyond the bounds of the grounds of the private residence at any time. 
(c)  Smoking of cannabis shall be prohibited in any building, structure, location, area or place where the Code currently prohibits the smoking of tobacco. 
(Ord. No. 4242 , § 4, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 34-904. - Violations. 
(a)  No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge, control, or possession of any premises within the city shall cause, allow, suffer, or permit such premises to be used in violation of this article. 
(b)  Except for section 34-903, which shall be subject to an infraction pursuant to state law, any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty thereof, as set forth in section 1-7 of this Code. Any such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day a violation of the provisions of this article is committed, continued, or permitted to be continued by such person. 
(c)  Any violation of this article is hereby declared a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation within the city by administrative, injunctive or other equitable means. All means of enforcement authorized under this Code may be used to address violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4242 , § 4, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 34-905. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4242 , § 4, 11-6-2017)  
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; city skate parks, § 58-631 et seq.; parks and recreation improvement, § 70-69. 
State Law reference— Park and Playground Act of 1909, Government Code § 38000 et seq.; authority to establish parks, Government Code § 40401; discontinuance of parks, Government Code § 38400. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board means the governing body of the Pomona Unified School District, known as the board of education. 
Commission and parks and recreation commission mean the city parks and recreation commission. 
Director means the community services director. 
Electronic smoking device means an electronic or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances, whether as a vapor or a gas. Electronic smoking device includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. Electronic smoking device does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease. 
Public park includes the Civic Plaza of the city. 
Smoke means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts. 
Smoking means engaging in the act that generates smoke, such as: (a) possessing a lighted pipe, hookah pipe, cigar, or a lighted cigarette of any kind; (b) operating an electronic smoking device; or (c) lighting or igniting a hookah pipe, a cigar, an electronic smoking device, a pipe, or a cigarette of any kind. 
Street includes any public street, avenue, boulevard, lane, road, parkway, right-of-way, easement, freeway, alley, or other public way. 
(Code 1959, § 18-1; Ord. No. 1507, § 10; Ord. No. 1723, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2666, § 1; Ord. No. 2675, § 1; Ord. No. 2798, § 1; Ord. No. 4198, § 1, 3-2-2015) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 38-2—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-521 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Established. 
There is hereby established a parks and recreation commission pursuant to section 801 of the Charter. 
(Code 1959, § 18-17; Ord. No. 1507, § 20; Ord. No. 2207, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 38-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the parks and recreation commission shall be to: 
(1)  Coordinate all of the park and recreation activities of the city and the city unified school district. 
(2)  Provide for the establishment of sound recreational programs. 
(3)  Ensure the efficient operation and use of all park and recreational facilities within the city and the unified school district. 
(4)  Encourage a sound program of park and playground acquisition, development and maintenance and beautification of streets, avenues and boulevards. 
(5)  Foster the close coordination of school and playground development to avoid duplication of facilities. 
(Code 1959, § 18-19; Ord. No. 1507, § 21)  
Sec. 38-33. - Powers and duties. 
The duties of the parks and recreation commission shall be to: 
(1)  Act in an advisory capacity to the council and the board and the community services director in all matters pertaining to parks and public recreation, and cooperate with all other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound park and recreational planning and programming. 
(2)  Recommend joint recreation programming in accordance with Education Code title 1, div. 1, pt. 7, ch. 10 (Education Code § 10900 et seq.) and render assistance regarding the terms of the contractual agreement between the council and the board. 
(3)  Aid the director in making plans for the conduct of recreation activities. 
(4)  Aid the director in planning, maintenance and development of parks, boulevards and street tree programs. 
(5)  Interpret the community park and recreational programs to public officials and to the general citizenship in order to promote understanding and financial support from public and private sources. 
(6)  Aid and advise the council and the board of the selection of properly qualified personnel for the park and recreation activities. 
(7)  Recommend the establishment of general policies with respect to the community services department. 
(8)  Consider recommendations and requests originating from any source outside the community services department. 
(9)  Make periodic inspections of park and recreation facilities. 
(10)  Make such investigations or surveys in the general field of park and recreation administration as may be requested by the council or board or as may be deemed advisable by the commission and fully report its findings and recommendations. 
(11)  Assist in the acquisition, development, beautification and maintenance of park and recreation facilities in the city as part of a sound master park and recreation plan in keeping with community needs and future growth. 
(12)  Advise and consult with the director in preparation of the annual budget and the long range park and recreation capital improvement budget. 
(Code 1959, § 18-21; Ord. No. 1507, § 23; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2666, § 3; Ord. No. 2675, §§ 8, 13)  
Sec. 38-34. - Street tree and beautification committee. 
The parks and recreation commission is hereby empowered to appoint an advisory body to the parks and recreation commission known as the street tree and beautification committee. Such committee shall be of a number as determined by the parks and recreation commission, and the commission may request advice from the committee as to any of its powers and duties set forth in section 38-33. 
(Code 1959, § 18-21.1; Ord. No. 2666, § 5)  
Secs. 38-35—38-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS 
 
Sec. 38-71. - Obedience to park officers. 
Any person who fails, refuses or neglects to comply with any lawful order of the director, the superintendent of parks, any park foreman or park employee acting as special police officer in the enforcement of any section of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 18-3; Ord. No. 908, § 565; Ord. No. 1723, § 1; Ord. No. 2675, § 3)  
Sec. 38-72. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Any and all public parks shall be open to the public during all daylight hours. 
(b)  Any and all public parks are closed to the public from sunset to sunrise, except in connection with a scheduled event where prior written authorization of the director has been obtained pursuant to section 38-74(b) and (c). 
(c)  Spectators and/or participants at a scheduled event, which has been approved for extended use after sunset and/or before sunrise by a valid permit signed by the director, shall have access only to those park facilities for which the schedule event was approved. 
(d)  Spectators and/or participants of a scheduled event, which has been approved for extended use after sunset and/or before sunrise, shall not remain on any park premises beyond the time specifically approved for such event, pursuant to a valid permit signed by the director. 
(e)  Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1959, § 18-4; Ord. No. 908, § 564; Ord. No. 1723, § 1; Ord. No. 2675, § 4; Ord. No. 3296, § 1; Ord. No. 3917, § 2)  
Sec. 38-73. - Specific acts prohibited. 
Every person who willfully within any public park commits any of the following acts is guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Leading, letting loose, or staking out any domestic animal or fowl of any kind whatsoever; provided, however, that this shall not apply to dogs when on a leash that complies with section 6-47. 
(2)  Cutting or removing any wood, tree, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel. 
(3)  Swimming, bathing or polluting or placing any boat or any floating object whatsoever in the water of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or flood control channel. 
(4)  Making or kindling a fire for any purpose whatsoever, except at such places as are provided by the director. 
(5)  Camping or lodging therein. 
(6)  Riding any domestic animal or riding or driving any bicycle or any other vehicle whatsoever elsewhere than on the roads or drives provided for such purpose. 
(7)  Selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise within any public park or upon any street, area or path within such park or upon any street adjacent to any public park; provided, however, that this shall not be construed as applying to any lawfully established concession or concessionaire holding a valid permit signed by the director. 
(8)  Playing or engaging in any hazardous or dangerous game or contest, including the hitting of golf balls, except at such place as shall be especially set apart for that purpose. 
(9)  Parking, leaving or standing or causing to be parked or causing to be left standing any vehicle whatsoever in any place in the public park designated and marked by the director. 
(10)  Driving or parking any vehicle on turfed or planted areas adjacent to roadways. 
(11)  Operating or allowing to be operated any model airplane, model car, go-cart or other self-propelled devices and vehicles not covered under the Vehicle Code upon the driveways, paths or grounds of any public school, park, playground or other property under the control of the board of education or the city, exempted in part or in whole from taxation, except within those areas or upon those grounds specifically designated and posted for such operation, and then only under those conditions and regulations as approved by the council. 
(12)  Playing of amplified music from any vehicle or from any handheld or freestanding radio, tape, or disc unit in any public park in such a manner which disturbs other park patrons or events held in the same park area. This subsection does not apply to events permitted pursuant to section 38-74. 
(13)  Vehicle repair, including but not limited to changing of tires, changing of motor oil, or washing and/or waxing of any vehicle. This subsection does not apply to emergency repairs. 
(14)  Failure to pick up and properly dispose of animal droppings from any domestic animal under the care and/or responsibility of any park patron. 
(15)  Placing, using or operating an inflatable structure or other attraction, as defined, within any public park without a permit pursuant to chapter 46, article XIII of this Code. This subsection shall not apply to inflatable structures or other attractions placed, used or operated by the city in conjunction with a city-sponsored event. 
(16)  Placing, using or operating any large tank of water over which a seat is suspended, commonly referred to as a dunk tank, dunking booth or dunking machine. This subsection shall not apply to dunk tanks placed, used or operated by the city in conjunction with a city-sponsored event. 
(17)  Smoking. 
(Code 1959, § 18-2; Ord. No. 908, § 560; Ord. No. 1096; Ord. No. 1723, § 1; Ord. No. 1736, § 1; Ord. No. 2675, § 2; Ord. No. 3917, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4132, § 1, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 4198, § 2, 3-2-2015)  
Sec. 38-74. - Scheduling of events; use of public address systems, amplified instruments and percussion instruments. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to reasonably regulate the use of parks within the city in such a manner that various groups may enjoy such parks without unduly interfering with or creating conflicts with other groups and to ensure that, if public address systems, amplified instruments or percussion instruments are used within the parks, they shall be used in such place and in such manner that they will not unduly interfere with or be an annoyance to other groups or individual people who may be using the parks at the same time or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  Public address systems and percussion instruments, such as drums, may only be used in those areas of the parks designated in writing by the community services director after obtaining a permit from the community services director. Such areas shall be substantially removed from residential property adjacent to the parks. Permits for such use may be denied if, in the opinion of the community services director, such use shall disturb or otherwise interfere with others using the park at such time. Use of such equipment or instruments without such permit shall constitute a misdemeanor. This subsection shall not, however, apply to emergency police and fire or public utility services. Amplified instruments shall not be played in any city park except inside a park building or in an outdoor area designated for such purpose by the community services director and only after a permit for such use is obtained in the manner set forth in this subsection. 
(c)  Any individual or group who wishes to reserve special areas within parks for the exclusive use of such individual or group for such activity shall make reservation therefor with the community services director. If such area has not been reserved, providing such area is one designated by the community services director as an area subject to reservation, the community services director may grant permission to use such special area and provide in writing to the person or group a statement to the effect that such area is for exclusive use of the applicant, stating the day and hours. No person, other than the member of the group authorized to use the special area at such time, shall use such area or interfere with or disturb the enjoyment of the use of the person or group which has reserved such area. Reservations shall be made on a first come, first served basis; providing, however, that a use for longer than three hours may be summarily denied if it is made more than a week before the event is called on the grounds that later requests may be made which should have a reasonable opportunity to share in the use of such facility. No areas in excess of 15 percent of the park area of a particular park may be reserved exclusively to the use of one group, excepting specific facilities designated for specific use, such as baseball diamonds, soccer fields, tennis or volleyball courts. 
(d)  Any person who interferes with a regularly scheduled group having a permit shall first be warned that he is interfering with a regularly scheduled group and a copy of the reservation permit displayed to such person. If after being notified the offending party continues to disturb and disrupt the group who has valid reservation, the person interfering with such use shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 18-2.1; Ord. No. 2574, § 1; Ord. No. 2608, § 1; Ord. No. 3917, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 38-75. - Unlawful use of restrooms. 
Any person who enters, uses, remains in, or loiters around any room, place or sanitary facility marked or designated for use by members of the opposite sex is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 18-5; Ord. No. 908, § 563; Ord. No. 1723, § 1)  
Sec. 38-76. - Permit for gatherings or assembly. 
Any person desiring reservation privileges to hold, conduct or gather for any picnic, celebration, parade or service or to assemble for any purpose whatsoever in any public park or civic plaza shall first apply for and receive a permit in writing from the director. However, if and when in the discretion of the director he deems any assembly to be of such a nature as to create a hazard to public facilities or place in jeopardy his own or the public welfare, the applicant for a permit to hold such an assembly shall be instructed to arrange with the chief of police for adequate policing. Written notice from the chief of police that such arrangement has been made shall be on file before such permit shall be issued by the director. 
(Code 1959, § 18-6; Ord. No. 908, § 561; Ord. No. 1723, § 1; Ord. No. 2675, § 5) 
Cross reference— Public exhibitions, gatherings and lecturers, § 46-541 et seq.  
Chapter 42 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; bus bench/advertising franchises, § 46-381 et seq.; administration and planning, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74; subdivisions and zoning, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate signs, Government Code § 38774. 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Placement on public property. 
(a)  No person, except a public employee in performance of a public duty, shall fasten any sign, notice or advertisement of any kind on public property except as may be authorized by permit or required by ordinance or law. 
(b)  Any sign, notice or advertisement of any kind posted in violation of this section is a nuisance which shall be remedied by the city by criminal or civil proceedings or by abatement. The costs of the city for abatement shall be assessed against the person who posted the sign, the person or business advertised and the person owning the real property at which an advertised activity is held. The minimum cost for each abatement shall be presumed to be $25.00. 
(Code 1959, § 3-1; Ord. No. 862, § 8; Ord. No. 3134, § 1; Ord. No. 3417, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3480, § 4 (part))  
Sec. 42-2. - Political signs. 
Signs advertising candidates or measures or any other noncommercial activity shall be permitted on private property in any zoning district during each local, special district, state or national election from the date of the close of nomination of candidates or qualification for ballot measures until election. All such signs erected or posted on private property shall be removed by the Monday following the election. Signs not removed within seven days of the deadline specified in this section shall be removed by the city at the expense of the political candidate or responsible political organization. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2; Ord. No. 2714, § 1; Ord. No. 3417, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3955, § 1, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 42-3. - Advertising structures adjacent to freeways. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertising display refers to a structure or sign of any kind erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any poster, painting or advertisement may be placed. 
Freeway means a highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no access from their abutting lands and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code. 
(b)  No advertising display shall be placed or maintained on property adjacent to a freeway if the advertising display is designed to be viewed primarily by persons traveling on such freeway, except if allowed by the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1959, §§ 3-3, 3-4; Ord. No. 2104, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 3417, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3480, § 4 (part))  
Chapter 46 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street saved from repeal, § 1-11(8); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan or a master plan of streets saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); presence of animals on sidewalks, streets or public rights-of-way, § 6-8; environment, ch. 18; possession of graffiti implements in designated public places, § 18-153; library, ch. 26; solicitors and panhandlers, § 30-601 et seq.; deposit of human waste in public place, § 34-5; solicitation on streets and highways, § 34-183; parks and recreation, ch. 38; signs, ch. 42; telecommunications, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; one-way streets and alleys, § 58-123; funeral procession, § 58-125; transportation of refuse over streets, § 62-591; administration and planning, ch. 70; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74; subdivisions and zoning, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— General authority to establish or construct streets, Government Code § 40401; city streets generally, Streets and Highways Code § 1800 et seq.; vacating streets, Streets and Highways Code § 8300 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Street includes all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way of any city street, whether or not such entire area is actually used for street purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 28-1; Ord. No. 910, § 45) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-2. - Street improvement fund. 
(a)  In compliance with the provisions of Vehicle Code § 42200, there is hereby created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the street improvement fund. 
(b)  All money recovered under articles I through V of this chapter shall be paid into the street improvement fund. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-9, 28-10; Ord. No. 910, §§ 112, 136)  
Sec. 46-3. - Special gas tax street improvement fund. 
In compliance with Streets and Highways Code § 2113, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. 
(Code 1959, § 28-36; Ord. No. 910, § 135) 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 50.  
Sec. 46-4. - Plan check and inspection fees for public works improvements. 
The director of public works/city engineer shall charge an appropriate fee as approved by the city council by resolution for the cost of plan check and inspection of public works improvements (streets, sewers, storm drains, etc.) and certificates of compliance. 
(Code 1959, § 28-301.1; Ord. No. 2838, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3142, § 2)  
Sec. 46-5. - Minimum width of streets generally. 
The width of the right-of-way for all local city streets shall be at least 60 feet; the width between curbs on all such streets shall be at least 36 feet. 
(Code 1959, § 28-7; Ord. No. 910, § 40)  
Sec. 46-6. - Maintenance of streets of less than minimum width. 
The city may maintain any city street having a lesser width of right-of-way than that required in section 46-5, but shall not expend any money thereon for major construction or improvement until the width of right-of-way is at least 60 feet. 
(Code 1959, § 28-8; Ord. No. 910, § 40)  
Sec. 46-7. - Abandonment of railroad crossings. 
With the consent of the state public utilities commission, the city council may abandon that portion of any local street which crosses the tracks or right-of-way of any railroad or street railroad and may close such crossing. 
(Code 1959, § 28-2; Ord. No. 910, § 31)  
Sec. 46-8. - Temporary closing of streets. 
(a)  The city council may restrict the use of or close any street whenever the director of public works/city engineer considers such closing or restriction of use necessary for the protection of the public or for the protection of such street from damage during storms or during construction, improvement or maintenance thereon. 
(b)  To notify the public that a city street is closed or its use restricted, the director of public works/city engineer may: 
(1)  Erect suitable barriers or obstructions upon such street. 
(2)  Post warnings and notices of the condition of any such street. 
(3)  Post signs for the direction of traffic upon it or to or upon any other street or detour open to public travel. 
(4)  Place warning devices on such street. 
(c)  Any person who willfully fails, refuses or neglects to observe any type of warning or notice placed or posted in accordance with or who otherwise willfully violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  The police department shall cooperate with the director of public works/city engineer in the enforcement of the closing or restricting the use of any street. 
(Code 1959, § 28-3; Ord. No. 910, §§ 35—38)  
Sec. 46-9. - Openings, stairs and vaults. 
(a)  Any person who constructs or maintains or causes, permits or allows to be constructed or maintained any opening or stairway in any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public way shall first file a written application with the city council and be issued a permit therefor. If such permit is granted, such person shall forthwith deposit with the city clerk an insurance policy, which in form shall be acceptable to the city council, in the sum of $25,000.00, conditioned to save the city harmless and indemnify the city from any loss or damage or liability resulting from such opening, stairway or use thereof. 
(b)  Any person who constructs or maintains or causes, permits or allows to be constructed or maintained any vault, space or room or structure under any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public way shall first file a written application with the director of public works/city engineer and be issued a permit therefor. 
(c)  Any person who in fact, prior to April 19, 1946, has, whether with or without a permit, constructed or maintained any opening or stairway in or any vault, space or room or structure under any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public way and continues to so maintain such opening, stairway, vault, space or room or structure in or under any such public place shall forthwith deposit with the city clerk an insurance policy, which in form shall be acceptable to the city council, in the sum of $25,000.00, conditioned to save the city harmless from any liability or damage resulting from or caused by any accidents from such opening, stairway, vault, space or room, or structure or the cover, trapdoor or manhole or the use thereof of any or all of them. 
(Code 1959, § 28-46; Ord. No. 910, §§ 130—132)  
Sec. 46-10. - Building moving permit. 
(a)  Any person who moves, causes, permits, or allows to be moved any building over, along, or across any street or public place without first having filed an application with the director of public works/city engineer in the manner prescribed in this section and having been issued a permit therefor is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Every person applying for a permit to move any building over, along, or across any street or public place shall file with the director of public works/city engineer an application signed and setting forth as follows: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The number of the valid business license to move buildings held by the applicant. 
(3)  The present location of the building to be moved. 
(4)  The proposed location or destination to which it is proposed to move such building. 
(5)  The greatest width of the building as measured at right angles to the axis of movement. 
(6)  The type of construction of such building. 
(7)  The proposed date for moving such building. 
(c)  The fixed deposits for a permit to move any building over, along, or across any street or public place are as set by resolution of the city council. However, before granting a permit under this section, the director of public works/city engineer may require, in addition to such deposit, a bond as provided in section 46-186. 
(d)  An application for a permit to move any building over, along, or across any street or public place, accompanied by cash or a certified check in an amount equal to the fixed deposit and, when so required, the necessary bond shall be filed with the director of public works/city engineer. The director of public works/city engineer may issue a permit upon a showing that there will be compliance with all laws and ordinances and a further showing that public safety will not be endangered. A permit shall provide as follows: 
(1)  The permit is nontransferable. 
(2)  The permit shall be for one building only, as described in the application. 
(3)  The route over which the building shall be moved. 
(4)  The hours during which such moving shall take place. 
(5)  The moving of any building over, along, or across any street or public place shall be prosecuted in a manner approved by the director of public works/city engineer. 
(e)  The director of public works/city engineer shall refund to the person having made the bond provided for by this section any balance remaining in his hands after deducting the cost of any repairs made necessary by damage to any street or public place by the moving of any building. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-11—28-15; Ord. No. 910, § 90) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 74.  
Sec. 46-11. - Dumping materials on streets. 
(a)  Any person who places, causes, permits, or allows to be placed any soil, gravel or other material in or on any street without first having filed an application with the director of public works/city engineer and is issued a permit therefor is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  All persons are prohibited from pouring, spilling or allowing to drop kerosene, gasoline, crude oil or distillate upon any asphalt street or alley in the city. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-16, 28-35; Ord. No. 190, § 91; Ord. No. 309, § 1) 
State Law reference— Littering, Penal Code § 374 et seq.  
Sec. 46-12. - Obstruction to visibility at intersections. 
(a)  On property at any corner from intersecting streets, it shall be unlawful to install, set out or maintain or cause, permit, or allow to be installed, set out or maintained any sign, hedge, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstructions to the view higher than three feet above the gutter flow line of the curb immediately adjacent to the corner property within that triangular area of both public and private property bounded by either the curblines of the intersecting streets and a diagonal line determined by joining points on the curb 45 feet from the intersection of the extended curblines or, in the absence of curbs, by the continuation of a diagonal line to the roadway through points on the property line measured 25 feet from the intersection of the property lines or their extensions. 
(b)  No obstruction to cross visibility shall be deemed to be excepted from the application of this section because of its being in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, unless expressly exempted by the terms of this subsection. Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to permanent buildings; public utility poles; trees trimmed to the trunk and to a line at least eight feet above the level of the intersection; saplings or plant species of open growth habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so planted and trimmed as to leave at all seasons a clear and unobstructed cross view; supporting members of appurtenances to permanent buildings existing on April 19, 1946; official warning signs or signals; or places where the contour of the ground is such that there can be no cross visibility at the intersection. 
(c)  When notice is given by the director of public works/city engineer, in the manner provided by section 46-156(b), to any person who installs, sets out or maintains or causes, permits or allows to be installed, set out or maintained any sign, hedge, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstruction to the view, such person shall, within the time set forth in the notice and at his own expense, remove or eliminate such obstruction to cross visibility. 
(d)  The city may cause to be removed any obstruction to cross visibility on the failure of the owner to comply with a notice or demand of the director of public works/city engineer under section 46-156(b), and the city shall have an action at law to recover the expense of such removal, costs and expense of suit. 
(e)  Violations of this section are a nuisance within the meaning of article II of chapter 18. 
(Code 1959, § 28-23; Ord. No. 910, §§ 105, 106, 108, 109, 111; Ord. No. 1701, § 1; Ord. No. 3387, § 1)  
Sec. 46-13. - Playing ball on streets. 
Any person who engages in the playing of any ball game in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or parkway is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 28-29; Ord. No. 908, § 222)  
Sec. 46-14. - Selling on streets. 
No person shall park any motor vehicle from which goods, wares, merchandise or food are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale on any portion of any street within the city for more than ten minutes at any location. 
(Code 1959, § 28-31; Ord. No. 908, § 224; Ord. No. 3240, § 2; Ord. No. 3648, § 1) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 30.  
Sec. 46-15. - Placement of mailboxes. 
It is unlawful to place or construct a new receptacle for mail in any portion of the public right-of-way or at any curbside. 
(Code 1959, § 28-32.5; Ord. No. 2774, § 1)  
Secs. 46-16—46-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS 
 
Sec. 46-51. - Sidewalk specifications. 
All sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with the standard specifications of the city and as approved by the director of public works/city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 28-53.1; Ord. No. 2601, § 4 (part))  
Sec. 46-52. - Sidewalk construction permit. 
Every person who constructs, causes, permits or allows to be constructed any sidewalk within a street right-of-way shall first file an application with the director of public works/city engineer and be issued a permit therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 28-53.2; Ord. No. 2601, § 4 (part))  
Sec. 46-53. - Construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks in conjunction with building construction. 
(a)  Any person constructing or arranging for the construction of a building or dwelling shall also provide for the construction of Portland cement concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks in accordance with the standard specifications of the city, unless adequate Portland cement concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks already exist along all street frontage adjoining the lot on which the building or dwelling is to be constructed, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  This section may be modified by the director of public works/city engineer under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Portland cement concrete curbs and gutters only shall be required where the topography is such that the installation of Portland cement concrete sidewalks would be impractical. 
(2)  Portland cement concrete curbs, gutters or sidewalks need not be installed where the street grade cannot readily be established by the director of public works/city engineer. 
(3)  Where the street for practical reasons has not been or cannot be readily graded to the established grade which would enable proper location of the curb or sidewalk. 
(4)  Where installation of Portland cement concrete sidewalks would be hazardous to pedestrians because of the grade. 
(5)  Where parcels in residential zones are divided into one-half acre or larger lots, the Portland cement concrete curb and gutter or Portland cement concrete curb, gutter and sidewalk need not extend a greater distance than the side yards or side and rear yards for corner lots defined in the city zoning code. 
(6)  Portland cement concrete sidewalks in agricultural (A) and industrial (M) zones where travel will be restricted or limited to the occupant establishments located in such zones. 
(c)  Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way in accordance with the master plan of principal streets and highways or in accordance with a precise plan officially adopted in accordance with such master plan of principal streets and highways. 
(d)  The building official shall deny final approval and acceptance on final public utility connections to any building or dwelling until such Portland cement concrete curbs and gutters or Portland cement concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks exist or are constructed or their construction is guaranteed by cash deposited with the city in a sum determined by the director of public works/city engineer based upon the number of linear feet of Portland cement concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks to be installed, except as set forth in this section. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other subsection of this section, the construction of curbs or sidewalks can be delayed if there is less than 35 percent of curb or sidewalk installed in the block of which the property is a part, provided the property owner signs an agreement with the city that such owner will construct curbs or sidewalks when 35 percent of the footage on the same side of the street within such owner's block shall have curbs or sidewalks installed or agreed to be installed. The city clerk shall cause to be recorded a real property lien against the owner's property to secure the performance of the agreement. The property owner shall pay to the city a fee set by resolution of the city council for the costs of recording the lien and preparation of the agreement and recording the release of lien when standard curbs or sidewalks are constructed. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-49, 28-50—28-53; Ord. No. 1362; Ord. No. 1411, § 1)  
Secs. 46-54—46-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-91. - Specifications; approval. 
Every driveway, entrance or exit constructed or established connecting a street with private property, wherever curb and sidewalk are maintained, shall have a floor not less than six inches in thickness, and such driveway shall be continued from such sidewalk on a straight line gradient through a cut in the curb to the flow line of the gutter of such street. All such construction shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works/city engineer. The director of public works/city engineer shall approve such construction as complies with all laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1959, § 28-37; Ord. No. 910, § 120)  
Sec. 46-92. - Location. 
Every driveway, entrance or exit constructed or established connecting a street with private property shall be so constructed or established that no portion of such driveway, entrance or exit shall approach or pass within six feet of any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1959, § 28-38; Ord. No. 910, § 121)  
Sec. 46-93. - Width. 
Every driveway, entrance or exit constructed or established connecting a street with private property wherever curb and sidewalk are maintained shall be restricted in width overall to 50 percent or less of the frontage of that portion of such private property as is directly involved in the use of the driveway. However, if, in the discretion of the city council sitting as a body in regular or adjourned session, such restriction as to overall width of such driveway, entrance or exit will endanger the public in person or property or interfere with the public convenience in the use of the sidewalk and street, the council may waive the restriction as to the overall width. Private convenience in the use of such driveway shall not be the basis for the waiving of the restriction as to overall width. 
(Code 1959, § 28-39; Ord. No. 910, § 122)  
Sec. 46-94. - Noncompliance with terms. 
On the failure of the permittee, owner or lessee to remove or replace, as provided in section 46-120, any driveway, entrance or exit, the use of which has been vacated or abandoned for 90 days, the director of public works/city engineer shall so report to the city council, and the council may instruct the director of public works/city engineer to abate such hazardous or inconvenient condition in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1959, § 28-45; Ord. No. 910, § 128)  
Secs. 46-95—46-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 46-116. - Required. 
Every person who constructs or establishes, causes, permits, or allows to be constructed or established any driveway, entrance or exit connecting a street with private property, wherever curb and sidewalk are maintained, shall first file an application with the director of public works/city engineer in the manner provided in this division and be issued a permit therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 28-40; Ord. No. 910, § 123)  
Sec. 46-117. - Application contents. 
Any person or his duly authorized representative who applies for a permit to construct or establish a driveway, entrance or exit shall file an application with the director of public works/city engineer signed and setting forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the authorized representative, if any. 
(3)  Location of the proposed driveway by street number and designating that portion, in feet, to be so used of such lot or property. 
(4)  The proprietary interest of the applicant in the lot or property. 
(5)  The overall width of the proposed driveway. 
(Code 1959, § 28-41; Ord. No. 910, § 124)  
Sec. 46-118. - Deposit. 
A cash deposit as determined by the director of public works/city engineer shall be paid to the city before a permit is issued under this division, which money shall be held by the director of public works/city engineer, in trust, conditioned upon completing the driveway and the cutting of existing curbs and the finishing thereof according to the specifications and requirements of the director of public works/city engineer. No permit to cut existing curbs or to construct driveways shall be issued until the deposit required in this section has been properly made. 
(Code 1959, § 28-42; Ord. No. 1126; Ord. No. 2601, § 1)  
Sec. 46-119. - Fees. 
The director of public works/city engineer shall charge an appropriate fee as approved by the city council by resolution for the cost of issuing the permit and the cost of inspection of the improvements as provided for by this division. 
(Code 1959, § 28-43; Ord. No. 2601, § 2)  
Sec. 46-120. - Terms. 
Any permit issued under this division to construct, in any business district, any driveway, entrance or exit shall provide that within 90 days after any use, by reason of which such permit was issued, has been vacated or abandoned, the permittee, owner or lessee shall at his own expense remove such driveway, entrance or exit and restore to its original condition any sidewalk, curb and street so damaged or displaced. 
(Code 1959, § 28-44; Ord. No. 910, § 127)  
Secs. 46-121—46-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ENCROACHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Encroachment includes any tower, pole, pole line, pipe, pipeline, fence, billboard, stand or building or any structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this section which is placed in, under or over any portion of the street. 
(Code 1959, § 28-54; Ord. No. 910, § 45) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-152. - Applicability generally. 
In addition to persons and public corporations, this article shall apply to all private corporations authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under or over any street. This article shall not be deemed or construed to limit the powers and duties vested by law in the state public utilities commission. If any conflict occurs with regard to the powers and duties given the city in this article, those of the state public utilities commission shall prevail. 
(Code 1959, § 28-55; Ord. No. 910, § 46)  
Sec. 46-153. - Depth of coverage. 
Every work or facility, manholes, flush tanks, catchbasins and culverts excepted, to be installed in or under any street shall be covered to a depth of 2½ feet as measured below the established grade of the gutter of such street or 2½ feet below the surface of such other public place. 
(Code 1959, § 28-64; Ord. No. 910, § 87)  
Sec. 46-154. - Water crossings. 
(a)  Any person proposing or desiring to excavate for or construct water crossings in or under any street to carry water for any purpose whatsoever shall construct, without expense to the city, such work or facility as is necessary to adequately and properly carry such water in or under such street. 
(b)  Any work or facility constructed in or under any street to carry water for any purpose whatsoever shall have its beginning and termination in an appropriate wall, bulkhead, or other work so established on private property as to protect from any water damage to or hazard on any public right-of-way. Such work or facility shall be constructed of asphalt dipped welded steel pipe having a sidewall thickness of not less than ten gauge, and such work or facility shall be covered in the manner specified in section 46-153. 
(c)  Any such construction shall be done in accordance with the permit and pursuant to this article and shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works/city engineer. The issuance of any such permit may be withheld until the director of public works/city engineer finds that the proper and adequate provision is made for the protection of such street and for the safety of travel thereon. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-65—28-67; Ord. No. 910, § 88)  
Sec. 46-155. - Maps of underground facilities. 
(a)  Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in any works or facilities installed for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street shall file in the office of the director of public works/city engineer a map or set of maps, each drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch, which map or set of maps shall show the exact location, size, description and date of installation, if known, of each and every part of the works or facilities. 
(b)  Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in any works or facilities installed for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street shall, within 15 days after January 1 of each and every year, file, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, a corrected map or set of maps showing all additions and revisions made to such works of facilities during the previous year. 
(c)  Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in any works or facilities installed for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street who abandons, in whole or in part, or the use thereof any such underground work or facility shall, within 30 days thereafter, file in the office of the director of public works/city engineer a written statement giving in detail the location of such part or structure so abandoned. Each map or set of maps filed pursuant to this subsection shall show in detail the location of all such parts or structures abandoned subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps. 
(d)  Each map required by this section shall be endorsed thereon by affidavit of such authorized person to the effect that it correctly exhibits the details required by this section. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-68—28-71; Ord. No. 910, § 89)  
Sec. 46-156. - Removal. 
(a)  Every permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to the provision that if future improvement occurs, pursuant to any state law providing for such improvement, necessitates the relocation or removal of such encroachment, the permittee will relocate or remove it at his sole expense. In such event the director of public works/city engineer shall serve on the permittee a written demand specifying the place of relocation or that the encroachment must be removed from the street and specifying a reasonable time within which the work of relocation or removal must be commenced. The permittee must commence such relocation or removal within the time specified in such demand and thereafter diligently prosecute it to completion. 
(b)  Notice shall be given to the owner, occupant or person in possession of the encroachment or to any other person causing or suffering the encroachment to exist by serving upon such person a notice containing a demand for the immediate removal of such encroachment from within such street. Any such notice shall describe the encroachment complained of with reasonable certainty as to its character and location. In lieu of service upon such person, serving of the notice may also be made by registered mail and by posting, for a period of five days, a copy of the notice on the encroachment described in the notice. If an owner, occupant or person in possession is not present in the county, the notice may be given to his agent in lieu of service by mailing and posting. 
(c)  The director of public works/city engineer may immediately remove from any city street any encroachment which obstructs or prevents the use of such street by the public or is not removed or the removal of which is not commenced and thereafter diligently prosecuted prior to the expiration of five days from and after the service of notice. 
(d)  Encroachments existing in violation of this section are a public nuisance within the meaning of article II of chapter 18. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-72—28-76; Ord. No. 910, §§ 60, 62—65)  
Secs. 46-157—46-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 46-181. - Required. 
(a)  The director of public works/city engineer may issue written permits, as provided in this division, authorizing the permittee to place, change or renew an encroachment. Such a permit shall be issued upon a showing that there will be compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. 
(b)  Any person who does any of the acts specified in this section without the authority of such permit is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 28-56; Ord. No. 910, § 50)  
Sec. 46-182. - Compliance with terms. 
Any act done under the authority of a written permit issued pursuant to this division shall be done in accordance with applicable sections of this article and the terms and conditions of such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 28-57; Ord. No. 910, § 51)  
Sec. 46-183. - Specific conditions of issuance. 
Any permit issued under this division shall provide that the permittee shall pay the entire expense of replacing the street in as good condition as before and may provide such other conditions as to the location and the manner in which the work is to be done as the director of public works/city engineer finds necessary for the protection of the street. 
(Code 1959, § 28-58; Ord. No. 910, § 52)  
Sec. 46-184. - Possession at location; display. 
Every permit issued under this division shall, at all times, be available at the location where any work pursuant to such permit is in progress, and upon demand shall be exhibited to any authorized person. 
(Code 1959, § 28-59; Ord. No. 910, § 55)  
Sec. 46-185. - Prior rights. 
Every permit issued under this division shall be granted subject to the right of the city or of any other person entitled thereto to unrestricted use of any street for any purpose for which such street may be lawfully used. 
(Code 1959, § 28-60; Ord. No. 910, § 56)  
Sec. 46-186. - Bond. 
(a)  Before granting a permit under this division, the director of public works/city engineer may require the applicant to file with the city a satisfactory bond payable to the city in such amount as the director of public works/city engineer deems sufficient. The director of public works/city engineer shall require of any such applicant such a bond, if such applicant has in fact prior to such application failed to comply with this article or with the provisions of a previous permit. 
(b)  Such bond shall be conditioned upon the permittee's performing the work for which the permit is issued in compliance with all laws and ordinances and the permittee's paying the costs of the city under section 46-187. Such bond shall be in an amount estimated by the director of public works/city engineer to be sufficient to perform the work for which the permit is issued in compliance with all laws, ordinances and the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 28-61; Ord. No. 910, § 57)  
Sec. 46-187. - Supervision of work; costs. 
The director of public works/city engineer may but is not required to supervise any work done under any permit issued under this division, in which event the permittee shall pay the reasonable cost of such supervision to the city. 
(Code 1959, § 28-62; Ord. No. 910, § 53)  
Sec. 46-188. - Revocation. 
All permits issued pursuant to this division shall be revocable on five days' notice, and the encroachment must be removed or relocated as may be specified by the director of public works/city engineer in the notice revoking the permit and within the time specified by the director of public works/city engineer, which time shall not be less than five days, unless the permit so provides. 
(Code 1959, § 28-63; Ord. No. 910, § 61)  
Secs. 46-189—46-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EXCAVATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-221. - Violations and abatement actions. 
(a)  Whenever, in the opinion of the director of public works/city engineer, any person fails, refuses or neglects to prosecute any work pursuant to a permit to make any excavation for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street, with due diligence and in compliance with this article, notice shall be given such person or his duly authorized agent or representative causing or suffering such noncompliance to exist, by serving upon such person or his duly authorized agent or representative a notice containing a demand for the immediate abatement of such noncompliance. Any such notice shall describe the noncompliance complained of with reasonable certainty as to its character and location. In lieu of service upon such person, service of the notice may also be made by registered mail and by posting, for a period of five days, a copy of the notice at the location described in the notice. If a person is not present in the county, the notice may be given to his authorized agent or representative in lieu of mailing and posting. 
(b)  The director of public works/city engineer may immediately abate any such failure to comply, if the work, necessary for compliance, is not commenced and thereafter diligently prosecuted prior to the expiration of three days from and after the service of the notice. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-102, 28-103; Ord. No. 910, §§ 84, 85)  
Sec. 46-222. - Applicability generally. 
In addition to persons and public corporations, this article shall apply to all private corporations authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under or over any street. This article shall not be deemed or construed to limit the powers and duties vested by law in the state public utilities commission. If any conflict occurs with regard to the powers and duties given the city in this article, those of the state public utilities commission shall prevail. 
(Code 1959, § 28-77; Ord. No. 910, § 46)  
Sec. 46-223. - Applicability to city departments, public corporations or contractors for city. 
Under this article a permit shall not be required of any department, public corporation or contractor for the city, authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any street, but each such agency shall be otherwise subject to this article and to such other reasonable conditions and provisions as the director of public works/city engineer may impose. 
(Code 1959, § 28-78; Ord. No. 910, § 86)  
Sec. 46-224. - Emergencies. 
Under this article the permittee may excavate openings in city streets to make repairs in an emergency requiring immediate action. In such cases the director of public works/city engineer shall be promptly notified of any such action, and such permittee, at his own expense, shall immediately have such street placed in as good condition as before such excavation. A public utility may excavate a city street without a permit in an emergency requiring immediate action, but in such case the street shall, at the expense of the public utility, be replaced in as good condition as before such excavation. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-104, 28-105; Ord. No. 910, § 54)  
Sec. 46-225. - Supervision of work; costs. 
The director of public works/city engineer may but is not required to supervise any work done under any permit issued under this article, in which event the permittee shall pay the reasonable cost of such supervision to the city. 
(Code 1959, § 28-89; Ord. No. 910, § 53)  
Sec. 46-226. - Refilling. 
The refilling of every excavation and removal of surplus material shall be carried out in a manner approved by the director of public works/city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 28-90; Ord. No. 910, § 76)  
Sec. 46-227. - Replacement of pavement by city. 
(a)  The director of public works/city engineer shall replace or repair the surface of any street damaged or removed by any person pursuant to a permit to excavate. The cost of making any such repair or replacement shall be charged against the deposit of the permittee in an amount as provided in this section. 
(b)  The fixed charges for repairing or replacing any street or portion damaged or removed by any person pursuant to a permit issued under this article shall be established by the director of public works/city engineer and approved by council resolution. 
(c)  On or before the 12th day of any month, the director of public works/city engineer shall cause to be mailed to every person owing the city a statement showing the amount due for any work performed by the city during the previous month pursuant to this article. The amount as stated shall be due and payable to the director of public works/city engineer on or before the 25th day of the same month. 
(d)  The city shall deduct the cost of any work or repairs made by the director of public works/city engineer as provided in this article from any and all deposits then on hand belonging to or that may be made by any person under this article. 
(e)  The decision of the director of public works/city engineer as to the cost of any work done or repairs made by the city pursuant to this article shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1959, §§ 28-91—28-95; Ord. No. 910, §§ 77, 79—81; Ord. No. 2601, § 8)  
Sec. 46-228. - Barriers. 
Every person making any excavation for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street shall place and maintain along and about such excavation barriers of such type and in such a manner as the director of public works/city engineer may deem necessary to prevent public hazard. 
(Code 1959, § 28-96; Ord. No. 910, § 82)  
Sec. 46-229. - Lights. 
Every person making any excavation for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street shall place and maintain, along and about such excavation, from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day or until such time as all hazard is removed, lights of such type and in such manner as the director of public works/city engineer may deem necessary to prevent public hazard. 
(Code 1959, § 28-97; Ord. No. 910, § 82)  
Sec. 46-230. - Maintenance of vehicle and pedestrian crossings. 
Every person making any excavation for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street shall maintain adequate and safe crossings for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections and at intervals of not less than 300 feet for pedestrian traffic. If any such excavation is made across any street, at least one adequate and safe crossing shall be maintained at all times for vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Code 1959, § 28-98; Ord. No. 910, § 83)  
Sec. 46-231. - Access to fire hydrants. 
Free access to all fire hydrants and water gates shall be provided and maintained at all times at any excavation. 
(Code 1959, § 28-99; Ord. No. 910, § 83) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, ch. 22.  
Sec. 46-232. - Provision of waterways. 
Adequate waterways in gutters and across all street intersections shall be provided and maintained at all times during an excavation. 
(Code 1959, § 28-100; Ord. No. 910, § 83)  
Sec. 46-233. - Storage of materials. 
All materials, excavated or otherwise, shall be stored in a manner approved by the director of public works/city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 28-101; Ord. No. 910, § 83)  
Secs. 46-234—46-255. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 46-256. - Required. 
Every person who makes, causes, permits or allows to be made, for any purpose whatsoever, any excavation in or under any city street shall file an application with the director of public works/city engineer in the manner provided in this article and be issued a permit therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 28-79; Ord. No. 910, § 70)  
Sec. 46-257. - Application contents. 
Every person or his duly authorized representative applying for a permit to make any excavation for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street shall file with the director of public works/city engineer an application therefor, signed and setting forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant's duly authorized representative, if any. 
(3)  The detailed location by street and number for a single excavation or as shown by a plat or map and such other information as the director of public works/city engineer may require. 
(4)  The purpose and use for such excavation. 
(5)  Legal authority to occupy and use such street. 
(Code 1959, § 28-80; Ord. No. 910, § 71)  
Sec. 46-258. - Action on application. 
An application for a permit to make an excavation for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street and accompanied by cash or a certified check in the amount equal to the fixed deposit shall be filed with the director of public works/city engineer. Such a permit shall be issued upon a showing that the excavation will comply with all laws and ordinances. The director of public works/city engineer may issue a permit which shall be nontransferable and for a period as provided in section 46-259. 
(Code 1959, § 28-81; Ord. No. 910, § 73; Ord. No. 2601, § 4)  
Sec. 46-259. - Term. 
Every permit to excavate for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street, unless work pursuant thereto is started and prosecuted with diligence to completion within 60 days from the date of issuance, shall be cancelled. 
(Code 1959, § 28-82; Ord. No. 910, § 74; Ord. No. 2601, § 5)  
Sec. 46-260. - Deposit. 
The fixed deposit for a permit to make any excavation for any purpose whatsoever in or under any street shall be established by the director of public works/city engineer and approved by council resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 28-83; Ord. No. 2601, § 6)  
Sec. 46-261. - Fee. 
The director of public works/city engineer shall charge an appropriate fee as approved by council resolution for the cost of issuing the excavation permit and the cost of inspection of the excavation. 
(Code 1959, § 28-83.1; Ord. No. 2601, § 7)  
Sec. 46-262. - Compliance. 
Any act done under the authority of a written permit issued pursuant to this division shall be done in accordance with applicable sections of this article and the terms and conditions of such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 28-84; Ord. No. 910, § 51)  
Sec. 46-263. - Specific conditions of issuance. 
Any permit issued under this division shall provide that the permittee shall pay the entire expense of replacing the street in as good condition as before and may provide such other conditions as to the location and the manner in which the work is to be done as the director of public works/city engineer finds necessary for the protection of the street. 
(Code 1959, § 28-85; Ord. No. 910, § 52)  
Sec. 46-264. - Possession at location; display. 
Every permit issued under this division shall, at all times, be available at the location where any work pursuant to such permit is in progress and, upon demand, shall be exhibited to any authorized person. 
(Code 1959, § 28-86; Ord. No. 910, § 55)  
Sec. 46-265. - Prior rights. 
Every permit issued under this division shall be granted subject to the right of the city or of any other person entitled thereto to unrestricted use of any street for any purpose for which such street may be lawfully used. 
(Code 1959, § 28-87; Ord. No. 910, § 56)  
Sec. 46-266. - Bond. 
(a)  Before granting a permit under this division, the director of public works/city engineer may require the applicant to file with the city a satisfactory bond payable to the city in such an amount as the director of public works/city engineer deems sufficient. The director of public works/city engineer shall require of any such applicant such a bond, if the applicant has in fact, prior to the application, failed to comply with this article or with the provisions of a previous permit. 
(b)  The bond shall be conditioned upon the permittee's performing the work for which the permit is issued in compliance with all laws and ordinances and the permittee's paying the costs of the city under section 46-225. The bond shall be in an amount estimated by the director of public works/city engineer to be sufficient to perform the work for which the permit is issued in compliance with all laws and ordinances and in compliance with the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 28-88; Ord. No. 910, § 57)  
Secs. 46-267—46-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSE NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 46-301. - Manner of numbering. 
All lots and buildings within the city shall be known and designated in the following manner: 
(1)  All lots and buildings on all streets running north and south, north of First Street, shall be numbered from south to north, commencing at First Street, the baseline; and all lots and buildings on all streets running north and south, south of First Street, shall be numbered from north to south, commencing at First Street, the baseline. 
(2)  All lots and buildings on all streets running east and west, west of Garey Avenue, shall be numbered from east to west, commencing at Garey Avenue, the baseline; and all lots and buildings on all streets running east and west, east of Garey Avenue, shall be numbered from west to east, commencing at Garey Avenue, the baseline. 
(3)  As near as may be, 20 feet shall be allotted to each number. 
(Code 1959, § 28-106; Ord. No. 910, § 235)  
Sec. 46-302. - Exceptions to manner of numbering. 
Exceptions to section 46-301 are as follows: 
(1)  All lots and buildings on Rio Rancho Road running east of State Route 71 to Garey Avenue shall be numbered west to east, commencing on State Route 71. 
(2)  All lots and buildings on Auto Center Drive running north and south of Rio Rancho Road shall be numbered north to south, commencing at the north end of Auto Center Drive, a cul-de-sac. 
(3)  All lots and buildings on Innovation Way running south of Kellogg Drive to Temple Avenue shall be numbered north to south commencing on Kellogg Drive. 
(Code 1959, § 28-106.1; Ord. No. 3380, § 1; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 11-20-2006)  
Sec. 46-303. - Assignment for each block; size of numbers. 
One hundred numbers shall be assigned, so far as possible and practical, to each and every block within the city. Figures used for such numbers shall be not less than 3½ inches in height and shall be placed immediately over or by the side of one of the doors next to the street or other place of the building easily visible from the street. 
(Code 1959, § 28-107; Ord. No. 910, § 236)  
Sec. 46-304. - Exceptions to assignment of numbers. 
As an exception to section 46-303, numbers commencing with 1 and continuing through 99 shall be assigned to those lots and buildings on Rio Rancho Road between State Route 71 and Garey Avenue; on Auto Center Drive between the northerly terminus and southerly terminus of such street; and on Innovation Way between Kellogg Drive and Temple Avenue. 
(Code 1959, § 28-107.1; Ord. No. 3380, § 2; Ord. No. 4072, § 2, 11-20-2006)  
Sec. 46-305. - Even and odd numbers designated. 
Lots and buildings on the south and east sides of all streets shall be designated by even numbers, and lots and all buildings on the north and west sides of all streets shall be designated by odd numbers. 
(Code 1959, § 28-108; Ord. No. 910, § 237)  
Sec. 46-306. - Assignment of individual numbers. 
Upon application for the proper number of a premises, it shall be the duty of the director of public works/city engineer to assign to each building, store or residence the proper number and deliver to each owner or occupant, free of charge, the certificate designating the number to be placed on such building, store or residence. 
(Code 1959, § 28-109; Ord. No. 910, § 238)  
Sec. 46-307. - Failure to comply; visibility. 
(a)  Any person having received the certificate provided for in this article who shall, for 30 days, fail, refuse or neglect to number any building in conformity with this article or shall number it without first having obtained the proper number thereof is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Building numbers displayed on a building shall be readily visible from the nearest street. 
(Code 1959, § 28-110; Ord. No. 910, § 238; Ord. No. 1279)  
Secs. 46-308—46-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OUTDOOR DINING AND NEWSSTANDS WITHIN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, adopted Mar. 21, 2016, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 46-341—46-351, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1959, §§ 28-501—28-505, 28-507—28-513; Ord. No. 3791, § 1. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30. 
 
Sec. 46-341. - Purpose 
The purpose of the regulations and standards in this article are to allow increased business and pedestrian traffic, encourage appropriate outdoor dining and outdoor newsstand opportunities within public rights-of-way, to ensure that the space used for outdoor dining and newsstands within the public right-of-way will serve a public purpose, and to simplify the process for obtaining permission to operate a sidewalk dining facility or newsstand. This article does not apply to outdoor dining or the sale of periodicals, including newspapers and magazines, on private property and nothing herein is intended to prohibit or regulate outdoor dining as may be permitted elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-342. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
Eating establishment means a place of business primarily engaged in the same of prepared foods. Typical uses include fine sit-down restaurants, coffee shops, bakeries, delicatessens and specialty food-to-go. 
Food court means a place of business or group of businesses specializing in retail sales of prepared ethnic and specialty foods clustered together to create a festive, pedestrian-oriented environment. Typically, uses extend from inside areas to outdoor dining areas. 
Outdoor dining means the use of a public sidewalk and public right-of-way for the placement of tables, chairs, benches, planters, umbrellas, and related items for the purpose of serving food and/or beverages in conjunction with and adjacent to an eating establishment or food court. 
Outdoor dining area means a place on the public sidewalk or within the public right-of-way where patrons of an adjacent eating establishment or food court may consume food and/or beverage. The area may be used for either table service or for seating and consumption of take-out items. 
Outdoor newsstand means a place of business or group of businesses specializing in retail sales of reading materials, including newspapers, magazines, periodicals and other similar newsprint publications. 
Sidewalk dining/sidewalk dining area means the same as, and is interchangeable with, outdoor dining and outdoor dining area. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-343. - Location permitted. 
Outdoor dining areas and outdoor newsstands within the public right-of-way are permitted on all commercially-utilized properties, provided all development standards are met. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-344. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to use the public sidewalk and/or public right-of-way for outdoor dining or outdoor newsstands without first obtaining a valid annual outdoor dining permit and/or outdoor newsstand permit. Outdoor dining permits shall be renewed each year in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-345. - Procedure for obtaining permit. 
(a)  Application. Establishment of an outdoor dining area or an outdoor newsstand shall require site plan review and permit issuance from the development services manager of the city. Any person or business wishing to operate an outdoor dining area or an outdoor newsstand shall apply for a permit by submitting the following to the planning division: 
(1)  A completed outdoor dining permit and/or outdoor newsstand permit application. 
(2)  A statement of consent from the owner(s) of the properties immediately adjacent to the proposed outdoor newsstand or outdoor dining area. 
(3)  Radius map and labels consisting of the property and business owners' names and mailing addresses for all properties within a radius of 150 feet from the external boundaries of the property of a proposed outdoor dining area or proposed newsstand. A certified property owners list affidavit provided by the company or firm preparing the labels is required. 
(4)  The site plan for the proposed outdoor dining area shall show the following: 
a.  Chairs, tables, umbrellas, planters, signs and any other fixtures and furnishings to be included in the outdoor dining operation. 
b.  The applicant's primary eating establishment or food court and the proposed circulation to and from the outdoor dining area, as well as pedestrian circulation at the perimeter of the outdoor dining area. 
c.  The public sidewalk or public right-of-way to be occupied with dimensions of the entire sidewalk or right-of-way and the clearance proposed for pedestrian access. 
d.  Names of and main entrances to the businesses immediately adjacent to the applicant's eating establishment or food court. 
e.  Specifications and photographs of all proposed chairs, tables, umbrellas, signs, railings, railing connections to the public sidewalk or right-of way and the adjacent building, and other furnishings. 
(5)  The site plan for a proposed outdoor newsstand shall show the following: 
a.  When abutting a building wall, the location of all windows and doors of the building wall. 
b.  The location of the newsstand and any display area within the sidewalk in relation to the street. 
(6)  Maintenance and operations proposal, including the proposed hours of operation, indicating how the space will be maintained and kept orderly. 
(7)  A city hold harmless and waiver form executed by the applicant. 
(8)  Insurance documents as required in section 46-349. 
(b)  Notice of application and public review process. Upon receipt of a complete application package, the development services manager shall prepare written notice which states the name of the applicant, the proposed location and that a site plan and supporting documents are available for public inspection at the offices of the city planning division. The notice shall state that interested persons may submit written comments to the development services manager within five business days from the mailing date of said notice. 
The development services manager shall cause this notice to be mailed to property and business owners within 150 feet of the proposed location of the outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand area. 
(c)  Site plan review, findings and conditions, and permit issuance. Applications for outdoor dining and outdoor newsstand permits shall be reviewed and considered by the development services manager. The decision of the development services manager shall be made after the completion of the five business day public review period. Prior to the granting of an outdoor dining and/or outdoor newsstand permit, the development services manager shall make the following findings of fact: 
(1)  That the applicant has submitted all documents required by this article, and has complied with all requirements of federal, state, county and local law. 
(2)  That the proposed layout, location and design is consistent with the character of the surrounding area and underlying zoning district. 
(3)  That configuration of the outdoor dining area or outdoor newsstand and the plan of operation meet the minimum standards of this article. 
(4)  That the proposed outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand operation will enhance the surrounding area, benefit the community, and will not pose a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
The development services manager may establish conditions of approval necessary to achieve the minimum requirements of this article, or such other conditions necessary for public safety or to protect public improvements. The development services manager may establish conditions necessary to restore the appearance and condition of the sidewalk to its original state upon termination of use as an outdoor dining area or outdoor newsstand. 
(d)  Appeal. The decision of the development services manager shall be final, unless a written appeal is filed with the planning division within ten days after the written decision by the development services manager. The applicant for an outdoor dining permit and/or outdoor newsstand permit, or business and property owners within 150 feet radius from the proposed outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand operation may appeal the decision of the development services manager to the planning commission. The appeal shall be considered by the planning commission as a consent item. The decision of the planning commission shall be final, unless a written appeal to the city council is filed with the planning division within ten days of the planning commission's decision. A member of the city council may request an appeal of the planning commission decision. Any councilmember who requests a review before the city council must request and obtain a majority vote of the city council in order to set the appeal for a public hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-346. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit application fee. Each applicant for an outdoor dining area or outdoor newsstand shall pay a non-refundable application fee to cover the cost of processing said application. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  Maintenance deposit. A maintenance deposit, in an amount determined by the public works director to be adequate to pay for the replacement of sidewalk paving and any fixtures within the outdoor dining or newsstand area, shall be paid to the city at the time the permit is issued. It is the responsibility of the permittee to maintain the sidewalk and fixtures within the outdoor dining or newsstand area in the same condition that they were in at the time of permit issuance. The permittee shall be responsible for any repairs required as a result of the permittee's use. Upon termination of the use as an outdoor dining area or outdoor newsstand, the area shall be inspected by the public works department, and the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee less any offset for repairs. 
(c)  Annual permit renewal. Each operator of an outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand area shall pay an annual permit renewal fee. The annual permit renewal fee shall cover the cost of inspecting the condition of the outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand area and all furnishings and documentation of the required indemnification and insurance. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-347. - Design standards. 
(a)  Outdoor dining area. 
(1)  The outdoor dining area shall be designed to facilitate sit down dining activity through the utilization of chairs and tables. It shall also be compact and shall be clearly delineated to promote a visual relationship between the dining area and the surrounding pedestrian areas. 
(2)  Outdoor dining is permitted only where the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed activity. A clear, continuous pedestrian path not less than four feet in width shall be required for unimpeded pedestrian circulation outside of the outdoor dining area. The minimum width of said pedestrian path may be increased by the public works director in areas requiring public utility access. As used herein, pedestrian path means a continuous obstruction-free sidewalk area between the outside boundary of the dining area and any obstruction including, but not limited to, parking meters, street trees, landscaping, street lights, bus benches, public art, and curb lines. 
(3)  No outdoor dining area shall be located so as to block access either to or from a building. A minimum unobstructed clearance which extends two feet to either side of both door jambs shall be maintained. 
(4)  Where an outdoor dining area is located on a corner, the outdoor dining area shall not be permitted within three feet of the corner of the building, along both frontages. Where an outdoor dining area is located adjacent to a driveway or an alley, the outdoor dining area shall not be permitted within five feet of the driveway or alley. These requirements may be modified at the discretion of the development services manager and/or public works director in locations where the sidewalk adjacent to the proposed outdoor dining area is wider than usual, where the perimeter of the building has an unusual configuration, or where public safety is at risk. 
(5)  The floor of the outdoor dining area shall be at the same level as the sidewalk, and no alterations to the sidewalk or coverings on the sidewalk shall be permitted, unless otherwise expressly approved by the city engineer. 
(6)  The outdoor dining area shall be accessible to the disabled. The buildings adjacent to these dining areas shall maintain building egress as defined by the California Building Code and State of California Title 24 Disabled Access standards. 
(7)  Permittee shall not expand its outdoor dining area onto the sidewalk frontage of an adjacent business unless permittee: 
a.  Submits an application, required information (including insurance), written consent of the property owner and the business owner of the adjacent space, and application fee; 
b.  Obtains the development services manager's approval of said application; and 
c.  Pays the annual usage rent for the permit. 
(8)  An outdoor dining area may be located directly adjacent to another outside dining area. 
(9)  In no case shall an outdoor dining area be located directly adjacent to parking, unless separated by a landscape barrier at least four feet deep and three feet high. 
(10)  The design and appearance of all proposed improvements or furniture, including but not limited to tables, chairs, benches, umbrellas, planters, and menu boards, to be placed in the sidewalk dining area shall present a coordinated and concerted theme and shall be compatible with the appearance and design of the principal building, as determined by the development services manager. 
(11)  A perimeter barrier shall be provided for the outdoor dining area. However, no barrier shall be required if the applicant proposes to limit the outdoor dining area to one row of tables and chairs abutting the wall of the establishment and if no alcohol will be served outside. 
(12)  All barriers shall complement the building facade as well as any street furniture and shall be between 24 inches and 36 inches in height. 
(13)  Barriers shall conform to the city engineer's installation standards and be removable. Barriers need not be removed each evening, but shall be capable of being removed, if needed, through the use of recessed sleeves and posts, or by wheels that can be locked into place. 
(14)  Barriers shall be able to withstand inclement outdoor weather and 100 pounds of horizontal force at the top of the barriers when in their fixed positions. 
(15)  Any modification to the surface of public sidewalks, such as borings for recessed sleeves, shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(16)  Heavy planters shall be clear of any access to basements and utility boxes or vaults. 
(17)  Objects placed on the sidewalk shall not interfere with safe line-of-sight distance. 
(18)  Any umbrellas, heaters, or similar feature used in an outdoor dining area shall be safely secured. All heaters shall be in compliance with the California Fire Code. 
(19)  The use of awnings over the outdoor dining area is permitted provided they do not interfere with street trees. No portion of an awning shall be less than eight feet above the sidewalk. Awnings may extend up to six feet from the building front or cover up to 50 percent of the outdoor dining area, whichever is less, but shall not extend beyond the sidewalk over the street curb. A building permit shall be obtained prior to installation of an awning. Signage on any awning shall meet the applicable sign development standards for the property and shall require a sign permit issued by the planning division. 
(20)  Outdoor lighting fixtures shall complement the style of the site. Lighting fixtures shall not create glare to pedestrians on the adjacent right-of-way and shall illuminate only the outdoor dining area. Outdoor lighting may be installed on the facade of the building or in the dining area in front of the facade. 
(21)  All signs shall be placed in a location which will not cause a tripping hazard for pedestrians or customers. Signage advertising alcohol products on umbrellas shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Outdoor newsstands. 
(1)  The location of all outdoor newsstands shall be approved by the development services manager. No outdoor newsstand shall be placed to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of the building wall window for display purposes, unless such a window is on the indoor portion of a newsstand facility. 
(2)  Outdoor newsstands shall not exceed four feet in depth, nine feet in height, and shall be between 25 and 100 feet in length. 
(3)  No outdoor newsstand shall be located closer than 500 feet to another outdoor newsstand. 
(4)  Outdoor newsstands shall be maintained at all times in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair and shall be constructed of a permanent material to the satisfaction of the building division. 
(5)  No outdoor newsstand shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that pertaining to the display, sale or purchase of newspapers or periodicals, as approved by the development services manager. 
(6)  Outdoor newsstands are permitted only where the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed activity. A clear, continuous pedestrian path not less than four feet in width shall be required for unimpeded pedestrian circulation outside of the newsstand area. The minimum width of said pedestrian path may be increased by the public works director in areas requiring public utility access. As used herein, pedestrian path means a continuous obstruction-free sidewalk area between the outside boundary of the newsstand area and any obstruction including, but not limited to, parking meters, street trees, landscaping, street lights, bus benches, public art, and curb lines. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-348. - Parking. 
Space used for outdoor dining on the public sidewalk shall not be added to the gross square footage of the food service establishment when calculating parking requirements. 
Off-street parking is not required for outdoor newsstands, as defined in section 46-342. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-349. - Standards of operation. 
All outdoor dining and outdoor newsstand uses shall conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Outdoor dining. 
(1)  The management of the eating establishment or food court shall be responsible for operating the outdoor dining area and shall not delegate or assign the responsibility. 
(2)  Hours of operation for outdoor dining areas are to coincide with those of the adjoining indoor restaurant. When the establishment ceases serving food for the day, further seating in the outdoor dining area shall be prohibited and the outdoor dining area shall close when those patrons already seated in it leave. 
(3)  The operator shall not permit the following outside of the building: food preparation, utensils, glasses, napkins, and condiments on unoccupied tables, busing service stations, or trash and garbage storage. All exterior surfaces within the outdoor dining area shall be easily cleaned and shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee. 
(4)  The permittee shall maintain the outdoor dining area and the adjoining street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk in a neat, clean, and orderly condition at all times. This shall include all tables, chairs, benches, displays, or other appurtenances placed in the public right-of-way. Provisions shall be made for trash receptacles to serve the sidewalk dining area, subject to the approval of the development services manager. The operator shall remove the debris to a closed receptacle. No debris shall be swept, washed, or blown into the sidewalk, gutter or street. 
(5)  If disposable materials are used, the establishment shall comply with all applicable city recycling programs. 
(6)  Plants shall be properly maintained; stressed or dying plants shall be promptly replaced. Because plant fertilizers contain materials that can stain the pavement, water drainage from any plants onto the adjacent right-of-way shall not be allowed. Potted plants shall have saucers or other suitable systems to retain seepage and be elevated to allow for air flow of at least one inch between saucer and sidewalk. 
(7)  Awnings and umbrellas shall be kept clean and in good condition at all times. Umbrellas shall not advertise alcohol products. 
(8)  All plans and permits for the outdoor dining area approved by the city shall be kept on the premises for inspection at all times when the establishment is open for business. 
(9)  Outdoor dining areas shall be operated in a manner that meets all requirements of the Los Angeles County Health Department and other applicable regulations. 
(10)  Musical instruments or sound reproduction systems are permitted in outdoor dining areas, but shall be maintained at sufficiently low volumes so as not to adversely affect the neighboring businesses, residents, or users of the public right-of-way beyond the outdoor dining area, or in violation of the city noise ordinance. 
(11)  Fixtures and equipment approved by the city pursuant to an outdoor dining area permit may remain in and on the sidewalk during such time that an outdoor dining area permit is in effect. 
(12)  Upon revocation or termination of an outdoor dining area permit, all fixtures and equipment shall immediately be removed from the sidewalk, and the sidewalk returned to its original condition. 
(b)  Outdoor newsstands. 
(1)  Except as authorized below, outdoor newsstands shall be exclusively used for the sale of periodicals, such as newspapers, magazines and other similar newsprint publications. The sale of ancillary items (e.g. sundries, candy, gum, etc.), as authorized by the development services manager, may also be permitted. All outdoor newsstands shall be required to be under the control and supervision of an attendant, who shall be over the age of 18 years and shall be responsible to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit and other laws relating to the operation of the outdoor newsstand. 
(2)  All sexually-oriented materials shall be sealed and placed in a display unit which contains a "blinder rack" and which is located adjacent to a cash register under the control and supervision of a newsstand attendant. All permittees shall comply with the requirements of Penal Code Section 313.1. Those outdoor newsstands which are permitted on public property shall require an "adult-oriented material display program" for the review, consideration and approval of the development services manager. All materials displayed must comply with all provisions of section 14.7-9. 
(3)  No seating fixtures, permanent or temporary, shall be allowed in conjunction with an outdoor newsstand. 
(4)  Upon revocation or termination of an outdoor newsstand permit, all fixtures and equipment shall immediately be removed from the sidewalk, and the sidewalk returned to its original condition. 
(5)  The permittee shall maintain the outdoor newsstand area and the adjoining street, curb, cutter, and sidewalk in a neat, clean, and orderly condition at all times. Provision shall be made for trash receptacles to serve the sidewalk newsstand area, subject to the approval of the development services manager. The operator shall remove the debris to a closed receptacle. No debris shall be swept, washed, or blown into the sidewalk, gutter or street. 
(6)  All permits, including building permits, shall be obtained for utilities. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-350. - Insurance. 
The permittee shall agree, in writing, to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officers and employees from and against all claims, losses, damage, injury, and liability for damages arising from the permittee's use of the public right-of-way. 
The applicant (permittee) shall obtain and maintain in force during the life of the outdoor dining area or outdoor newsstand permit comprehensive general liability, broad form property damage and blanket contractual liability insurance in a combined single limit amount, per claim and aggregate, of at least $1,000,000.00 covering the applicant's operations on the sidewalk or within the public right-of-way. Such insurance shall name, on a special endorsement form, the city, its elected, appointed boards, officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. A certificate of insurance shall contain provisions that prohibit cancellation, modification, and lapse without 30 days prior written notice to the city. Both the certificate of insurance and the completed special endorsement form shall be submitted with the completed application for an outdoor dining area or outdoor newsstand permit. 
The applicant (permittee) shall obtain and maintain in force during the life of the outdoor dining area or the outdoor newsstand permit worker's compensation insurance with statutory limits, and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per accident. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-351. - Special closures. 
The city shall have the right and power, acting through the city administrator or his/her designee, to prohibit the operation of an outdoor dining area or an outdoor newsstand at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk or right-of-way area. Such problems and conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, festivals, parades, marches and similar events, repairs and widening of the streets or sidewalks, or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior notice of any time period during which the operation of the outdoor dining area or the outdoor dining area or the outdoor newsstand shall be prohibited by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-352. - Violations of conditions—Revocation. 
If any portion of an outdoor dining area or an outdoor newsstand obstructs the public sidewalk or right-of-way beyond that which is provided for in this article, the community development director or his/her designee shall immediately direct the permittee to move the obstruction. If the permittee fails to do so, the city manager or his/her designee is entitled to immediately move the obstruction. 
If the sidewalk dining or outdoor newsstand area is not maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly condition, or as conditioned by the development services manager, the community development director or his/her designee shall direct that the permittee or property owner correct the condition and/or remove the furniture, displays, and appurtenances. If the community development director or designee finds that it is necessary to remove the furniture, displays, or appurtenances in the interest of the public health, safety, or general welfare immediately remove them at the expense of the permittee or property owner. 
An outdoor dining or an outdoor newsstand permit may be revoked by the community development director or designee following written notice being sent to the permittee by certified mail. The permit may be revoked if one or more conditions of the permit or of this article have been violated or if the outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand area is being operated in a manner of which constitutes a nuisance, or the operation of the outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand area unduly impedes or restricts the movement of pedestrians past the outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand area. Following revocation of an outdoor dining or outdoor newsstand permit, no application for the same site shall be filed within six months from the date of revocation. 
Decisions of the development and neighborhood services director or designee may be appealed to the planning commission. Decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
Unless otherwise indicated, all appeals shall be made in writing and state the reason(s) for appeal. Such appeals shall be filed with the planning division within five days of receipt of notice of revocation. The receipt of a written appeal shall stay all actions, or put in abeyance all permits or other discretionary approvals which may have been granted, pending the effective date of the decision of the planning commission or the city council. 
Appeals shall be scheduled for the earliest regular meeting of the hearing body, not less than 15 days or more than 45 days after the date of filing an appeal, consistent with the agenda preparation procedures and scheduling of the planning commission and the city council. All appeals shall be accompanied by a fee, set by resolution of the city council, sufficient to cover the cost of handling the request. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-353. - Special standards for outdoor dining areas with alcoholic beverage service. 
Alcoholic beverages may only be served in outside dining areas which are established in conjunction with a restaurant. For purposes of this section, a "restaurant" is a business operating within an enclosed building which has as its primary purpose the serving of meals prepared on the premises, which devotes the majority of its floor area to food preparation and dining where table service is provided, and where any bar or liquor service area shall be clearly subordinate in both the area of premises devoted to it and the share of gross receipts to the primary dining function of the restaurant. 
The outside dining area shall be clearly delineated from pedestrian traffic, and physically separated from the rest of the sidewalk by a barrier no greater than 36 inches and no less than 24 inches in height. The barrier shall conform with the design standards stipulated in section 28-507 of this article. 
The outdoor dining area must be immediately adjacent to and abutting the indoor restaurant, which provides it with food and beverage service. 
All entrances/exits of the outside dining area shall be posted with signs, subject to the approval of the development and neighborhood services director or designee, stating that consumption and/or carrying of an open container of alcohol beyond the outside dining area is prohibited and is unlawful. In addition, cards shall be placed on each table giving notice that removal of alcoholic beverages from the outdoor dining area is not allowed. 
No bar shall be allowed in the outside dining area. 
Empty beverage containers shall be removed from the outside dining area as soon as possible. 
A license shall be obtained from the department of alcoholic beverage control (ABC) prior to the operation of an outside dining area serving alcoholic beverages and shall be maintained continuously as long as alcoholic beverages are served in the outside dining area. Loss of such license shall automatically constitute termination of the city permit to serve alcoholic beverages in the outside dining area. 
The city manager shall suspend the use of the outside dining area and shall hold a hearing on the matter if an outside dining area serving alcoholic beverages is not operated as required by this article, or if the restaurant operator is not able to control patrons consuming alcoholic beverages to the extent that patrons demonstrate a pattern of behavior which includes, but is not limited to, the exhibition of loud, offensive, or abusive actions, the physical or verbal harassment of passersby or the removal of alcoholic beverages from the outside dining area. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 46-354. - Severability. 
If any section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this article or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective. 
Outdoor dining and outdoor newsstands are not permitted where the speed, volume or proximity of vehicular traffic is not compatible. All outdoor dining areas shall be adjacent to and incidental to an eating establishment or food court. Use of the sidewalk shall be confined to the actual sidewalk and public right-of-way frontage of the eating establishment or food court building. 
(Ord. No. 4222 , § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Secs. 46-355—46-380. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - BUS BENCH/ADVERTISING FRANCHISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, § 1301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 42. 
 
Sec. 46-381. - Criteria for granting. 
Nonexclusive franchises shall be granted by the city to approved applicants for the privilege of placing, constructing and maintaining benches or shelters with advertising on them at designated locations along the streets in the city. Criteria for awarding of franchise contracts shall be promulgated by the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-1; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-382. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bench means a seat located upon public property along the public way for the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation. 
Bench shelter means a freestanding three-sided structure designed for the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation utilized for the purpose of providing a protection. 
Grantee means a person granted a nonexclusive bus bench/shelter franchise pursuant to this article. 
Quarterly period means a period of three consecutive months. The quarters begin on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year. 
Street means any public thoroughfare or way, including the sidewalk, the parkway and other public property fronting a public way. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-2; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-383. - Benches or shelters prohibited. 
No person shall install or maintain any bench or shelter with advertising on it along any street in the city except in accordance with the provisions of the franchise granted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-3; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-384. - Payment of fees. 
For the privilege granted in the franchise pursuant to this article, the grantee shall pay to the city on a quarterly basis a fee per bus bench and/or shelter, and the fee shall be set by sealed bid. No later than the tenth day of the month following the close of each quarterly period, the grantee shall submit a report to the city treasurer stating the total number of benches and/or shelters in place on the last day of the preceding month and providing the following information for each bench or shelter: (i) the bench or shelter number, (ii) the bench or shelter location, (iii) the name of any business on abutting property, and (iv) the name of the advertiser on the bench or shelter. The fee shall be paid according to the number of benches or shelters in place on the last day of the quarterly period, whether or not there is advertising on them, and shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the close of the quarterly period. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-4; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-385. - Placement of benches or shelters. 
No bus benches or shelters shall be placed or installed under the provisions of the franchise granted under this article until the insurance policy and performance bond as specified in the franchise agreement are filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-5; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-386. - Advertising space. 
No advertisement or sign on any bus bench or shelter shall display the words, "stop," "look," "drive-in," "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character that might interfere with, mislead or distract traffic. No bus bench or shelter shall be placed in an area zoned residential without the prior permission of the public works director. Such permission shall be given upon a showing that the bench or shelter will not constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-6; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-387. - Approval of location. 
Bus benches or shelters shall be placed, maintained and relocated as required by the city manager. The benches or shelters are designed for the convenience of those using the buses in the city and shall be placed upon the streets traversed by public transit buses in the city. The benches or shelters may not be installed at any place except public carrier stops except with the express approval of the public works director. Such permission shall be given upon a showing that the bench or shelter will not be a nuisance and a further showing that there is a need for the bench or shelter. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-7; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-388. - Maintenance of benches or shelters. 
All bus benches or shelters must be cleaned regularly when needed and must be maintained in good repair in a safe and sightly condition. All trash and other debris shall regularly and when needed be removed from around the bench or shelter. The franchise grantee shall inspect each bench or shelter periodically to ensure full compliance with this section. The city manager's decision as to the state of repair and condition of the benches or shelters shall be conclusive. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-8; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-389. - Placement of benches or shelters. 
Specifications and regulations pertaining to placement of bus benches or shelters on city property, including distances from curbs and intersections, as well as bench or shelter design and structural requirements shall be promulgated by the public works director and included in the franchise agreement. Such requirements shall be designed to further public safety and avoid the creation of nuisances. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-9; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-390. - Inspection of books. 
The city shall have the right at all reasonable times to examine all books, papers, and records of the grantee to verify the statements or reports required and for any other purpose connected with this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-10; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-391. - Transfer of assignment. 
Franchises granted pursuant to this article may not be sold, transferred, assigned or otherwise disposed of, without prior written consent of the city council. The council may grant or deny any request and may impose conditions as it deems to be in the public interest. Any attempted disposition made without the council's consent shall be void. 
(Code 1959, § 11.2-11; Ord. No. 3606, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 46-392—46-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - NEWSRACKS 
 
Sec. 46-421. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial distributor means a distributor who owns or operates any newsracks primarily for pecuniary profit. 
Distributor means the person or entity who owns or operates any newsracks located in the right-of-way in the city, or located so as to attempt to utilize or take advantage of the right-of-way, or who places, or maintains, or is responsible for, or directs the placing or maintenance of such a newsrack. 
Newsrack means any type of self-service device installed, used, or maintained upon any public right-of-way for the display, sale, or free distribution of newspapers, periodicals, or publications. 
Public right-of-way means any public street, highway, sidewalk, parkway, or alley. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7-2; Ord. No. 2869, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4055, § 1, 2-13-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-422. - Purpose and criteria. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the regulation of placement, appearance, servicing and insuring of newsracks on public rights-of-way so as to: 
(1)  Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience; 
(2)  Restrict the unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles. 
(3)  Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes and access to locations used for public transportation purposes; 
(4)  Eliminate newsracks which may result in a visual blight on the public rights-of-way or which may unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements; 
(5)  Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties; 
(6)  Reduce unnecessary exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage claims; and 
(7)  Provide for and maintain the freedom of speech for newspapers or news periodicals using newsracks for distribution purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7-1; Ord. No. 2869, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-423. - Permit required; application fee; written appeal of denial of permit application; business license tax. 
(a)  No person shall place, affix, erect, construct, or maintain a newsrack upon any public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit in accordance with this article. 
(b)  One permit application shall be required for each distributor per location regardless of the number of newsracks proposed to be installed at the time of application, provided that all newsracks proposed for that location are included in the application. A permit application shall be filed with the director of public works upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by the director, along with the permit fee. Should a distributor desire to add additional newsracks at a later date, to a location for which a permit has already been issued, an additional permit application and permit fee shall be required prior to the installation of any additional newsrack(s). 
(c)  Permit applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's newsrack(s); 
(3)  The number of newsracks and the exact proposed location of each newsrack shown on an eight and one-half-inch by 11 inch diagram and identifying all items in the public right-of-way, including but not limited to bus benches, street poles and posts, fire hydrants, fire call boxes, driveways, wheelchair ramps, crosswalks, curb returns, buildings, landscaping, other newsracks, and any other public or private improvements within a 20 feet radius of the proposed location; 
(4)  The date that said newsrack(s) is proposed to be installed; and 
(5)  A statement that the applicant agrees, upon expiration or revocation of the permit, or in the event that the newsrack must be removed due to either public or private improvements of the location where the newsrack is located, to immediately restore the public right-of-way to its condition existing prior to the installation of the newsrack(s). 
(d)  Each applicant shall also execute a document, approved as to form by the city attorney, agreeing to indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees and agents free and harmless from any claims, demands, liability, damage or judgments in favor of any person, arising out of or in any way connected with the placement, installation, use or maintenance of any newsrack within the city. The sole exception to this duty to indemnify, defend and hold harmless is for those claims caused solely by the negligence or willful misconduct of the city or its agents. 
(e)  If an application or portion of an application for a permit required under this article is denied by the director of public works, written justification shall be sent to the applicant stating the reasons for the denial, including any applicable factors set forth in section 46-424. 
(f)  Following a notice denying issuance of a permit from the director of public works, the denial can be appealed within ten days of receipt of the written confirmation of such decision. The following appeal procedure shall apply: 
(1)  The applicant shall make every effort to resolve any issues with the director of public works. 
(2)  If the director of public works cannot resolve the conflict, the applicant may submit written justification and other evidence to the city manager. 
(3)  The city manager or his or her designee shall review the stated reasons for the denial by the director of public works and the written justification for appeal submitted by the applicant. Within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal, the city manager shall affirm, overrule or modify the denial of a permit. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(g)  Approval of a newsrack permit by the director of public works shall not in any event constitute an easement on or an encumbrance against the public right-of-way. No right, title or interest in the public property upon, in or over which the newsrack is located, or any part thereof, shall vest or accrue in the distributor or owner of the newsrack by reason of approval of a newsrack permit by the director of public works. 
(h)  Upon issuance of a newsrack permit, commercial distributors shall submit a business license application to the city treasurer and pay a business license tax as set forth in section 50-412(9)b. of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7-3; Ord. No. 2869, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-424. - General placement. 
Subject to the prohibitions set forth in section 46-426, newsracks shall be placed adjacent and parallel to the wall of a building and not less than six inches nor more than 18 inches from the wall, unless the city determines that placement near a building is not suitable, in which case the city may authorize placement near a curb. Newsracks placed near the curb must be placed parallel to and no less than 18 inches nor more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7-4; Ord. No. 2869, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-425. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  Stands for newsracks shall be single-pedestal, K-Jack Style Mounts Model 100 or equivalent. 
(b)  Newsracks shall have wood-grain panels, and the mount shall be painted gloss black. 
(c)  Newsracks shall carry no advertising except the name of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed on the bottom one-third of the hood. 
(d)  No more than six newsracks shall be mounted on any one modular unit. 
(e)  Newsracks shall be maintained in good working order at all times, freshly painted and with unbroken hoods. 
(f)  The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person who may be contacted at any time concerning the newsrack shall be displayed on the hood of the newsrack in such a manner as to be readily visible and readable to a prospective customer thereof. 
(g)  Mounts shall be bolted in place in accordance with specifications provided by the department of public works. Such specifications shall be designed to securely hold the mounts in place. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7-5; Ord. No. 2869, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-426. - Prohibitions. 
No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained: 
(1)  Within five feet of any marked crosswalk. 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk. 
(3)  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire callbox, police callbox, or other emergency facility. 
(4)  Within five feet of any driveway. 
(5)  Within five feet ahead of and 15 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop. 
(6)  Within five feet of any bus bench. 
(7)  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet. 
(8)  On or within three feet of any area improved with lawn, ground cover, flowers, shrubs, or trees. 
(9)  Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window display purpose. 
(10)  Facing another newsrack divided only by the width of a sidewalk or pedestrian walk. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7-6; Ord. No. 2869, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2885, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-427. - Removal. 
(a)  Nonconforming newsrack. Any newsrack in violation of any section of this article will have a notice of violation attached by the city reciting the nature of the violation. Any newsrack installed, used, or maintained in violation of any of the sections of this article may be removed after a notice of violation has been securely affixed to the newsrack and after a hearing is held as provided in this subsection. The notice of violation shall provide that the newsrack is in violation of this article in stated particulars, that a hearing shall be held by the director of public works on that date and time and place set forth in the notice of violation, and that the newsrack shall be removed if it is found to be in violation. The director of public works shall determine at the hearing whether the newsrack is in violation of this article, and if he so determines his decision shall be final. The newsrack shall be removed or made to comply within five days after the decision of the director of public works is mailed to the owner of the newsrack, addressed to the name and address which has been affixed to the newsrack as provided in section 46-525(f). If the owner does not appear at the hearing or if his name and address are not affixed to the newsrack, the newsrack shall be removed without the necessity of notice of the determination being given as provided in this subsection. If any newsrack is situated on a public right-of-way in such a manner as to immediately jeopardize the health and safety of motorists or pedestrians, the newsrack can be immediately removed and stored, provided that notice of such action is given thereafter to the owner of the newsrack, if such is known, before disposition thereof. 
(b)  Abandonment. If any newsrack installed pursuant to this article does not contain the publication specified in the application therefor, within a period of 48 hours after release of the current issue, the director of public works may deem the newsrack abandoned and may thereafter remove the newsrack from the public right-of-way in accordance with the procedure set out in subsection (a) of this section. In addition a newsrack shall be deemed abandoned when no publication is in the newsrack for a period of more than seven consecutive days. If a permittee of a newsrack desires to voluntarily abandon a newsrack location, the permittee shall completely remove the newsrack and mount and restore the public right-of-way to a safe condition, leaving no holes or projections in the pavement. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7-7; Ord. No. 2869, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 46-428. - Display of certain matter prohibited. 
No publication offered for sale from any newsrack placed or installed in, maintained on, or relocated to any public sidewalk or parkway shall be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from the street any of the following: 
(1)  Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. 
(2)  Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses, or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront. 
(3)  Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront. The term "explicit sexual acts" means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of such conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person's genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7-9; Ord. No. 3028, § 1)  
Sec. 46-429. - Return of impounded newsracks. 
Unless the newsrack and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution, any newsrack removed and stored pursuant to this article shall be claimed by the owner thereof within 30 days after the date of the hearing set forth in the notice of violation attached to the nonconforming newsrack, as provided in subsection 46-427(a) of this article, upon providing satisfactory proof of ownership and payment of an impound and daily storage fee in an amount equal to the reasonable cost to the city of removing and storing the newsrack, as provided by resolution of the city council. Any newsrack that remains unclaimed after the expiration of 30 days shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the city and may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4055, § 3, 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-430. - Additional newsrack restrictions. 
The director of public works may identify locations within the city, typically identified as a block or blocks of a particular street, requiring additional restrictions for newsracks beyond the requirements set forth in the preceding sections of this article, including but not limited to the placing of restrictions on the number of newsracks at any one location, based on but not limited to the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and welfare, as provided in section 46-422 of this article, and in order to preserve the unique aesthetic and historical attributes of the particular area. 
(Ord. No. 4055, § 4, 2-13-2006)  
Sec. 46-431. - Applicability of this article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all newsracks, whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of its provisions. Newsracks installed prior to the effective date of any provision enacted hereunder shall be brought into compliance with this article within 90 days of the effective date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4055, § 5, 2-13-2006)  
Secs. 46-432—46-460. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - STREET TREES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Tree Planting Act of 1931, Streets and Highways Code § 22000 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-461. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the parks and recreation commission. 
Maintain and maintenance include the entire care of trees, as well as the preparation of grounds, fertilizing, mulching, spraying, trimming, pruning, topping and root control, but not watering unless specifically so stated. 
Mixed pattern means all proper spaces filled with trees of approved varieties. 
Plan means the master street tree plan of the city. 
Planting, when used in a comprehensive sense, includes planting and replacement. 
Planting strip means that area capable of being planted between the curb or the place where the curb should be and the property line, and such squares and places as traffic divider strips or islands. 
Uniform pattern means all proper spaces filled with trees of the same approved varieties. 
(Code 1959, § 18-35; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2666, § 1; Ord. No. 2675, § 16) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-462. - Scope of article. 
This article is intended to and does give full advisory authority to the parks and recreation commission over any and all trees, plants and shrubs planted and growing or to be planted and grown upon any and all of the public streets and planting strips in the city, subject to final approval of the council. 
(Code 1959, § 18-47; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Sec. 46-463. - Coordination with other departments and agencies. 
(a)  For the purpose of coordination and facilitating the carrying out of all street improvements with the proper provision for multiple uses, all plans and specifications for street planting proposed by the parks and recreation commission shall be submitted to the planning department and the director of public works/city engineer for their recommendations. Their recommendations shall take precedence as to the construction, reconstruction and maintenance of any street; providing, however, that all due regard and provision shall be made in any plan for the keeping of existing trees in a healthy condition. The recommendations shall be made within 30 days after receipt of plans and specifications from the commission. If the department of public works and planning division take no action within the time specified, their inaction shall be deemed to mean approval. 
(b)  For the purpose of facilitating a program of improvement and development of subdivision tracts and fringe areas, the commission shall invite suggestions from and shall cooperate with all city departments, with the street tree and beautification committee and all other groups interested in city beautification. 
(Code 1959, § 18-46; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2675, § 21)  
Sec. 46-464. - Street tree plan. 
(a)  The parks and recreation commission shall develop and recommend to the council a comprehensive plan for the planting and maintaining of trees in the streets within the city. This plan shall be referred to as the "street tree plan" and shall be officially certified as the master street tree plan upon its adoption by the council. 
(b)  The commission is hereby charged with the duty of advising the community services director and the council concerning the types and varieties of trees for planting along the streets. Recommendations as to a uniform method of street tree planting, the zoning of certain streets for certain specimens of trees, selecting suitable types for residential areas and special types of trees for commercial areas, intervals between such trees and the place where each tree is to be planted shall be made by the commission after consultation with competent authorities. Prior to such determination the commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be by postcard to the affected property owners or by newspaper publication at least ten days in advance, giving the time and place of the hearing. When such determination has been made, the commission shall report its determination in writing to the director in a report to be designated "Master Street Tree Plan, Pomona, California." Such report, when endorsed by the director, shall be forwarded to the council for approval by resolution and placed on file in the office of the city clerk. After such filing the report shall be the official determination of the street trees for that block. Such report, if not endorsed by the director within 30 days, may be presented directly to the council as a recommendation of the commission. Prior to presentation of a master street tree plan, segmented street tree plans may be presented and approved by the commission and the council. After the acceptance of the master street tree plan, subsequent reports covering the same subject, each of which shall be complete in itself, shall also be filed in the office of the city clerk and become a part of the master street tree plan. 
(c)  The commission, with the assistance of the department of public works and the planning division, shall from time to time prepare subsequent plans which shall designate, by means of a complete map of the city streets, zoning of certain streets, for certain specimens of trees. 
(d)  When the plan in its original or modified form is adopted by resolution of the council, it shall become the official master street tree plan for the city streets and shall be strictly adhered to in all future street planning projects unless modified by subsequent resolution. 
(e)  The parks division shall maintain a current list of approved ground covers and plantings for planting strips. Use of plant materials other than those listed shall be by prior approval of the director of community services. No planting, construction or excavating which endangers pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be permitted in planting strips. No surfacing material, such as asphalt, gravel, etc., may be used without prior approval of the public works director. No vines or other plant materials shall be allowed to grow on any street tree. The placing of temporary protection for new lawns or trees or the provision of watering basins shall not be considered a violation of this section. 
(f)  It shall be the consistent purpose of the commission to encourage and develop the planting of the proper type of trees along all the city streets. The commission may recommend the removal and replacement of trees which do not conform with the approved pattern. Prior to such recommendation being made, the commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be by postcard to affected property owners or by newspaper publication at least ten days in advance, giving the time and place of the hearing to consider removal or replacement of trees along any one block. Trees shall be planted at proper intervals. The commission shall recommend the planting of trees in all vacant spaces, and a replacement of an approved variety shall be planted for each tree and shrub which is removed, to conform with and to develop the approved pattern. 
(g)  Any changes in the streets, including alterations in street widths or rezoning of areas, shall include allowances for planting areas and specifications for planting and landscaping of such areas. The planting and landscaping of such areas shall be integrated into such changes and alterations before the alterations and changes are approved or made. 
(h)  When the planting strip is situated between the inside edge of the sidewalk and the property line, an easement of six feet behind the sidewalk shall be retained or obtained where possible. Where easements are granted in this pattern, trees may be planted therein. 
(i)  A petition addressed to the commission bearing the signature of not less than 51 percent of the property owners of any one block may be filed with the commission, requesting a change in the approved variety of trees in the planting strip adjacent to their property. Should such a change be granted all expenses of such change shall be borne by all the petitioning property owners requesting such change; all such work shall be done under the supervision of the director of community services. 
(j)  The city hereby assumes full responsibility for a replacement of trees program whereby all trees along city streets throughout the city shall be removed by the park division if such trees are found by the director of community services to be dead, diseased or in a dangerous condition likely to cause damage not due to negligence. The city, at its own expense and in accordance with this article, shall replace all trees so removed. The number of trees to be planted or replaced shall be determined by the director of community services upon recommendation of the commission. 
(Code 1959, § 18-37; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2666, § 3; Ord. No. 2675, § 3)  
Sec. 46-465. - Proceedings under state law. 
A proceeding under the Tree Planting Act of 1931 (Streets and Highways Code § 22000 et seq.) for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees may be instituted by a petition to the city council by property owners whose property will be assessed to pay for the cost of the proposed improvement. 
(Code 1959, § 18-38; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Sec. 46-466. - Appeals. 
Appeals to the parks and recreation commission from orders of the director of community services may be made by filing a written notice thereof with the city clerk within seven days after such order is received, stating in substance that the appeal is being made from such order to the commission. The appeal shall clearly specify the reasons for which a hearing by the commission is requested. The city clerk shall thereupon forward the appeal to the commission at its next regular meeting, at which time the appellant and the director of community services may present evidence. Action taken by the commission after such hearing shall be conclusive and final. 
(Code 1959, § 18-41; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2675, § 16; Ord. No. 2713, § 2)  
Sec. 46-467. - Permit required to trim or remove; insurance of tree movers; interfering with city employees; injury or destruction; watering; placing tree stakes and guards. 
(a)  No person shall, without a written permit from the director of community services, remove, trim, prune or cut any tree upon the streets or planting strips. Such a permit shall be issued upon a showing of need and a further showing that there will be compliance with all ordinances. Upon such permit being granted to any person for the purpose of trimming, pruning, cutting or removing any trees, such trimming, pruning, cutting or removal shall be done under the general supervision of the director of community services. All stumps, including underground portions to a depth specified by the director of community services, shall be removed. 
(b)  Any person engaged in the business of removing city trees shall carry adequate public liability and property damage insurance, the amount to be fixed by the director of community services before the permit is issued. The insurance coverage so fixed shall be adequate to meet all potential liabilities. Such policies or certificates shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  No person shall interfere or cause or permit any person to interfere with city employees who are engaged in the planting or maintaining, treating or removing of any tree in the planting strip or in the removing of any stone, cement or any substance in any such street, sidewalk, planting strip, alley or other public place in conjunction with tree planting or removal. 
(d)  No unauthorized person shall willfully injure or destroy any tree or plant material in the planting strip areas by any means, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Constructing a Portland cement, brick or other approved sidewalk or otherwise filling up the ground area around any tree so as to shut off light, air or water from the roots. 
(2)  Piling building material, equipment or other substance around any tree so as to cause injury. 
(3)  Pouring any deleterious matter on or around any tree or on the ground around it or on any lawn in such a manner as to damage the tree. 
(4)  Posting any sign on any tree, tree stake or guard; provided, however, that warning and parking signs and official notices of the city may, with the permission of and under the supervision of the director of community services, be installed on tree trunks which are suitably located. 
(5)  Injuring any tree, tree stake or guard with any vehicle, animal or in any other manner causing injury to any tree or lawn. The cost of repair of damage shall be borne by the responsible party or the owner of abutting property, where the person responsible for damage is not known. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of abutting property to water street trees adequately, except where tree death is due to inadequate watering due to compliance with government-imposed water use restrictions, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The abutting property owner shall bear the expense of replacement of street trees where death is a result of insufficient water. 
(2)  Subdividers and their successors in interest shall be responsible for street tree watering and for replacement of trees where death is a result of insufficient watering prior to the time subsequent owners take possession of the property. 
(f)  Tree stakes or guards may be placed around trees by property owners, provided the stakes or guards are placed near a tree for the purpose of protecting or training such trees. 
(Code 1959, § 18-39; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2675, § 14)  
Sec. 46-468. - Infested or infected trees; inspection and removal of trees, shrubs or plants. 
(a)  The director of community services may order that any tree infested or infected be treated. If any trees are so infested or infected to such a degree that the conditions cannot be eradicated by treatment, the director of community services may order their removal and replacement from the officially approved list, after giving the affected property owners a notice in writing, at least ten days in advance, of the necessity for such removal or replacement. 
(b)  The director of community services shall also inspect any and all shrubs and plants which are in any city right-of-way or standing on any private property to determine whether any of shrubs and plants or any part thereof appears to be dead, liable to fall, dangerous or an obstruction to public travel. All such conditions are a public nuisance. If any tree, shrub or plant in any street in the city or any tree, shrub or plant standing on any private property overhanging or projecting into any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way appears to be dead, liable to fall, dangerous or an obstruction to public travel, the director of community services may cause the tree, shrub or plant or such part thereof as is dead, liable to fall, dangerous or an obstruction to public travel to be cut down and, if in the street, sidewalk or public right-of-way, to be removed therefrom. However, except for manifest danger to the public and immediate necessity, no trees or shrubs standing on any private property shall be cut down or removed unless ten days' notice, in writing, is given by the director of community services to the owner or occupant of such property. If the owner or occupant or agent of the owner or occupant of such property, within seven days after the receipt of such notice, files with the city clerk his objections, in writing, to such removal, such tree or shrub shall not be cut down or removed unless the director of community services gives such owner or occupant a reasonable opportunity to be heard in support of such objection and thereafter approves, in writing, the removal of the tree or shrub, if the objection is not sustained. 
(c)  Nothing in subsection (b) of this section shall be deemed to impose any liability upon any member of the commission or upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees nor to relieve the owner and/or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep trees and shrubs upon private property or under his control in safe condition. 
(Code 1959, § 18-40; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2675, § 15) 
State Law reference— Authority to define nuisance, Government Code § 38771.  
Sec. 46-469. - Procedure to impose lien on property for removal of hazardous and nuisance trees. 
If the director of community services or the parks and recreation commission, on appeal, does not sustain the objection of the owner or occupant pursuant to section 46-568 and the city removes the tree or shrub or otherwise abates the hazard which constitutes a nuisance, the cost of such removal or abatement shall be a lien upon the property upon which the tree or shrub was growing. The director of community services shall keep an itemized account of the expense involved in such abatement. He shall submit this itemized statement to the city clerk who shall send, by first class certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the statement to the person owning the land along with the notice of the time and place when and where the statement shall be submitted to the city council for approval and confirmation. At such time the city council shall consider any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by the property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such work, after which, by resolution, the report, as submitted or as ordered revised, corrected or modified by the city council, shall be confirmed and adopted. If the statement is not paid within 15 days after the passing of the resolution, it shall constitute a lien on the real property upon which the tree, shrub or plant was growing and shall be collected as a special assessment against the real property. The resolution shall further direct that the city clerk shall file with the county auditor and the county assessor and tax collector certified copies of the resolution and the statement adopted therein. The clerk shall direct the auditor to enter the amount of the charges against the real property described in the statement and resolution as it appears on the current assessment roll. The tax collector shall include the amount of the charges on the bills for taxes levied against the real property. Thereafter, the amount of the charge shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same person as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest upon delinquent payment. Abatement expenses shall be collected pursuant to Government Code § 38773.1 or 38773.5. 
(Code 1959, § 18-41.5; Ord. No. 2713, § 1) 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement authorized, Government Code § 38773.  
Sec. 46-470. - Maintenance of poles and wires in street. 
Any person having a right to maintain poles and wires in streets, alleys, planting strips and other public places shall keep such poles and wires free and away from any trees or shrubs, as far as possible, and shall, under the direction and supervision of the director of community services, properly trim such trees or shrubs so that no damage is done, including aesthetic, either to poles, wires, trees or shrubs, by contact therewith. 
(Code 1959, § 18-42; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2675, § 17)  
Sec. 46-471. - Damages. 
Where injury has been done to trees, shrubs, plant material, or other property, the city, through the office of the director of finance, shall bill and collect from the offending party all damages sustained by the city which shall include the cost of repair or replacement of trees and shrubs and other incidental expenses necessary to rectify the damage. 
(Code 1959, § 18-43; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Secs. 46-472—46-495. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATERING TREES LOCATED IN PLANTING STRIPS 
 
Sec. 46-496. - Required. 
All trees in planting strips in the city shall be watered as necessary by the owners of the property in front of which they are growing so that they do not become a hazard to public health, welfare and safety and dangerous to human life as a result of withering and dying and falling over due to lack of proper and regular watering. Failure to comply with this section is a nuisance. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44; Ord. No. 1723, § 2) 
State Law reference— Authority to define nuisance, Government Code § 38771.  
Sec. 46-497. - Unwatered trees declared nuisance. 
All trees in planting strips of the city which are dying due to lack of water are determined to be hazardous to public health, welfare and safety and dangerous to human life and are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and hazard which, in public interest and necessity, requires that such nuisance and hazard be abated by procedures specified in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.1; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Sec. 46-498. - Examination of trees; watering and posting notice. 
The director of community services shall examine or cause to be examined all trees growing in the planting strips of the city. Where such examination reveals that a tree is withered or dying because of the lack of water, it shall be watered by the examiner without charge to the owner, and at the same time the following notice shall be securely fastened to the tree at eye level with the title in block letters one inch high: 
"NOTICE BY CITY OF POMONA OF INTENTION TO COMMENCE WATERING SERVICE." 
"The owner of this tree is hereby notified that this tree was examined by a representative of the parks division on the date indicated below and found to require immediate watering. The owner is further notified that such failure to regularly water a tree which is situated on front of his property and in a city planting strip (parkway or right-of-way) of the city is a direct violation of this Code and pursuant to this Code this tree was watered on the date below without charge but commencing ten days from the date this tree will be watered regularly as necessary by the city and a fee based upon the cost of water used, the construction of adequate basins around such tree, and the overhead costs of the assessment, shall be charged to the owner, unless the owner sets forth in writing to the director of community services, within ten days, by stating that he intends to properly and regularly water the tree. 
Signed _____ 
Parks Division 
City of Pomona 
Dated _____ ." 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.2; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2675, § 18)  
Sec. 46-499. - Listing and posting notice on trees examined. 
The parks division shall maintain a list of all trees which have been examined and posted pursuant to this division. A notice shall be mailed giving seven days' notice of the intention to commence watering service at the specified location, pursuant to this Code, to each person to whom any parcel of real property, in front of which the tree is growing, is assessed in the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the notice is mailed at the address shown on the assessment roll. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.3; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Sec. 46-500. - Fees for watering service. 
If no written statement or protest is filed with the director of community services within ten days of the original posting or within seven days of the mailing of the notice pursuant to this division, whichever date is later, regular watering of the tree as deemed necessary by the parks division to bring it out of a state of decline will be commenced and the owner charged for each watering as required. The fees or charges for each tree watering shall be those which the council may from time to time determine, fix and establish by resolution duly adopted by it. Such fees or charges may be changed by the council from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.4; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2675, § 19)  
Sec. 46-501. - Withholding watering service pending performance of declared intention to regularly water trees. 
Under this division, where the property owner by written statement protests commencement of tree watering service by the city by setting forth that he intends to properly and regularly water the tree, the contemplated watering service will be withheld by the city pending faithful performance of the declared intention of the property owner. If any noncompliance is discovered during periodic inspections, watering service will be commenced without further notice, and a charge will be made for each watering as required. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.5; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Sec. 46-502. - Special assessment for fees for watering service. 
The fees for the watering of trees pursuant to this division shall be charged to the owner of the land involved as a special assessment on the land and shall be a lien on the land until paid. The charges shall be collected on the tax roll in the same manner and by the same persons and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, general taxes. The director of community services is directed to prepare a written report and file it with the city clerk on or before July 15 each year. The report shall contain a description of each parcel of real property receiving such service and the amount of the charge for each parcel for the year, computed in conformity with the charges prescribed by resolution based upon this division. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.6; Ord. No. 1723, § 2; Ord. No. 2675, § 20)  
Sec. 46-503. - Notice of hearing on reports of special assessments. 
The city clerk shall cause notice of the filing of the report provided for in section 46-602 and of a time and place of hearings thereon to be posted on the bulletin board in the foyer of the city hall at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.7; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Sec. 46-504. - Hearing of reports of special assessments. 
At the time stated in the notice in section 46-503, the council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report referred to in the notice. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any charge or overrule any or all objections and shall make its determination upon each charge as described in the report, which determination shall be final. Such charges may be collected pursuant to Government Code § 38775.2 or Government Code § 38773. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.8; Ord. No. 1723, § 2) 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement authorized, Government Code § 38773.  
Sec. 46-505. - Filing assessment of fees for watering service. 
Following the final determination made pursuant to section 46-604, the city clerk shall file with the county auditor and tax assessor and collector a copy of the report with a statement endorsed thereon over his signature that it has been finally adopted by the city council, and the auditor shall enter the amount of the charges against the respective lots or parcels as they appear on the current assessment roll. The amount of the charge shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which the charge has been imposed. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.9; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Sec. 46-506. - Collection of fees on tax bill. 
Pursuant to this division, the tax collector shall include the amount of the charges on bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land. Thereafter, the amount of the charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same persons as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city and shall be delinquent at the same time and thereafter be subject to the same delinquency penalties. 
(Code 1959, § 18-44.10; Ord. No. 1723, § 2)  
Secs. 46-507—46-540. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS, GATHERINGS AND LECTURERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Permit for gatherings or assembly, § 38-76. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-541. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Event means any public exhibition, public gathering, lecturer or lecture; also referred to as "special event." 
Exclusive temporary use means that the event will cause one or more of the following circumstances to exist: 
(1)  The public place and/or right-of-way is temporarily closed to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Access to the public place and/or right-of-way will be restricted temporarily to participants of the event. 
(3)  The public place and/or right-of-way is temporarily designated as having a specific private use. 
Lecturer means any person or his duly authorized representative who engages in, practices, or conducts, at or within any public place, except when within and in conjunction with a place holding a valid license to operate such business, the avocation, occupation, business or profession of exhibiting, lecturing on, or demonstrating, whether by word of mouth, use of models, samples, charts, slides, still pictures, moving pictures, or in any manner whatsoever, any procedure, process, remedy, promotion, or product, commercial or otherwise, which is purported to be beneficial in any manner whatsoever to mankind or any other living creature. 
Public exhibition means any display or showing of works of art, war trophies or war relics, or any display, animate or inanimate, whatsoever, or any boxing exhibition, wrestling match, circus, fair, carnival, road show, public dance, street dance, fiesta parade, concert or entertainment to which the public is admitted or invited, at which an admission fee is charged on admission, through the sale of tickets or in any manner whatsoever, or at which the admission is free of charge. 
Public gathering means any celebration, parade, service, or assembly for any purpose whatsoever, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public building, or parkway. 
Public place and right-of-way mean any and all publicly owned improvements, including public facilities, streets, sidewalks and alleyways, with the exception of park facilities. 
(Code 1959, § 24-2; Ord. No. 3649, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3866, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-542. - Penalty. 
Any person or his duly authorized representative who conducts, operates, manages, stages, or causes, permits or allows to be conducted, operated, managed, or staged in or at any public place any public exhibition, public gathering, lecture, or event, without first having filed an application with the community development director in the manner prescribed in this article and issued a permit therefor is guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any penalties imposed by a court of law, there shall be assessed an additional 100 percent of the fixed permit fee for such event, which penalty shall be added thereto and shall be collected therewith from the duly authorized representative and/or person. 
(Code 1959, § 24-8; Ord. No. 3649, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 46-543—46-560. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 46-561. - Required. 
Every person who conducts, operates, manages, stages, or causes, permits or allows to be conducted, operated, managed or staged, in or at any exhibition, gathering, or lecture, which would require the exclusive temporary use of the public right-of-way or other public place in the city, shall first file an application for a special event permit as provided by the city with the community development director in the manner prescribed in this division and shall be issued a special event permit therefor prior to conducting the public exhibition, gathering, or lecture. 
(Code 1959, § 24-1; Ord. No. 3649, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3866, § 1; Ord. No. 4015, § 1, 11-1-2004)  
Sec. 46-562. - Application contents. 
(a)  Any person or his duly authorized representative who applies for a special event permit to conduct, operate, manage or stage any public exhibition, public gathering, or lecture shall file, at least four weeks prior to the event, an application for a special event permit as provided by the city with the community development director, signed under penalty of perjury, and setting forth information which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of his duly authorized representative, if any. 
(3)  A statement regarding the kind, type or nature of the exhibition, gathering, or lecture. 
(4)  The address of the last place, if any, where such event was held. 
(5)  The name, business address and description of the agency, benefit, or cause, if any, which is sponsoring or which will be the beneficiary therefrom. 
(6)  The percentage allotment of proceeds to such agency, benefit or cause. 
(7)  The name of the insurance carrier; the amount of personal and property liability, naming the city as an additional insured, carried together with the name of the nearest representative and his business address. 
(8)  The place where such event will be held. 
(9)  The date when such event is to be held. 
(b)  The applicant or his duly authorized representative shall provide adequate policing or security from a reputable private security firm which is in compliance with all state and federal regulations at his own expense and shall arrange with the chief of police for police officers or show proof that arrangements have been made for adequate security from a private security firm and that such arrangements will provide security at all times such event is being conducted. If police officers are contracted for by the applicant and can be provided, the applicant shall pay to the community development director, at the time of making application, an amount necessary to cover the expense of such policing, which amount shall be in accordance with the rate per police officer established by resolution of the city council. No permit shall be issued until after complete compliance with this subsection. 
(Code 1959, § 24-3; Ord. No. 3649, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3866, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 46-563. - Review procedures; waiver of fee. 
(a)  An application for a permit to conduct, operate, manage or stage any exhibition, gathering, or lecture and accompanied by a certified check in an amount equal to the fixed permit fee shall be filed with the community development department. Such application shall be referred to the fire chief, police chief, director of public works, director of community development, director of community services and the human resources/risk management director for approval or disapproval. If a favorable report is returned by all departments, the community development director may then issue a permit as requested or with such conditions as may appropriately and reasonably be imposed to ensure the safety and security of the event. The provisions of section 46-564 shall establish the criteria for evaluating all applications. 
(b)  One copy of the application shall be kept on file in the community development department, and one copy shall be filed with the fire department, the police department and the human resources/risk management director. 
(c)  The fixed permit fee, along with insurance fees, use of public facilities fees, and other related fees, may be waived by the community development director, or by the community services director when an event is conducted in a city park, for indigent persons; bona fide incorporated religious institutions, churches, military and veteran organizations of the state or the United States; religious, state and local school systems; and Pomona-based nonprofit organizations that hold a valid designation under 26 USC 501(c)(3) or its successor. 
(d)  If such application or fee waiver is denied, the applicant shall be permitted to appeal the denial to the office of the city manager for final review by the city manager. The decision on appeal and review by the city manager shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 24-4; Ord. No. 3649, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3866, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 4015, § 2, 11-1-2004)  
Sec. 46-564. - Criteria for evaluation and issuance. 
(a)  The community development director shall issue a special event permit, conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to comply with the terms of the permit, unless he finds that: 
(1)  The time and the size of the special event will disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic or would substantially inconvenience the persons who would normally use the street; 
(2)  The special event is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and contiguous areas that allowing the special event would unreasonably impair the normal police protection of the city; 
(3)  The special event will interfere with another special event for which a permit has been issued; 
(4)  The conduct of the special event is likely to cause injury to persons or damage to property, provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance of the peace; 
(5)  The congregation of persons, animals and vehicles in the area will unreasonably interfere with proper fire and police protection of the city or will jeopardize the public safety or welfare; 
(6)  The special event will unduly interfere with the orderly operation of the parks, hospitals, churches, schools or other public or quasipublic institutions in the city; 
(7)  The applicant has knowingly made a materially false or misleading statement on the application; or 
(8)  The applicant refuses to comply with all conditions of the permit. 
(b)  In each permit the community development director shall specify, as conditions to the issuance of the permit, the following: 
(1)  The assembly area and time of special event. 
(2)  Starting and ending times. 
(3)  What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by the special event, if any. 
(4)  The number of persons required to monitor the special event. 
(5)  Requirements and instructions for removal of litter and debris created in connection with the special event. 
(6)  Such other requirements as are found by the community development director to be reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property. 
(Code 1959, § 24-5; Ord. No. 3649, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3866, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 46-565. - Fallacious statements. 
Any person or his duly authorized representative who files an application with the community development director for a permit to conduct, operate, manage, or stage any exhibition, gathering, or lecture and makes or causes, permits or allows to be made in the application any statement that is fallacious or any fallacious representation whatsoever regarding any of the facts as set forth in the application or any fallacious representation whatsoever regarding the nature of the event as a whole is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 24-7; Ord. No. 3649, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3866, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 46-566. - Suspension; revocation. 
Any person having been issued a permit to conduct, operate, manage or stage any exhibition, gathering, or lecture who violates, causes, permits, or allows to be violated any section of this article or this Code or any other city ordinance or of any law of the state relating to or regulating any such business or if and when, in the discretion of the city, it is contrary to the public welfare, the community development director may, in addition to the other penalties provided, suspend or revoke such permit. No relief from a revocation may be obtained until a new application shall have been filed with the community development director in the prescribed manner as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 24-6; Ord. No. 3649, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 46-567—46-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - CAMPING, SLEEPING OR STORAGE OF PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 46-601. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Camp means, in light of all of the circumstances, residing in or using a public park or other public property for living accommodation purposes such as making preparations to sleep overnight, between the hours of sunset to sunrise, including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping or storing personal belongings, blankets, sheets, other bedding material, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware and similar material; erecting, maintaining or occupying any structure with natural or artificial material, including a building or tent; making any fire or using any tents; regular cooking of meals; living in a parked trailer, camper shell, motor home, or any motor vehicle as defined by the Vehicle Code; or setting up or using any camp paraphernalia. 
State Law reference— Vehicle defined, Vehicle Code § 670. 
Camp paraphernalia means but is not limited to tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city-designated cooking facilities and similar equipment 
Store means, in light of all of the circumstances, to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location any personal property on public property. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 1(18.5-2), 11-18-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-602. - Findings. 
The public streets and other public areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes, storage of personal property, and sleeping interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. In addition, using such areas in a manner different than what the area was designed for creates a risk of harm to all users. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 1(18.5-1), 11-18-2002)  
Sec. 46-603. - Unlawful camping. 
Unless otherwise permitted by law, it is unlawful for any person to camp or use camp paraphernalia in or on any public park, street, sidewalk or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 1(18.5-3), 11-18-2002)  
Sec. 46-604. - Storage of personal property in public places. 
Except as otherwise permitted, it is unlawful for any person to store any personal property in or on any public park, street, sidewalk, or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 1(18.5-4), 11-18-2002)  
Sec. 46-605. - Sleeping in motor vehicles. 
(a)  Unless otherwise permitted by law, it is unlawful for any person to occupy for the purpose of sleeping or living any parked trailer, camper shell, motor home, or any motor vehicle as defined by the Vehicle Code located in any public park or other public place or on any public street. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "occupy for the purpose of sleeping or living" shall include but not be limited to acts of sleeping, living in, occupying as a dwelling or any other sojourn or stay within the vehicle not directly related to driving the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 1(18.5-5), 11-18-2002) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle defined, Vehicle Code § 415.  
Sec. 46-606. - Unlawful areas to sleep. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in the following places: 
(1)  In or on any public street or sidewalk or in or on city walkways, paseos, or other public ways intended for pedestrian or vehicular use and owned or maintained by the city. 
(2)  On the grounds of city-owned or city-maintained buildings, facilities or other improved city property. 
(Ord. No. 3969, § 1(18.5-6), 11-18-2002)  
Secs. 46-607—46-649. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - INFLATABLE STRUCTURES AND OTHER ATTRACTIONS ON CITY PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-650. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City property means property owned, operated or controlled by the City of Pomona, including, but not limited to, public parks and civic plazas. 
Climbing wall means a temporary, portable wall specifically designed for climbing and often built to simulate a rocky surface. 
Dunk tank means a large tank of water over which a seat is suspended, also referred to as a dunking booth or dunking machine. 
Inflatable structure means inflatable structures or equipment, commonly used for jumping, bouncing, sliding, riding, or as an apparatus for sports and recreational activities. The term includes, but is not limited to, inflatable buildings, castles, roofs, covers, slides, swimming pools, boxing rings, and obstacle courses. 
Other attractions means temporary attractions that are not permanent fixtures on city property, that include large structures or live animals, and are commonly used and operated at fairs, fundraisers and private parties. Other attractions includes, but is not limited to, pony rides, climbing walls, slides, and petting zoos, but shall not include dunk tanks. 
Petting zoo means a collection of one or more farm animals or exotic animals for children to pet and feed. 
Pony ride means a collection of one or more ponies for children to ride. 
Slide means a portable, smooth surface or track for sliding, which may or may not include either standing water on its surface, or water pumped to its top and allowed to flow down its surface. 
(Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 46-651. - Required. 
(a)  Any person desiring to place, operate, stage and/or use an inflatable structure or other attraction on city property shall first apply for and receive a permit in writing from the city manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  Every person who places, operates, stages, or uses an inflatable structure or other attraction on city property, or causes, permits or allows to be placed, conducted, staged, or used an inflatable structure or other attraction on city property, without having filed an application with the city manager or his/her designee in the manner prescribed in this article and issued a permit therefor is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to those persons who will use an inflatable structure or other attraction in connection with a special event, and have applied for and been issued a permit for said event and the use of the inflatable structure or other attraction pursuant to chapter 46, article XI of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 46-652. - Application contents. 
Any person or authorized representative desiring a permit to place, operate, stage and/or use an inflatable structure or other attraction on city property (hereinafter, the "applicant") shall file, at least two weeks prior to the anticipated event, an application for such a permit. The application shall be on a form provided by the city, shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and contact information of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and contact information of the vendor providing the inflatable structure or other attraction, if any. 
(3)  A statement describing the kind, type or nature of the inflatable structure and/or other attraction. 
(4)  The name of the insurance carrier; the amount of personal and property liability, naming the city as an additional insured, carried together with the name of the nearest representative and his or her business address. 
(5)  The number of people expected to use the inflatable structure or other attraction. 
(6)  The location where the inflatable structure and/or other attraction will be placed, operated, staged and/or used. 
(7)  The date when the inflatable structure and/or other attraction will be placed, operated, staged and/or used. 
(8)  A description of how the inflatable structure and/or other attraction will be self contained, as required by the policy described in section 46-654. 
(Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 46-653. - Review procedures. 
(a)  An application for a permit to place, operate, stage and/or use an inflatable structure or other attraction on city property shall be accompanied by payment in an amount equal to the nonrefundable fixed permit fee. The application and fee shall be filed with the city manager or his/her designee. The application shall be evaluated based on the policy described in section 46-654. If the application conforms to the criteria set forth in such policy, the city manager or his/her designee may then issue a permit. The permit may include conditions as may be appropriate and reasonably be imposed to ensure the safety of the users of the inflatable structure or other attraction. 
(b)  One copy of the application shall be kept on file with the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 46-654. - Criteria for evaluation and issuance. 
(a)  The city council shall establish and adopt by resolution a policy setting forth criteria for the issuance of permits for the placement, operation, staging and/or use of inflatable structures or other attractions on city property. 
(b)  In each permit, the city manager or his/her designee, shall specify, as conditions to the issuance of the permit and in conformance with the policy described in subdivision (a), the following: 
(1)  The designated area for the placement and use of the inflatable structure or other attraction. 
(2)  The date, and starting and ending times, for the placement and use of the inflatable structure or other attraction. 
(3)  Any damage to city property directly attributable to the placement or use of the inflatable structure or other attraction shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The applicant who is issued the permit must have in his or her possession a copy of the permit at all times during the placement and use of the inflatable structure or other attraction. 
(5)  The inflatable structure or other attraction must be operated at all times pursuant to the terms and conditions included in the permit. 
(6)  The inflatable structure or other attraction shall not be operated or used for commercial purposes. 
(7)  Such other requirements as are found by the city manager or his/her designee to be reasonably necessary for the protection of the public or city property. 
(Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 46-655. - Fallacious statements. 
Any applicant who files an application with the city manager or his/her designee pursuant to this article, who knowingly makes any statement in the application that is fallacious, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 46-656. - Establishment of fee. 
The city council shall establish a nonrefundable application fee, and a fee for cancellations and/or re-scheduling of the use of the inflatable structure or other attraction. All fees shall be established by resolution of the city council, in accordance with the city master fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 46-657. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any inflatable structure or other attraction placed, operated, staged and/or used in violation of this article or in violation of the permit's terms and conditions shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city. 
(b)  In addition to other penalties provided, the city manager or his/her designee may revoke or suspend any permit issued pursuant to this article, if: 
(1)  The inflatable structure or other attraction is operated in violation of the policy described in section 46-654 of this article or the permit's terms and conditions; 
(2)  The person issued the permit violates, causes, permits, or allows to be violated any provision of this Code, city ordinance, or any state or federal law; or 
(3)  In the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee, the operation of the inflatable structure is contrary to the public welfare. 
(c)  No relief from a revocation may be obtained until a new application shall have been filed with the city manager or his/her designee in the manner set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Chapter 50 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(12); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-821 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30; special gas tax street improvement fund, § 46-3. 
State Law reference— General taxation authority, Revenue and Taxation Code § 37100.5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Sales and use taxes, Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.; local sales and use taxes, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-31. - Operative date. 
This article shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Code 1959, § 9-46; Ord. No. 2657, § 3)  
Sec. 50-32. - Purpose. 
The city council declares that this article is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes and directs that this article be interpreted in order to accomplish the purposes of adopting a sales and use tax ordinance which: 
(1)  Complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.). 
(2)  Incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.) insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.). 
(3)  Imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes. 
(4)  Can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under this article. 
(Code 1959, § 9-47; Ord. No. 2657, § 4)  
Sec. 50-33. - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date of this article established in section 50-31, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this article. However, if the city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this article on September 17, 1973. 
(Code 1959, § 9-48; Ord. No. 2657, § 5)  
Sec. 50-34. - Sales tax imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in section 50-37 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date established in section 50-31. 
(Code 1959, § 9-49; Ord. No. 2657, § 6) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy sales tax, Government Code § 37101.  
Sec. 50-35. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Code 1959, § 9-50; Ord. No. 2657, § 7)  
Sec. 50-36. - Use tax imposed. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date established in section 50-31 for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate stated in section 50-37 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Code 1959, § 9-51; Ord. No. 2657, § 8) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy use tax, Government Code § 37101.  
Sec. 50-37. - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this article shall be one percent. 
(Code 1959, § 9-45; Ord. No. 2657, § 2)  
Sec. 50-38. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article and except insofar as this article is inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), all of the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.) are adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth. 
(b)  All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) shall automatically become a part of this article. 
(Code 1959, §§ 9-52, 9-58; Ord. No. 2657, §§ 9, 15)  
Sec. 50-39. - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6000 et seq.), wherever the state is named or referred to as the "taxing agency," the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made: 
(1)  When the word "state" is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, the state treasury, or the constitution of the state; 
(2)  When the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; 
(3)  In those sections, including but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under such provisions; 
(4)  In Revenue and Taxation Code § 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828; and 
(5)  For the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203. 
(Code 1959, § 9-53; Ord. No. 2657, § 10)  
Sec. 50-40. - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Revenue and Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 9-54; Ord. No. 2657, § 11)  
Sec. 50-41. - Exclusions and exemptions generally. 
(a)  Under this article there shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
(1)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) by any city and county, county, or city in this state. 
(b)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax levied by this article the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of the aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202(h)(7). 
(c)  In addition to all other exemptions, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by the operators directly and exclusively in the use of the aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempt from the use tax levied by this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202(h)(7). 
(d)  In addition to all other exemptions, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by the operators directly and exclusively in the use of the aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempt from 80 percent of the use tax levied by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 9-55; Ord. No. 2657, § 12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7203(e); mandatory that city so provide, Government Code § 37101(a).  
Sec. 50-42. - Alternate exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax pursuant to this article shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this article. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
(d)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
(e)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(f)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Code 1959, § 9-56; Ord. No. 2657, § 13)  
Sec. 50-43. - Effectiveness of exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  Section 50-42 shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in which the state board of equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, at which time section 50-41 shall become inoperative. 
(b)  If section 50-42 becomes operative and the state board of equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, section 50-41 shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time section 50-42 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, at which time section 50-42 shall again become operative and section 50-41 shall become inoperative. 
(Code 1959, § 9-57; Ord. No. 2657, § 14)  
Sec. 50-44. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city or against any officer of the state or the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this article or Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Code 1959, § 9-59; Ord. No. 2657, § 16) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, Government Code § 7202.  
Secs. 50-45—50-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local occupancy taxes, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280 et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. The term "hotel" does not mean any of the following: 
(1)  Any hospital, sanitarium, medical clinic, convalescent home, rest home, home for aged people, foster home or other similar facility operated for the care or treatment of human beings. 
(2)  Any asylum, jail, prison, orphanage or other facility in which human beings are detained and housed under legal restraint. 
(3)  Any housing owned or controlled by any educational institution and used exclusively to house students, faculty or other employees and any fraternity or sorority house or similar facility occupied exclusively by students and employees of such educational institution and officially recognized or approved by it. 
(4)  Any housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes by any organization having qualifications for exemption from property taxes under the laws of the state. 
(5)  Any housing owned by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for governmental purposes. 
(6)  Any camp as defined in the Labor Code or other housing furnished by an employer exclusively for employees. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or portion thereof in any hotel for lodging purposes. 
Operator means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
Rent means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax administrator means the city treasurer. 
Transient means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy of a specific room by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing providing for a longer period of occupancy of the room. However, in no event shall this tax be waived for the first 30 days of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived may be considered. 
(Code 1959, § 9-125; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 2056, § 1; Ord. No. 3381, § 1; Ord. No. 3434, § 2; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-82. - Imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the city treasurer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1959, § 9-126; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 2195, § 1; Ord. No. 2384, § 1; Ord. No. 3309, § 1; Ord. No. 3434, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3743, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy above tax, Government Code § 7280(a).  
Sec. 50-83. - Persons deemed exempt from tax. 
(a)  No transient occupancy tax shall be imposed upon the following: 
(1)  Any person as to whom or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law of international treaty. 
(b)  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1959, § 9-127; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3361, § 1; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-84. - Collection; advertising that payment of tax not required. 
(a)  Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this article to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. 
(b)  No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any portion thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 9-128; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3434, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-85. - Registration certificate. 
Each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the city treasurer and obtain from him an occupancy tax registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
(1)  The name of the operator. 
(2)  The address of the hotel. 
(3)  The date upon which the certificate was issued. 
(4)  "This Occupancy Tax Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of Article III of Chapter 50 of the Code of the City of Pomona, California, by registering with the City Treasurer for the purpose of collecting from transients the Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the City Treasurer. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Code 1959, § 9-129; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3361, § 2; Ord. No. 3434, § 4; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-86. - Reports and remittances. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, make a return to the city treasurer on forms provided by him of the total rents charged and received and the amount of transient occupancy tax collected for occupancies. However, if such last day of the month is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the tax shall be due and payable prior to 12:00 midnight of the next subsequent working day or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the city treasurer. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the city treasurer. The city treasurer may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this article shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1959, § 9-130; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 2043, § 2; Ord. No. 3361, § 2; Ord. No. 3434, § 5; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-87. - Penalties for failure to remit when due. 
(a)  Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(b)  Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
(c)  Fraud. If the city treasurer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this article is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(e)  Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid. 
(Code 1959, § 9-131; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3361, § 2; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-88. - Failure to collect and report; determination of tax; notice and hearing. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the transient occupancy tax and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this article, the city treasurer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the city treasurer shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this article and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this article. If such determination is made, the city treasurer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known address. Such operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the city treasurer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the city treasurer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the city treasurer shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing the city treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed of such determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in section 50-89. 
(Code 1959, § 9-132; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3361, § 2; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-89. - Appeal. 
Any operator or transient aggrieved by any decision of the city treasurer with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, imposed pursuant to this article may appeal to a hearing officer appointed by the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city treasurer within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of the tax due. The hearing officer shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city treasurer shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known address. The findings of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive and shall be serviced upon the appellant in the manner prescribed for service of the notice of the hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice. 
(Code 1959, § 9-133; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3361, § 2; Ord. No. 3434, § 6; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-90. - Retention of records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the city shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1959, § 9-134; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3361, § 2; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-91. - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any transient occupancy tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city treasurer within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the city treasurer. 
(b)  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(c)  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city treasurer, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(d)  No refund shall be paid under this section unless the claimant establishes his right to a refund by written records showing entitlement to the refund. 
(Code 1959, § 9-135; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3361, § 2; Ord. No. 3434, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-92. - Action by city to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Code 1959, § 9-136; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 3434, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-93. - Security deposit. 
Whenever he deems it reasonably necessary to ensure remittance of the transient occupancy tax, the city treasurer may require any operator to deposit security for his payment of the tax in the form of United States currency. The type and amount of security deposit shall be determined by the city treasurer, but shall not exceed a sum or value equal to twice the estimated tax payable by the operator for any one calendar quarter. To recover the transient occupancy tax, including penalty and interest, remittable by the depositor, the city treasurer may apply or sell at public auction the security deposited with him. Security deposits in the form of bearer bonds issued by the United States of America or by the state may be sold by the city treasurer at private sale for the current market price. At least ten days prior to the application or sale of a security deposit, the city treasurer shall serve upon the depositing operator notice of his intent to apply or sell the security deposit. Service of notice may be made by placing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the depositing operator at his hotel. Any portion of the proceeds from the sale of security remaining after satisfaction of outstanding transient occupancy taxes, penalty, interest and costs of sale may be retained by the city treasurer for security or may be paid over by him to the depositing operator. 
(Code 1959, § 9-137; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-94. - Transfer of business. 
(a)  Successor's liability. If an operator conveys or quits his hotel business, his assignee or successor in interest shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover the accrued or outstanding transient occupancy tax liability of the operator until the operator produces a certificate of the city treasurer stating the nonliability of the operator for payment of the transient occupancy tax. If the assignee or successor in interest fails to withhold the amount required to pay the tax liability, he shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him. 
(b)  Certificate of nonliability. Within 30 days from the date of receipt of the application of any operator for a certificate of nonliability for the payment of the transient occupancy tax, the city treasurer shall issue the certificate if the operator's tax liability has been satisfied to the date of the application. If tax has accrued to that date, the city treasurer shall give notice to the operator of the amount which must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. 
(Code 1959, § 9-138; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-95. - Violations. 
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this article or to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due as required by this article to be made is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 9-139; Ord. No. 3562, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 50-96—50-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENT RIDE TAX  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement ride means any ride upon any merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, loop-o-plane, midget automobile, animal, monorail or other such device or contrivance commonly used at fairs or amusement parks. 
Charge and price include, in addition to or in lieu of money, any valuable consideration paid, given or received in exchange for the right or privilege of obtaining an amusement ride and any additional consideration paid, given or received after admission to any premises in exchange for the right or privilege to use any accommodations or facilities therein located or provided for amusement rides. 
Conduct includes "operate," "carry on," "maintain," "keep," "render" or "hold." 
Operator includes any person owning, operating, conducting, directing, managing or controlling, alone or in conjunction with others, in whole or in part, as principal agent, officer, employee or independent contractor, any business at which amusement rides are offered which are subject to any tax imposed by any section of this article. 
Patron includes any person who pays or on account of whom is paid any charge for the right or privilege of obtaining amusement rides. 
Season pass means and includes every season ticket, season pass, passbook, club membership, membership card, association membership or insignia, or other device, the ownership or possession of which entitles the owner or holder thereof to amusement rides during any period of time. 
Separate amusement ride means an amusement ride on a particular separate device or machine during a period of time between which riders regularly, ordinarily or customarily board, mount or enter amusement ride devices and leave, dismount or remove themselves from the devices. 
(Code 1959, § 9-150; Ord. No. 2158, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-132. - Power of council to waive requirements. 
The council may at any time, by the affirmative vote of at least three of its members entered upon the council minutes, waive any or all of the requirements of this article with respect to any event which is conducted or sponsored within the city by any institution, organization, association or corporation which is organized and carried on wholly for the benefit of religious or charitable purposes and from which no individual person, other than bona fide employees and help necessarily contracted for, receives any gain, remuneration or profit. 
(Code 1959, § 9-169; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-133. - Performance of duties. 
Any act required by this article to be performed by an operator shall be performed by each person included in the definition of operator; provided, however, that performance by any one such person shall be deemed performance by all such persons. 
(Code 1959, § 9-165; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-134. - Amount of tax when charge based upon number of separate rides given or obtained. 
There is hereby imposed a tax in the amount of $0.02 upon each patron taking or obtaining an amusement ride for each separate amusement ride taken or obtained for which a separate charge is made or for which a specific number of rides are given for a charge. Such tax shall be collected when the charge or price is received by the operator from the patron and shall be paid to the city as provided by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 9-151; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-135. - Additional taxes and fees. 
The tax imposed by this article is in addition to any other tax, license or permit fee that may be required of any person by an ordinance or other section of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 9-167; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-136. - Amount of tax when charge not based on number of separate rides given or obtained. 
There is hereby imposed upon each patron taking or obtaining amusement rides a tax in the amount of ten percent of the charge made for such rides when an indefinite or indeterminate number of amusement rides are given or obtained on an hourly or daily basis or by a season pass. Such tax shall be collected by the operator from the patron when the charge or price is collected and shall be paid to the city as provided by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 9-152; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-137. - Payment. 
The tax levied and assessed by or under this article is hereby imposed upon each person or patron by or on account of whom payment is made for amusement rides and shall be paid by or on account of such person at the time and at the place when the charge or price is paid. 
(Code 1959, § 9-153; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-138. - Person convicted of violation not exempt from complying with article. 
The conviction or punishment of any person for the violation of any portion of this article shall not excuse or exempt such person from payment of any license, tax, fee or penalty due or unpaid under this article or under any other section of this Code or any ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 9-168; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-139. - Disposition of funds. 
All taxes and penalties received under this article shall be deposited by the city clerk with the treasurer to be placed in the general fund, unless the council by resolution directs otherwise. 
(Code 1959, § 9-170; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Secs. 50-140—50-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 50-161. - Operator's responsibility. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected for the city by the operator at the time and place where the tax is due or payable and thereafter shall be accounted for and paid over to the city by such operator at the time and in the manner specified in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 9-154; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-162. - Alternate procedures. 
Upon the filing by an operator with the council of a written application setting forth good cause for a modification of the time and manner of accounting for and payment of taxes due under this article, the council may, by the approval of at least three of its members entered upon the council minutes, authorize such operator to account for and pay over to the city all taxes due, payable or paid under this article at a time and in a manner other than those specified in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 9-163; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-163. - Bond. 
Every operator shall account for all taxes imposed or collected under this article at the times set forth in section 50-164 and shall post a cash bond with the city clerk in an amount of not less than $100.00 prior to conducting such rides to ensure payment of such taxes. 
(Code 1959, § 9-155; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-164. - Payment to city. 
If any amusement rides subject to the tax imposed by this article are scheduled by the operator to be held for a period of less than seven days, the operator shall account to the city in the manner specified in this division within 24 hours after the completion of each such single event. If any such amusement rides are scheduled by the operator to be held for a period of more than seven days but less than 30 days, the operator shall account to the city in like manner on each Monday for all taxes collected for rides during the week for which no accounting has been made. If any such amusement rides are scheduled by the operator to be held for a period of more than 30 days, the operator shall account to the city in like manner on the 20th day of each calendar month for all rides thus conducted by him from the first to the 15th calendar days of such month and on the fifth day of each calendar month for all rides thus conducted by him from the 16th calendar day to the last calendar day of the preceding calendar month. Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from accounting more frequently or upon a date earlier than specified in this section. 
(Code 1959, § § 9-156—9-159; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-165. - Statement. 
(a)  At the times required by this division, every operator shall file with the city clerk a written statement setting forth the number of separate amusement rides for which a charge or price was paid; the number of season passes and the charge or price paid for them and for indeterminate numbers of rides; and a statement of the total taxes due under this article upon each of the foregoing, the period of time covered by the accounting and such other information as may be required by the city clerk for a proper understanding of such statement and a complete audit of the taxes due thereunder. 
(b)  Such accounting statement shall be dated, subscribed by the individual making the statement, stating the capacity in which the signer makes the statement, and the signer shall certify, under penalty of perjury, that the statements made therein are true and correct to the best of his information, knowledge and belief. The statement shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  Such accounting statement shall be accompanied by payment to the city at the office of the city clerk in legal tender or in other form approved by the city clerk of the total amount of taxes shown in such statement to be due and payable under this article for the period thus accounted for, plus all penalties that may be due thereon under this article. 
(d)  If any operator fails to file a statement as required by this section of the amount of tax such operator has collected or if the city clerk has information or belief that the information in the statement is inaccurate, the city clerk may request a hearing before the city council by giving both the city council and the operator at least ten days' prior written notice. Such notice shall state the reasons why the clerk believes the statement should be filed or the reasons for its inaccuracies if it has been filed. At such hearing the city council may hear all relevant evidence presented by the city clerk or any of his witnesses and the operator and any of his witnesses concerning the true amount of tax that has been collected or should have been collected by the operator under this article. After hearing such evidence, the city council shall make its findings by resolution and determine the amount of money due the city from the operator by reason of this article. Such findings and determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive within ten days after the passage of such resolution and notification thereof to the operator unless the operator shall file an appropriate writ prohibiting such determination with a court of competent jurisdiction. After such ten days, unless such writ is granted, a court of competent jurisdiction shall enter a judgment against such operator upon the filing of a certified copy of such resolution and affidavits showing the operator has received by personal service all notices required by this subsection. The procedures adopted by this subsection shall be an alternate to the procedure also provided for a civil suit in the court by the city for the collection of the tax from the operator as a debt. 
(Code 1959, §§ 9-160—9-162, 9-176; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-166. - Penalty for delinquency in payment. 
The failure of an operator to pay the entire amount of tax due under this article within the time and manner prescribed shall cause the city clerk to add to the amount of taxes due a penalty of five percent and an additional penalty of one-half of one percent on the last day of each month from the date on which the tax was due until paid. 
(Code 1959, § 9-164; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-167. - Debt to city. 
The amount of any tax or any penalty imposed by this article shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any operator violating any of the sections of this article shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of taxes and penalties imposed by this article, and attachment shall issue on verified complaint without any bond or affidavit given or required in behalf of the plaintiff. 
(Code 1959, § 9-166; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Sec. 50-168. - Payment under protest. 
(a)  After the taxes imposed in this article are payable, any person may pay such taxes under protest. Such a payment will be deemed not to be a voluntary payment. 
(b)  The protest made must be in writing and submitted to the city clerk specifying the following: 
(1)  Whether the entire payment is claimed to be void, or if only part, what portion. 
(2)  The grounds on which the claim is founded. 
(c)  The written protests, if any, shall be numbered by the city clerk and kept on file in his office, and a copy of any such protest shall be submitted to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(d)  Within 60 days after the payment under protest, an action may be brought against the city in the superior court of the state for the county to a refund of such taxes paid under protest, if for any reason such taxes were improperly calculated, levied, assessed or collected. The action may be brought only: 
(1)  As to the portion of the tax payment claimed to be void. 
(2)  On the grounds specified in the protest. 
(3)  By the person claimed to be responsible for the payment of the tax, his guardian, executor or administrator. 
(Code 1959, §§ 9-171—9-175; Ord. No. 2158, § 1)  
Secs. 50-169—50-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY USERS TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 50-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ancillary telecommunication services means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services: 
(1)  Conference bridging service means an ancillary service that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge. 
(2)  Detailed telecommunications billing service means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer's billing statement. 
(3)  Directory assistance means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information. 
(4)  Vertical service means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services. 
(5)  Voice mail service means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service. 
Ancillary video services means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services, including but not limited to electronic program guide services, recording services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of video services. 
Billing address means the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer. 
City means the City of Pomona. 
City manager means the city manager or his or her authorized representative. 
City treasurer means the city treasurer of the city or his or her designee. 
Internet access means the service of providing the initial access to the internet and the data services it provides, whether by dial-up, broadband, cable, model, or other technology, but does not mean telephone communications services using internet technology (such as voice of internet protocol services) provided to one who otherwise has internet access. 
Mobile telecommunications service has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder. 
Paging service means a "telecommunications service" that provides transmission of coded radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such transmissions may include messages and/or sounds. 
Person means, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Place of primary use" means the street address representative of where the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. 
Post-paid telecommunication service means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a telecommunication-by-telecommunication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service. 
Prepaid telecommunication service means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of telecommunications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount. 
Private telecommunication service means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a telecommunications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A telecommunications channel is a physical or virtual path of telecommunications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the telecommunications). 
Service address means either: 
(1)  The location of the service user's telecommunication equipment from which the telecommunication originates or terminates, regardless of where the telecommunication is billed or paid; or 
(2)  If the location in subsection (1) of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user's place of primary use. 
(3)  For prepaid telecommunication service, "service address" means the location associated with the service number or, if not known, the point of sale of the services. 
Service supplier means any entity or person, including the city, that provides telecommunication service to a user of such service within the city. The term includes any entity or person required to collect, or self-collect tax under this article and to remit such tax imposed by this chapter, including the billing agent of such an entity or person in the case of electric, gas, water or telecommunication service suppliers. 
Service user means a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
Small business means 50 or less employees. 
State means the State of California. 
Streamlined sales and use tax agreement means the multi-state agreement commonly known and referred to as the streamlined sales and use tax agreement, as it is amended from time to time. 
Telecommunications services means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used, whether such transmission, conveyance, or routing occurs by wire, cable, fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, radio wave, (including but not limited to, cellular service, commercial mobile service, personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), and other types of personal wireless service (see 47 USCA section 332(c)(7) (C)(i)) regardless of radio spectrum used), switching facilities, satellite or any other technology now existing or developed after the adoption of this division, and includes without limitation, fiber optic, coaxial cable, and wireless. The term "telecommunications services" includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Telecommunications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that is functionally integrated with "telecommunication services". "Telecommunications services" include, but are not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; ancillary video services; intrastate, interstate, and international telecommunication services; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling), local number portability, text messaging, instant messaging, mobile telecommunications service; connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; prepaid telecommunication service (to the extent that it is practicable for the service supplier to collect the correct tax imposed under this chapter from the service supplier), including but not limited to prepaid calling cards; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Telecommunications Commission); 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Telecommunications Commission for services whereby subscribers who call in to prerecorded or live service); or value-added non-voice data service. For purposes of this section, "private telecommunication service" means any dedicated telephone communications service that entitle a user to exclusive or private use of communications channels. Nothing in the definition of telecommunications devices is intended to include charges for internet access within the scope of taxable charges for telecommunications services under this article. 
VoIP (voice over internet protocol) means the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any internet protocol network. 
800 service means a "telecommunications service" that allows a caller to dial a toll free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the name "800", "855", "866", "877", and "888" toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
900 service means an inbound toll "telecommunications service" purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber's customers to call in to the subscriber's prerecorded announcement or live service. "900 service" does not include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the "telecommunications services" to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber's customer. The service is typically marketed under the name "900" service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Code 1959, § 9-210; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3757, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-3-2009) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-202. - Constitutional exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state. 
(b)  Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall file an application with the city treasurer for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the city treasurer and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all telecommunication and video service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the city treasurer, such service user shall give the city treasurer timely written notice of any change in telecommunication service suppliers so that the city treasurer can properly notify the new telecommunication service supplier of the service user's tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of telecommunication users' taxes collected and remitted to the city treasurer from such service user as a result of such noncompliance. The decision of the city treasurer may be appealed by filing an application with the city treasurer and appeal to the city manager as a prerequisite to a suit thereon. 
(c)  The city council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax for a specified period of time. 
(Code 1959, § 9-211; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 50-203. - Telecommunication utility users' tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using telecommunication services, including services for intrastate, interstate, or international calls billed to a customer with a service address within the city's tax jurisdiction ("telecommunication utility users' tax") to the extent permitted by federal and state law. Interstate calls shall be deemed to include calls to all districts, territories and possessions of the United States, including the District of Columbia. The term "charges," as used in this section, includes charges made for (i) telephone service; (ii) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, demand charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges, and (iii) the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telecommunication services provided. Telecommunication utility users' tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges within the city's tax jurisdiction, such as charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the city as permitted by the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act of 2000, 4 U.S.C section 116, et seq. The tax imposed by this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential users: Nine percent, effective January 1, 1997. 
(2)  Commercial/industrial users: Nine percent, effective January 1, 1997. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that telecommunication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city's boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telecommunication services. 
(b)  The city treasurer may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other telecommunication services, including but not limited to postpaid telecommunication services, prepaid telecommunication services, and private telecommunication services, provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation. 
(c)  To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telecommunication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the city treasurer that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or local jurisdiction on such telecommunication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or local jurisdiction; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section. 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones, except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due. 
(2)  No tax shall be imposed under this section, except with respect to local telephone service, on any payment received from any person for services used in the collection of news for the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or radio broadcasting, or in the dissemination of news through the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or by means of radio broadcasting, if the charge for such service is billed in writing to such person. 
(3)  No tax shall be imposed under this section on any payment received for services furnished to an international organization designated under the International Organizations Immunities Act, and defined in 22 U.S.C section 288, or to the American National Red Cross. 
(4)  No tax shall be imposed under this section on any payment received for any toll telephone service which originates within a combat zone, as defined in Section 112 of Title 26 of the United States Code, from a member of the Armed Forces of the United States performing service in such combat zone, as determined under Section 112 of Title 26 of the United States Code. 
(5)  Only one payment of tax under this section shall be required with respect to the tax on any service, notwithstanding the lines or stations of one or more persons are used in furnishing such service. 
(6)  No tax shall be imposed under this section on the amount paid for any toll telephone service described in Section 4252(b)(2) of Title 26 of the United States Code to the extent that the amount so paid is for use by a common carrier, telephone or telegraph company, or radio broadcasting station or network in the conduct of its business as such. 
(7)  No tax shall be imposed under this section on so much of any amount paid for the installation of any instrument, wire, pole, switchboard, apparatus, or equipment as is properly attributable to such installation. 
(8)  No tax shall be imposed under this section on any amount paid by a nonprofit hospital for services furnished to such organization. For purposes of this exemption, the term "nonprofit hospital" means a hospital referred to in Section 170(b)(1)(A)(iii) of Title 26 of the United States Code which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(a) of Title 26 of the United States Code. 
(9)  No tax shall be imposed under this section upon any payment received for services or facilities furnished to the government of any state, or any political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia. 
(10)  No tax shall be imposed under this section on any amount paid by a nonprofit educational organization for services or facilities furnished to such organization. For purposes of this exemption, the term "nonprofit educational organization" means an educational organization described in Section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) of Title 26 of the United States Code which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(a) of Title 26 of the United States Code. The term also includes a school operated as an activity of an organization described in Section 501(c)(3) of Title 26 of the United States Code which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(a) of Title 26 of the United States Code, if such school normally maintains a regular facility and curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled body of pupils or students in attendance at the place where its educational activities are regularly carried on. 
(e)  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the telecommunication services. The amount of tax collected in the month must be received by the city treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month. The duty to collect the tax based on a measure including charges for interstate and international telecommunication services shall commence with the first regular billing period of each service user ending on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. The city treasurer may consider state-wide interpretative rules and guidelines as a factor in determining the intent of voters adopting this section. To the extent that the city treasurer determines that the tax imposed under this section shall not be collected in full for any period of time, and such administrative ruling falls within the city treasurer's discretion to settle disputes, the city treasurer's exercise of prosecutorial forbearance under this chapter does not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Government Code section 53750(h), and the city does not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the telecommunication utility users' tax in full as a result of issuing such administrative rulings and may suspend such rulings and recommence collection of the tax without additional voter approval. 
(f)  To prevent actual multiple taxation of any service that is subject to tax under subsection (a) of this section and which consists of a call that originates or terminates outside of the city, any service user, upon proof that such service user has paid a tax in another taxing jurisdiction of the United States on such call, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other taxing jurisdiction of the United States. However, no credit may be allowed for any tax paid to another taxing jurisdiction on any call to the extent that such call may not, under the Constitution and Statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by such other taxing jurisdiction of the United States. For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, "substantial nexus" and "minimum contacts" shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the telecommunication utility users' tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any telecommunication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that "substantial nexus/minimum contacts" exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or distributed from a location with the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States Mail; or if there are activities performed in the city on behalf of the service supplier that are significantly associated with the service supplier's ability to establish and maintain a market in the city for the provision of telecommunication services that are subject to the telecommunications utility users' tax. 
(g)  If any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier's books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and nontaxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and nontaxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation of the taxable and nontaxable services. 
(Code 1959, § 9-212; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2381, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2777, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3179, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3278, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3330, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3517, § 1; Ord. No. 3604, § 1; Ord. No. 3744, § 1; Ord. No. 3829 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 50-204. - Electricity users tax. 
(a)  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using electrical energy in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the following rates of percentage of the charges made for such energy and shall be paid by the person paying for such energy. The term "charges," as used in this section, includes charges made for (i) metered energy; and (ii) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges. The tax imposed by this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential users: nine percent, effective January 1, 1997. 
(2)  Commercial/industrial users: nine percent, effective January 1, 1997. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale. 
(c)  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying such energy. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the city treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month. 
(Code 1959, § 9-213; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2381, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2777, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3278, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3330, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3440, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3517, § 2; Ord. No. 3601, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3772, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3829, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-205. - Gas users tax. 
(a)  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using gas in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the following rates of percentage of the charges made for such gas and shall be paid by the person paying for such gas. The term "charges," as used in this section, includes charges made for (i) metered gas; and (ii) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges. The tax imposed by this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential users: nine percent, effective January 1, 1997. 
(2)  Commercial/industrial users: nine percent, effective January 1, 1997. 
(b)  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made: 
(1)  For gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; 
(2)  For gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy by a public utility or a governmental agency; and 
(3)  By a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities. 
(c)  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling the gas. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the city treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month. 
(Code 1959, § 9-214; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2381, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2777, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3179, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3278, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3330, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3440, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3517, § 3; Ord. No. 3601, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3772, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3829, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-206. - Water users tax. 
(a)  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using water in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the following rates of percentage of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the person paying for such water. The term "charges," as used in this section includes charges made for (i) metered water, and (ii) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges. The tax imposed by this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential users: nine percent, effective January 1, 1997. 
(2)  Commercial/industrial users: nine percent, effective January 1, 1997. 
(b)  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. 
(c)  The term "using water," as used in this section, shall not include the mere receiving of water by a public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale. 
(Code 1959, § 9-215; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2381, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2777, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3179, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3278, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3330, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3440, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3517, § 4; Ord. No. 3601, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3772, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-207. - Interest and penalty. 
(a)  Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the city treasurer on or before the due dates provided in this article are delinquent. 
(b)  Interest and penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any deficiency determination shall attach and be paid by the person required to collect and remit at the rates and in the same manner as is provided in article VIII of this chapter for delinquency in payment of business tax. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall have power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes under this article for fraud and negligence in reporting and remitting in the same manner and at the same rates as are provided in article VIII of this chapter for such penalties upon persons required to pay business tax. 
(d)  Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under this section shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. 
(Code 1959, § 9-216; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 50-208. - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the city treasurer shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Code 1959, § 9-217; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 50-209. - Procedures to collect. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this article shall be performed as follows: 
(1)  The tax shall be collected and turned over to the city insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the utility's regular billing practice. If the amount paid by a service user is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax from a service user shall be deemed to have been paid. 
(2)  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person which starts on or after the operative date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. 
(Code 1959, § 9-218; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-210. - Enforcement powers and duties. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall have the power and duty and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the sections of this article. 
(b)  In administering and enforcing the sections of this article, the city treasurer shall have the same powers and duties with respect to collecting the tax provided in this article as he has under article VIII of this chapter with respect to collecting the business tax. 
(Code 1959, § 9-219; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 50-211. - Administrative assessment remedy. 
The city treasurer may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit by this article. The city treasurer shall give written notice to the assessee by mail of this assessment. Within ten days of giving such notice, any person aggrieved by the decision of the city treasurer may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city treasurer. Such notice shall state the grounds thereof, and the treasurer shall set a hearing on the appeal before the city council within 30 days from receipt thereof. At such hearing the appellant may present relevant evidence as to the alleged lack of sufficiency of the assessment. At the conclusion of the hearing the city council shall affirm, overrule or modify the treasurer's assessment and shall set forth in its decision its findings and conclusions which the treasurer shall within 30 days deliver to the appellant by mail. 
(Code 1959, § 9-220; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 50-212. - Additional assessment upon service user for refusal to remit tax to service supplier when billed. 
Whenever the city treasurer determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a service supplier or that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax for a period of two or more billing periods or whenever the city treasurer deems it in the best interest of the city, he may relieve the service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this article from such service users for specified billing periods. The city treasurer shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which the billing was made by the service supplier or, should the service user have changed his address, to his last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the city treasurer within 15 days from the date of service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than $5.00. The penalty shall become part of the tax required to be paid. 
(Code 1959, § 9-221; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 50-213. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve for a period of three years all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection and remittance to the city treasurer, which records the treasurer shall have the right to inspect at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1959, § 9-222; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 50-214. - Refunds. 
(a)  A person required to collect and remit taxes imposed under this article may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the city treasurer that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax. However, neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the persons required to collect and remit. 
(b)  Whenever a utility service supplier, pursuant to an order of the state public utilities commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this article on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. 
(Code 1959, § 9-223; Ord. No. 2279, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3291, § 1; Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 50-215. - Maximum annual tax; annual adjustment. 
(a)  Effective August 1, 1996, the total taxes imposed by this article upon any one service user upon the use of telephone, electricity, gas and water during any one fiscal year, which year shall commence August 1 and shall terminate July 31 of the subsequent year, shall not exceed the amount indicated in the city's utility users' tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(b)  The maximum annual tax set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be adjusted by the city treasurer effective August 1, 1993, and annually thereafter by either a resolution or an ordinance, effective August 1 of each succeeding year, in a percentage amount equal to the change in the Consumer Price Index during the 12-month period for the Metropolitan Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area or other succeeding index, as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
(Code 1959, § 9-223a; Ord. No. 2295, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2382, § 1; Ord. No. 2777, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3278, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3440, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3517, § 5; Ord. No. 3601, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3678, § 1; amended during 6/94 supplement; amended during 6/95 supplement; amended during 6/96 supplement; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 4226 , § 3, 5-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-216. - Small business—Maximum annual tax. 
(a)  Effective August 1, 1996, the total taxes imposed by this article upon any "small business" service user, licensed under section 50-412(16) of division 3 of article VIII of chapter 50, upon the use of telephone electricity, gas, and water during any one fiscal year, which year shall commence August 1st and shall terminate July 31st of the subsequent year, shall not exceed the amount indicated in the city's utility users' tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(b)  The maximum annual tax set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be adjusted by the city treasurer effective August 1, 1996, and annually thereafter by either a resolution or an ordinance, effective August 1 of each succeeding year, in a percentage amount equal to the change in the Consumer Price Index during the 12-month period for the Metropolitan Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area or other succeeding index as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
(Code 1959, § 9-223b; Ord. No. 3757, § 1 (part); amended during 6/96 supplement; Ord. No. 4091, § 1, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 4226 , § 3, 5-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-217. - Procedure to obtain refund of amount paid in excess of maximum; alternative certificate of exemption for remainder of year after maximum paid. 
(a)  Any service user who pays taxes imposed by this article in excess of the maximum set by section 50-215 during a fiscal year, beginning August 1 and ending July 31, shall be entitled to a refund of such excess amount paid. Applications for the refund may be made by the service user monthly after proof has been given to the city treasurer by sworn statements on forms provided by the city together with copies of utility bills showing that the total amount of taxes billed and collected by the service supplier and paid by the service user exceeds such maximum in such year. 
(b)  As an alternate to the refund procedure, when the service user has provided proof to the city treasurer as required in subsection (a) of this section showing he has paid during the fiscal year the maximum amount of tax specified by section 50-215, the city treasurer may at his discretion issue an exempt certificate to the service user for the remainder of the fiscal year. Payment of such maximum may be made by any service user directly to the city, and thereupon the service user may apply for an exempt certificate. The exempt certificate shall authorize the service supplier to refrain from collecting the taxes imposed by this article for the remainder of the fiscal year from the exempt service user. The city treasurer shall immediately notify all service suppliers affected of the name and address of all those service users issued an exempt certificate authorized by this section. However, at the end of the fiscal year, which for the purposes of this section shall be July 31, the service supplier shall again commence collecting these taxes from the service user until another exempt certificate is issued to the service user and notice thereof is given by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1959, § 9-224; Ord. No. 2295, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3440, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-218. - Exemption for certain residential service users. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply during any calendar year to persons residing in the city who use telephone, gas, electric or water services in or upon the premises where their residential unit is situated and whose gross income from all sources whatsoever is within the criteria indicated in the city's utility users' tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(b)  The gross income levels as set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be adjusted effective July 1, 1986, and annually thereafter by either a resolution or an ordinance, effective on July 1 of each succeeding year, in a percentage amount equal to the change in the Consumer Price Index during the 12-month period for the Metropolitan Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
(c)  If a person has suffered an extreme financial emergency or if the payment of the tax imposed by this article shall cause any person undue hardship regardless of his gross income, the treasurer, upon the finding that such undue hardship exists, may exempt such person from the payment of such tax. 
(Code 1959, § 9-225; Ord. No. 2295, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2380, § 1; Ord. No. 2467, § 1; Ord. No. 2777, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3008, § 1; Ord. No. 3149, § 1; Ord. No. 3331, §§ 1, 2; amended during 6/87 supplement; Ord. No. 3440, § 1 (part); amended during 6/89 supplement; amended during 6/90 supplement; amended during 6/91 supplement; amended during 9/92 supplement; amended during 9/93 supplement; amended during 6/94 supplement; amended during 6/95 supplement; amended during 6/96 supplement; Ord. No. 4202, § 3, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 4226 , § 4, 5-16-2016)  
Sec. 50-219. - Application for certificate of exemption, notification of service suppliers, and application for refund of taxes paid by exempt residential service user. 
Any service user exempt from the taxes imposed by this article for any given year because of section 50-218 may file an application with the city treasurer for an exempt certificate. Such application shall be made upon forms supplied by the city treasurer and shall recite facts under oath which qualify the applicant for an exemption under section 50-218. The city treasurer upon receipt of such applications shall review them and issue exempt certificates to those applicants he determines qualify and shall notify all service suppliers affected that such exempt certificates have been issued and stating the name of the applicant and address to which such exempt service is being supplied. Upon receipt of the notice, the service supplier shall not be required to continue to collect any further tax imposed by this article from such exempt service user until further notice by the treasurer is given. The city treasurer shall process all applications received by him by the 15th of each month and make his determination of sufficiency. If he grants an exempt certificate he shall notify the service supplier thereof by the last day of the month. The service supplier shall not, however, be required to eliminate such exempt service user from its billing procedure until 30 days after receipt of such notice by the city treasurer. All exempt certificates shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they are issued, and unless application for renewal thereof is made before November 15 and granted before November 30 and the service suppliers notified of such renewal, the service suppliers shall have the duty to collect the taxes imposed by this article in the manner provided by this article. The city treasurer shall also notify the service supplier by January 1 of each year to resume taxing the accounts of those service users who have not applied for renewal of their exempt status during the specified period or whose applications for such renewal have been denied. Upon receipt of the written notification, the service supplier shall resume taxing those accounts affected with the first billing period beginning on and after January 1. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, however, any service supplier who determines by any means readily available to it that a new nonexempt service user during any calendar year is receiving service through a meter or connection exempt by virtue of an exempt certificate issued to a previous user of the same meter or connection, such service supplier shall insofar as feasible, taking into account the nature of its accounting system and computer programming, resume the collection of taxes imposed by this article upon such new nonexempt service user. Any service user exempt from the taxes imposed by this article during any given year because of section 50-218 and who has paid such taxes may make application for a refund of any such taxes collected from him by any service supplier during such year by filing such application with the city treasurer not sooner than January 1 or later than March 15 following the year for which such exemption is claimed. Such applications shall be upon forms supplied by the city treasurer, and statements made therein shall be under oath and the applicant shall declare facts qualifying the applicant to be exempt under section 50-218. The application shall also be accompanied by original customer copies of bills showing the amount of such taxes collected by service suppliers during such year. If the applicant has lost or destroyed such bills and cannot supply them, the maximum refund that shall be permitted to him shall not exceed $12.00 for any one-year period; provided, however, that if such applicant has been granted an exempt certificate during such year, the total refund for the applicant for that year shall not exceed $1.00 per month for each full month before such exempt certificate was issued. The city treasurer shall review all such applications and determine if they recite facts qualifying the application for an exemption. Those applications he determines to qualify the applicant for a refund shall be forwarded to the director of finance and the treasurer for refund payment. If any application for an exemption or refund as permitted to be filed by this section is determined to be deficient by the city treasurer for failure to set forth the facts necessary to qualify the applicant for an exemption or refund or if the city treasurer has reason to believe the applicant has failed to truthfully set forth such facts, he may deny the application by giving written notice thereof and by stating therein the grounds for such denial and mailing such notice in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application. 
(Code 1959, § 9-226; Ord. No. 2295, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3331, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 50-220. - Penalty for late payment of maximum tax. 
Any tax payable under this article which is paid later than prescribed by this article and when payment is not received until after July 31 and when such payment constitutes the maximum charge as set forth in section 50-215, a penalty of 12 percent shall be paid together with the tax. 
(Code 1959, § 9-227; Ord. No. 2382, § 2; Ord. No. 3440, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 50-221—50-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Documentary Transfer Tax Act, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-251. - Imposed. 
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or any other person, by his direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale, exceeds $100.00 a tax at the rate of $1.10 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 9-256; Ord. No. 2182, § 2; Ord. No. 3605, § 1) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11911.  
Sec. 50-252. - Payment responsibility. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to section 50-251 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit the document or instrument is made, signed or issued. 
(Code 1959, § 9-257; Ord. No. 2182, § 3)  
Sec. 50-253. - Exemption for instrument to secure debt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Code 1959, § 9-258; Ord. No. 2182, § 4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11921.  
Sec. 50-254. - Federal or state exemption. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof or any state or territory or political subdivision thereof is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed by this article when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Code 1959, § 9-259; Ord. No. 2182, § 5; Ord. No. 2328, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11922.  
Sec. 50-255. - Exemption for conveyances for reorganization. 
(a)  Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
(1)  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
(2)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in 11 USC 205(m), as amended; 
(3)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in 11 USC 506(3), as amended; or 
(4)  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
(b)  Subsections (a)(1) to (4) of this section, inclusive, shall only apply if the making, delivering or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Code 1959, § 9-260; Ord. No. 2182, § 6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11923.  
Sec. 50-256. - Exemption for Securities and Exchange Commission order conveyances. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances, to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
(1)  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 USC 79k, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935. 
(2)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed. 
(3)  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Code 1959, § 9-261; Ord. No. 2182, § 7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11924.  
Sec. 50-257. - Exemption for transfer of interest or termination of realty partnership. 
(a)  If any realty is held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise if: 
(1)  Such partnership or another partnership is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
(2)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
(b)  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this article, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon, all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(c)  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of a termination described in subsection (b) of this section and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Code 1959, § 9-262; Ord. No. 2182, § 8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11925.  
Sec. 50-258. - Administration of article. 
The county recorder shall administer this article in conformity with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code div. 2, pt. 6.7 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq.) and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 9-263; Ord. No. 2182, § 9)  
Secs. 50-259—50-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - NEW CONSTRUCTION TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 74. 
 
Sec. 50-291. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article, words, phrases and terms shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them as shown in the city zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 9-268; Ord. No. 2582, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2644, § 3; Ord. No. 3505, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-292. - Deposit of money collected. 
All sums of money collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9-269; Ord. No. 2582, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3505, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-293. - Declaration. 
It is declared that the taxes required to be paid by this article are assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the city and solely for the purposes of producing revenue. 
(Code 1959, § 9-270; Ord. No. 2582, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2644, § 4; Ord. No. 3505, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-294. - Rate of tax. 
Every person constructing any single-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, habitation unit or commercial or industrial building in the city shall pay the following percentages of the total valuation calculated for the project at the time the building permit for such development is obtained: 
(1)  Single-family residential, 1.0 percent. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential, 2.0 percent. 
(3)  Commercial, 1.0 percent. 
(4)  Industrial, 1.0 percent. 
(Code 1959, § 9-266; Ord. No. 2582, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2644, § 1; Ord. No. 3505, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 50-295. - Payments; refunds. 
The tax imposed under this article shall be due and payable upon the obtaining of a building permit for such construction; provided, however, that there shall be a refund of such tax if the permit is not used for such construction or creation and the permit is cancelled. 
(Code 1959, § 9-267; Ord. No. 2582, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2644, § 2; Ord. No. 3505, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 50-296—50-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy license tax, Government Code § 37100 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-331. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business includes professions, trades, occupations and all and every kind of callings, whether or not carried on for profit. 
Employee means any person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, member of the owner's family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any or all other persons employed or working in such business. 
Gross receipts includes the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit is allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in the term "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from the term "gross receipts" shall be cash discounts allowed and taken on sales, state and city sales tax and federal retail excise tax, such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit, amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, that portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represent payments to subcontractors, provided that such subcontractors are licensed under this article and provided the general contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid each subcontractor. 
Person includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee. 
(Code 1959, § 14-1; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 1; Ord. No. 3893, § 1; Ord. No. 4049, § 12, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 4102, § 2, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 4103, § 2, 5-27-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-332. - Purpose of article. 
This article is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. 
(Code 1959, § 14-2; Ord. No. 1836, § 1)  
Sec. 50-333. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the business license division and it is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the sections of this article. The chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this article as may from time to time be required by the business license division or the city council. 
(b)  The business license division, in the exercise of the duties imposed under this article and acting through deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether this article has been complied with. 
(c)  The business license division, each and all assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed in this article and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any person having such license certificate issued in his possession or under his control who wilfully fails to exhibit the license certificate on demand shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided by this article. It shall be the duty of the business license division to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating this article. 
(Code 1959, § 14-3; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3893, § 2)  
Sec. 50-334. - Imposed; persons exempted from payment. 
(a)  There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this article license taxes in the amounts prescribed. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state. 
(c)  Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this article. 
(d)  Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city shall include nonrecurring entertainers hired by the city or one of its agencies. 
(Code 1959, § 14-12; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 4146, § 1, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 50-335. - Separate license for each location; exception. 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license, provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under this article shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(Code 1959, § 14-7; Ord. No. 1836, § 1)  
Sec. 50-336. - Commencement or continuance of business without license. 
No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or for any other person or otherwise, shall conduct or carry on any business in the city without first having obtained a license therefor from the city and without complying with any and all applicable sections of this article. Each day that such business is so carried on constitutes a separate violation of this article. Any such person violating or causing the violation of any of the sections of this article shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.1; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3196, § 1)  
Sec. 50-337. - Application for license. 
(a)  Every person required to have a license under this article shall make application for the license to the business license division. Upon the payment of the prescribed license tax, the business license division shall issue to such person a license, if the business is not unlawful and is conducted in conformity to the zoning code. The license shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
(2)  The business licensed; 
(3)  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
(4)  The date of the expiration of such license; and 
(5)  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Every person required to have a license under this article shall pay the license application fee at the time of the filing of the application with the business license division, of which an amount set by resolution of the city council is a nonrefundable application fee. 
(Code 1959, § 14-5; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3384, § 1; Ord. No. 3893, § 3; Ord. No. 4233 , § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 50-338. - Statement of gross receipts by applicant for new license. 
If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, he shall pay the minimum annual license fee for a license as set forth in section 50-411, which will expire not more than nine months commencing with the quarter in which the business begins from the date of issuance on either March 31, June 30, September 30, or December 31. Within 30 days after the expiration date, the person so licensed shall report on a form, provided by the business license division, the gross receipts of the business for the period covered by the license. The business license division shall determine from this information the additional fee required for the remaining three-month or six-month period, whichever completes the yearly term of the license, by estimating the gross receipts on an annual basis and prorating the fee for that portion of the year the business will have been in operation at the end of the next three-month or six-month period, which shall either be March 31, June 30, September 30, or December 31. The applicant will be given credit for his initial minimum fee. If the business license division determines that the gross receipts so estimated will be less than the minimum gross receipts set forth in section 50-411, it shall extend the license fee for the next three-month or six-month period without payment of any additional fee. The business license division shall not issue to any such person another license of the same or any other business, until such person shall have filed the written statement as required by this section. 
(Code 1959, § 14-16; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 3; Ord. No. 3363, § 1; Ord. No. 3607, § 1; Ord. No. 3893, § 7)  
Sec. 50-339. - Filing of statement of gross receipts with application for renewal of license. 
(a)  When the license fee is based on gross receipts, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the business license division, for its guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be provided by the business license division, written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths. 
(b)  This section requiring sworn, written statements or statements under penalty of perjury shall not only apply to business licenses, but shall also apply to taxes collected by the city as its own tax collecting agent, based upon gross receipts; however, if a tax other than a business license tax is involved, such written statement shall be presented by the person required to pay such tax to the business license division at the time prescribed for the required payment of such tax. 
(Code 1959, § 14-17; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 2105, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 4; Ord. No. 3363, § 2; Ord. No. 3893, § 8)  
Sec. 50-340. - Statement of gross receipts not deemed conclusive for computation of tax; investigation of business records; information confidential. 
(a)  No statement of gross receipts shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein nor shall the filing of the statement of gross receipts preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this article. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the city treasurer, his deputies or authorized employees of the city who are hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in his judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. 
(b)  All licenses, applicants for licenses and persons engaged in business in the city are hereby required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purpose stated in subsection (a) of this section. Any failure or refusal to permit such an examination by a licensee shall constitute good cause under section 50-381 for the suspension, cancellation or revocation of the license issued under this article, which penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to any other penalty or remedy provided for by law, whether criminal or civil in nature. 
(Code 1959, § 14-18; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 5)  
Sec. 50-341. - Failure to file statement of gross receipts or corrected statement. 
(a)  If any person fails to file any required statement of gross receipts within the time prescribed or if, after demand therefor made by the business license division, he fails to file a corrected statement, the business license division may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as it may be able to obtain. 
(b)  If such a determination is made, the business license division shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within 15 days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the business license division for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application for a hearing is made, the business license division shall cause the matter to be set for a hearing within 15 days before a hearing officer approved by the city manager. The business license division shall give at least ten days' notice to such person of the time and place of the hearing in the manner prescribed for serving notices of assessment. The hearing officer shall consider all evidence produced and shall make findings thereon which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed for serving notices of assessments. If the person does not request a hearing upon the assessment within the prescribed time, the amount of the assessment shall be final, and the amount thereof shall be immediately due and owing to the city. The administrative proceedings prescribed by this section shall be deemed exhausted. Failure to pay the tax prescribed shall constitute an assessment against such business property and shall be a lien on the property or the city shall have the right to bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount due. In each case the city shall assess an administrative fee set by resolution of the city council to cover any costs incurred. 
(Code 1959, § 14-19; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 6; Ord. No. 3893, § 9)  
Sec. 50-342. - Exemption from payment due to constitutional or legislative provisions. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment of such taxes as are prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 14-13; Ord. No. 1836, § 1)  
Sec. 50-343. - Adjustment for businesses engaged in interstate commerce. 
(a)  None of the license taxes provided for by this article shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. When a license tax is believed by a licensee or an applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the business license division for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the business license division may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The business license division shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the business license division shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will ensure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this article. Should the business license division determine the gross receipts measure of the license tax to be the proper basis, it may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant's business in the city or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of license tax therefor, provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this article. 
(b)  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the city treasurer stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. 
(c)  The business license division shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by this article. 
(d)  The business license division, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 14-14; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3893, § 6)  
Sec. 50-344. - Payment not relief from payment of other required business taxes. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this article shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other section of this Code or city ordinance and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other sections of this Code or city ordinances. 
(Code 1959, § 14-15; Ord. No. 1836, § 1)  
Sec. 50-345. - Expiration of licenses; due dates for payment of tax. 
(a)  Every person required to have a license under this article shall pay the renewal processing fee due at the time of the filing of the renewal with the business license division, of which an amount set by resolution of the city council is a nonrefundable renewal processing fee. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for, all licenses issued shall expire on the last day of December, March, June and September of each year, and the license tax shall be due and payable within 31 days after the expiration date for January and October and 30 days after the expiration date for April and June. However, if such 31st or 30th day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the tax shall be due and payable prior to 12:00 midnight of the next subsequent working day. 
(c)  All quarterly licenses are due and payable January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year. 
(d)  All daily licenses are due and payable each day in advance. 
(Code 1959, § 14-21; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 2043, § 3; Ord. No. 3357, § 7; Ord. No. 3893, § 10; Ord. No. 4233 , § 2, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 50-346. - Standards for businesses not involving free speech. 
The business license division shall refuse to approve the issuance of a business license not involving free speech if it finds that: 
(1)  The business is prohibited by any local or state law, statute, rule or regulation or prohibited in the particular location by any law, statute or rule; 
(2)  The business has been or is a public nuisance; 
(3)  The applicant or his employee, agent or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license or in any report or record required to be filed with the business license division; 
(4)  The applicant is unfit to be trusted with the privileges granted by such license or has a bad moral character or intemperate habits; or 
(5)  The business, in the judgment of the business license division, will be materially detrimental to public health, morals, safety or general welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.8; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3893, § 12)  
Sec. 50-347. - Standards for businesses which may involve free speech. 
The business license division shall refuse to approve the issuance of a business license for a bookstore, an exhibition, a traveling show, a motion picture theater, adult entertainment, a music venue, a sound or advertising vehicle, a modeling studio, a picture arcade, or an outdoor festival if he finds that: 
(1)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business does not comply with or fails to meet all of the health, zoning, fire and safety requirements or standards of all laws of the state, sections of this Code or city ordinances applicable to such business operation; or 
(2)  The applicant or his employee, agent or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license or in any report or record required to be filed with the business license division. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.8.1; Ord. No. 3893, § 13)  
Sec. 50-348. - Hearing on denial of license. 
Any person denied a license by the business license division shall be entitled to a hearing thereon before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager upon the filing of a written request therefor with the business license division. The hearing officer shall hold such hearing not later than ten days thereafter, unless an extension of time therefor is requested by the applicant. The hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided in section 50-386. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.9; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3893, § 14)  
Sec. 50-349. - Transferability of license; transfer fee. 
No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable except when the entire assets of the business have been sold to a new owner or when the business name has been changed or when a business has changed locations. In such case the license may be transferred or amended upon application to the city treasurer by the new owner or licensee requesting the change and upon the payment of a fee set by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be increased on a yearly basis pursuant to section 50-415. Such transfer shall not apply to businesses whose license fees are based on gross receipts. 
(Code 1959, § 14-8; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 2776, § 8; Ord. No. 3121, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 2; amended during 6/88 supplement; amended during 6/89 supplement; amended during 6/90 supplement; amended during 6/91 supplement; amended during 9/92 supplement; amended during 9/93 supplement; amended during 6/94 supplement; amended during 6/95 supplement; amended during 6/96 supplement; amended during 6/97 supplement; amended during 6/98 supplement; amended during 6/99 supplement; amended during 6/00 supplement; amended during 6/01 supplement; amended during 1/07 supplement)  
Sec. 50-350. - Duplicate license; fee. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the city treasurer to replace any license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee's filing of a statement of such fact and, at the time of filing such statement, paying to the city treasurer a duplicate license fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 14-9; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 2776, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; amended during 6/91 supplement; Ord. No. 3893, § 4)  
Sec. 50-351. - Posting or carrying of license required. 
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: 
(1)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
(2)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
(Code 1959, § 14-10; Ord. No. 1836, § 1)  
Sec. 50-352. - Additional authority of business license division. 
(a)  The business license division shall have the authority, provided good cause is shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a new or renewal business license for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(b)  Any person who is assessed a penalty pursuant to section 50-353 subdivisions (a) or (c), may seek a waiver of such penalty, provided good cause is shown, by submitting, within 15 days of notification by the business license division, a written request along with a sworn statement of facts to the director of finance. 
(1)  Pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b), a written request for a waiver of penalties in an amount not exceeding $500.00 shall be determined by the director of finance. The director of finance shall consider the request for a waiver of such penalties only if all completed application forms and payment of all business license taxes through the current licensing term have been submitted to the city. Any decision rendered by the director of finance shall be final. 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b), a written request for a waiver of penalties in an amount of $500.00 or more shall be determined by the city council. The city council shall consider the request for a waiver of such penalties only if all completed application forms and payment of all business license taxes through the current licensing term have been submitted to the city. Any decision rendered by the city council shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 14-11; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3504, § 1; Ord. No. 3893, § 5; Ord. No. 4146, § 2, 7-11-2011)  
Sec. 50-353. - Commencement or continuance of business without license; compromise of penalties; failure to file declaration of gross receipts report. 
(a)  Any person who conducts or carries on any business without first having obtained a license therefor shall pay a penalty of 20 percent of the prescribed license tax, and an additional ten percent penalty shall be added each 30 days thereafter until paid. The maximum penalty shall be 100 percent of the license. The penalty shall be collected in the same manner as other license taxes are collected and payment thereof enforced. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the business license division has the authority to compromise any penalties due under subsection (a) of this section for commercial and residential rental business licenses, if the following two conditions are met: 
(1)  Within 15 days after the date of dispatch of the notice of delinquency of the tax liability from the business license division's office, the taxpayer shall pay to the business license division the full amount of delinquent tax liability. 
(2)  Within 15 days after the date of receipt, the delinquent taxpayer fully completes a city business license application form and submits the completed application form to the business license division. 
(c)  Any person who fails to file a declaration of gross receipts report as required by this article shall be subject to a penalty of 20 percent of the balance of tax due, and an additional ten percent penalty shall be added each 30 days thereafter until filed and paid. The maximum penalty shall be 100 percent of the balance of the tax due. The penalty shall be collected in the same manner as other business license taxes are collected and payment thereof enforced. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.2; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3222, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 8; Ord. No. 3815, § 1)  
Sec. 50-354. - Effect of license issuance. 
The issuance of any license shall not authorize the commencing or conducting of any business in the city contrary to the provisions of the zoning ordinance or other sections of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.3; Ord. No. 3031, § 2)  
Sec. 50-355. - Unlawful business. 
No license issued under this article shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business or practice. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.4; Ord. No. 3031, § 2)  
Sec. 50-356. - Indebtedness for past license taxes. 
No license shall be issued for any succeeding license period to any person who, at the time of requesting any new license, is indebted to the city for any unpaid license tax. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.5; Ord. No. 3031, § 2)  
Sec. 50-357. - Civil and criminal actions. 
(a)  The amount of any license tax imposed by this article shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person carrying on any business mentioned in this article without having a license therefor from the city shall be subject to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of license tax imposed by this article on such business. 
(b)  The conviction and punishment of any person for carrying on any business without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of such license tax due or unpaid at the time of such conviction. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent a criminal prosecution of any person violating any of the sections of this article; provided, however, that persons holding a license issued by the state to carry on any business shall not be subject to criminal prosecution for failure to pay any license tax required by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.6; Ord. No. 3031, § 2)  
Sec. 50-358. - Mistakes. 
In no case shall any mistake made by the business license division in stating the amount of a license tax prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of the amount which shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a business subject to a license under this article. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.7; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3893, § 11)  
Sec. 50-359. - Tax constitutes debt to city. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by this article shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties. 
(Code 1959, § 14-23; Ord. No. 1836, § 1)  
Secs. 50-360—50-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
 
Sec. 50-381. - Businesses not involving free speech. 
Any license issued to any person to carry on any business not involving free speech which is not covered in section 50-382 may be revoked or suspended in the manner provided in this division. This class of business license shall be revoked or suspended by the hearing officer if he finds that the licensee or his employee, agent or manager has: 
(1)  Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in an application for a license or in any report or record required to be filed with the business license division; 
(2)  Violated any statute or any other ordinance arising from any act performed in the exercise of any rights granted by the license, the revocation of which is under consideration; 
(3)  Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving theft, embezzlement or moral turpitude; 
(4)  Committed any act constituting dishonesty or fraud; 
(5)  A bad moral character, intemperate habits, or a bad reputation for truth, honesty or integrity; 
(6)  Committed any unlawful, false, fraudulent deception or dangerous act while conducting a licensed business; 
(7)  Published, uttered or disseminated any false, deceptive or misleading statements or advertisement in connection with the operation of a licensed business; 
(8)  Violated any rule or regulation adopted by any governmental agency relating to the licensee's business; 
(9)  Conducted the business contrary to the provisions of the zoning ordinance; or 
(10)  Conducted the business in a manner which is materially detrimental to public health, morals, safety, or general welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.10; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3065, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 9; Ord. No. 3893, § 15)  
Sec. 50-382. - Businesses which may involve free speech. 
Any license issued to any person to carry on the business of a bookstore, an exhibition, a traveling show, a motion picture theater, adult entertainment, a music venue, a sound or advertising vehicle, a modeling studio, a picture arcade, or an outdoor festival under this article may be revoked or suspended in the manner provided in this division. This class of business license shall be revoked or suspended by the hearing officer if he finds that: 
(1)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business does not comply with or fails to meet all health, zoning, fire and safety requirements or standards of all laws of the state, this Code or city ordinances applicable to such business operation. 
(2)  The licensee or his employee, agent or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application of a license or in any report or record required to be filed with the business license division. 
(3)  The licensee or his employee, agent or manager has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of: 
a.  Any violation of any statute, any section of this code or any other ordinance arising from any act performed in the exercise of any rights granted by the license, the revocation of which is under consideration; or 
b.  Any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance caused by any act performed in the exercise of any rights granted by the license, revocation of which is under consideration. 
(4)  The licensee has commenced or is conducting the business contrary to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.10.1; Ord. No. 3893, § 16)  
Sec. 50-383. - Suspension without notice for businesses not involving free speech. 
(a)  The chief of police, fire chief, business license division, director of public works, or county health officer may suspend any license without previous notice and, pending a hearing, when it appears to such officers that the immediate suspension of any license is necessary for the public health, morals, safety or general welfare. 
(b)  At the time of the suspension of the license, the licensee shall be served with a written statement containing the reasons for such suspension and giving notice of the time and place for hearing thereon before the hearing officer appointed by the city manager as determined by the business license division. 
(c)  The hearing of the charges upon which the suspension was based shall be held not later than 48 hours after such suspension unless an extension of time therefor is requested by the licensee, in which event the hearing will be held not later than 15 days after suspension. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.11; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3893, § 17)  
Sec. 50-384. - Suspension without notice for businesses which may involve free speech. 
(a)  The chief of police, fire chief, business license division, director of public works, or county health officer may suspend any license without previous notice and, pending a hearing, when it appears to such officers that the immediate suspension of any license is necessary for the public health, morals, safety or general welfare due to a finding under section 50-347(1). 
(b)  At the time of the suspension of the license, the licensee shall be served with a written statement containing the reasons for such suspension and giving notice of the time and place for a hearing thereon before the hearing officer appointed by the city manager as determined by the business license division. 
(c)  The hearing of the charges upon which the suspension was based shall be held not later than 48 hours after such suspension unless an extension of time therefor is requested by the licensee, in which event the hearing will be held not later than 15 days after suspension. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.11.1; Ord. No. 3893, § 18)  
Sec. 50-385. - Notice of hearing. 
The city treasurer shall, upon written charges filed by any officer or department head of the city, give notice to any licensee to appear before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager at a time and place set for such hearing by the city treasurer to show cause why the license issued to such licensee should not be revoked or suspended. Such notice shall state the grounds for the complaint or reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension and shall be served upon the licensee not less than five days prior to the date set for such hearing. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.12; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3357, § 16)  
Sec. 50-386. - Hearing. 
(a)  Hearing officer. The hearing officer shall hold a hearing of the suspension or revocation of a license at the time set therefor. The licensee may appear personally or by counsel. The hearing officer may continue the hearing from time to time; provided, however, that the hearing held pursuant to section 50-383 or 50-384 may be continued only with the consent of the licensee. At the conclusion thereof, the hearing officer may revoke, suspend or reinstate any such license upon such terms and conditions as in the exercise of reasonable discretion he shall determine. Such decision shall also contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, shall state the hearing officer's findings and shall set forth that the decision is subject to Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
(2)  Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(3)  Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding, unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(4)  Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts in this state. 
(5)  Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(6)  Rights of parties. Each party shall have the right, among others, to: 
a.  Call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing. 
b.  Introduce documentary and physical evidence. 
c.  Question opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.13; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3893, § 19)  
Sec. 50-387. - Notice. 
Any notice required to be given by this article shall be deemed sufficient if given by personal delivery to the licensee, to any employee of such licensee at his place of business mentioned in the license if such licensee is absent from such place of business, or if sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address shown on the license or in other public records pertaining to the matter to which the notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed 24 hours following the time of the deposit in the post office. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.14; Ord. No. 3031, § 2)  
Sec. 50-388. - Duty of business license division. 
After a license has been revoked or suspended, no license shall be issued by the business license division to any licensee to carry on any business or do any act for which such a license was granted until an order to the contrary shall have been issued by the hearing officer. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.15; Ord. No. 3031, § 2; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3893, § 20)  
Sec. 50-389. - Effect. 
No person whose license has been revoked or suspended pursuant to this article shall carry on any business or do any act permitted to be done pursuant to such license during the period of suspension or after revocation thereof until the license is reinstated or a new license shall have been granted. 
(Code 1959, § 14-22.16; Ord. No. 3031, § 2)  
Secs. 50-390—50-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TAX SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 50-411. - Businesses engaged in selling at retail; request for reclassification of business; hearing upon denial of request. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail, where 75 percent of the gross receipts of such business are derived from such sales, shall pay an annual business license tax (based upon the annual gross receipts of the business) in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(b)  Every person engaged in any business listed herein shall pay an annual business license tax (based upon the annual gross receipts of the business) in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. Businesses that do not receive direct revenues for business conducted in the city shall pay the annual business license tax applicable to businesses that fall within subsections (b)(1) through (b)(5) immediately below, and as indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(1)  Less than six employees 
(2)  Seven to 15 employees 
(3)  Sixteen to 30 employees 
(4)  Thirty-one to 60 employees 
(5)  Over 60 employees 
Advertising agencies 
Auto and appliance repair 
Barbershops 
Beauty shops 
Cafes or restaurants 
Child and family care 
Dry cleaners 
Electronic data processing 
Equipment rental, including auto and truck rentals 
Gardening 
Hospitals and rest homes 
Hotels and motels 
Kennels 
Laundries 
Medical and dental laboratories 
Mobile home parks 
Newspaper and magazine agency 
Photo studios 
Physical culture studios or gymnasiums 
Public utilities, including gas, electric, telegraph and telephone 
Trading stamp agencies 
Training schools 
Undertaking establishments 
Any business which the city treasurer classifies as similar to those above mentioned. 
(c)  Every person engaged in any trade, occupation or profession listed herein shall pay an annual license tax (based upon the annual gross receipts of the business) in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. Businesses that do not receive direct revenues for business conducted in the city shall pay the annual business license tax applicable to businesses that fall within subsections (c)(1) through (c)(5) immediately below, and as indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(1)  Less than six employees 
(2)  Seven to 15 employees 
(3)  Sixteen to 30 employees 
(4)  Thirty-one to 60 employees 
(5)  Over 60 employees 
Accountants, including public and certified public 
Attorney at law 
Chiropractors 
Engineers 
Medical and dental doctors, including osteopaths 
Psychologists 
Public bookkeeping 
Real estate brokers 
Veterinarians 
Any trade, occupation or profession which the city treasurer classifies as similar to those above mentioned. 
(d)  Every person engaged in the business of renting residential units shall pay the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(e)  Every person engaged in the business of renting or leasing commercial property shall pay an annual business license tax (based upon the gross receipts of the business) in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(f)  Every contractor who performs construction work in the city and who is subject to the job fee described in this paragraph shall pay an annual business license tax in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. Such fee shall not be prorated and shall be considered an administrative fee for processing such license application as provided in section 14-5 of article I of this chapter. In addition, all contractors shall pay as part of the business license a job fee, which fee shall be a sum equal to 30 percent of the grading or building permit fee or other general contracting permit fee and/or a sum equal to 100 percent of the mechanical, electrical, or plumbing permit fee. The job fee shall be due and payable at the time of the issuance of the permit and shall be paid at the same time the permit fee is paid. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  An owner-builder may be exempt from the payment of any job fee, at the discretion of the building official, if all work performed under a permit is done exclusively by such owner upon his own property. 
(2)  Permits for work within the public right-of-way or future right-of-way may be exempt from application of a job fee at the discretion of the director of public works. 
Contractors not subject to the job fee referred to above in this subsection will pay an annual business license tax (based upon the annual gross receipts of the business) in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. The contractor, upon application of a business license, must indicate the date in which the job is to commence and estimate the date in which the job is to be completed and must indicate the gross amount of contract. The license fee shall be based on the gross amount of contract and the term of the business license will be that which is indicated on the application for expiration within that quarter. Within 30 days of the expiration of the business license, the contractor shall file a declaration of gross receipts report written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, on forms provided by the city treasurer, indicating the actual gross receipts of the job or jobs for the period covered by the license. The city treasurer shall determine the balance due from revenues over that which is covered by the license fee paid for the previously licensed period. If the gross receipts of the license is less than the minimum gross receipt set forth in section 14-24, the license may be extended to cover the succeeding job or jobs unless the succeeding job or jobs exceeds one year from the commencement of the first job. If within the term of one year of commencement the contractor obtains additional jobs, he shall pay the amount over the minimum annual license fee; however, in no case shall the license exceed the one-year term from commencement. In each case the contractor must file a declaration of gross receipts report as provided for above. Failure to file such timely statements shall result in the accumulation of penalties as provided for by section 14-22.2. 
(Code 1959, § 14-24; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 1845, § 1; Ord. No. 1909, § 1; Ord. No. 1995, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2776, §§ 2, 3, 4; Ord. No. 3196, § 2; Ord. No. 3279, § 1; amended during 6/86 supplement; Ord. No. 3357, § 10; amended during 6/87 supplement; amended during 6/88 supplement; amended during 6/89 supplement; amended during 6/90 supplement; amended during 6/91 supplement; Ord. No. 3607, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 3610, §§ 1, 2; amended during 9/92 supplement; amended during 9/93 supplement; amended during 6/94 supplement; amended during 6/95 supplement; amended during 6/96 supplement; amended during 6/97 supplement; amended during 6/98 supplement; amended during 6/99 supplement; Ord. No. 3893, § 21; amended during 6/00 supplement; amended during 6/01 supplement; amended during 1/07 supplement; Ord. No. 4161, § 1, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 4173, § 1, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 4184, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 50-412. - Business providing entertainment; amusement machines, etc. 
Every person transacting or carrying on the business herein enumerated shall pay an annual business license tax in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. 
(1)  Repealed by Ordinance No. 3262. 
(2)  Auction house. 
(3)  Auctioneer. 
(4)  Billiard room, each table. 
(5)  Billboards. 
(6)  Bowling alleys, each alley. 
(7)  Boxing or wrestling exhibitions. 
(8)  Circuses, carnivals or fairs. 
a.  If held as a trade stimulator at shopping centers or for recreational or entertaining events. 
(9)  Concert, or similar event. 
(10)  Coin-actuated machine operator: 
a.  Electronic game machines which are run by an electronic rather than electromechanical mechanism; 
b.  Machines vending any goods, wares or merchandise operated by coins by value greater than $0.10; 
c.  U.S. postage stamp machine; 
d.  Coin-operated photo machines and phonographs; 
(11)  Dance studios. 
(12)  Delivery or service trucks. 
(13)  Dry cleaners, laundries, towel, linen, uniform and wiping rag supply trucks, if not operated from a local address. 
(14)  Junk and rubbish collectors. 
(15)  Junk dealers and auto dismantlers. 
(16)  Manufacturing and processing, including product research and development, newspaper and job printing, and wholesaling, per year: 
a.  Less than six employees; 
b.  Seven to 15 employees; 
c.  Sixteen to 30 employees; 
d.  Thirty-one to 60 employees; 
e.  Over 60 employees; 
(16A)  Massage parlors. 
(17)  Itinerant merchant, operating from one temporary location. 
(18)  Pawnbroker. 
(19)  Peddlers or solicitors: 
a.  Each person peddling or soliciting on foot; 
b.  Each person peddling or soliciting with a vehicle. 
(20)  Public dancing: 
a.  One single dance; 
b.  One dance per week; 
c.  Each additional dance per week. 
(21)  Route food merchant, selling food for human consumption over regularly established route. 
(22)  Secondhand dealer. 
(23)  Stock and bond brokers, real estate and personal loan agents and savings and loan associations. 
(24)  Swap meet or trade fair. 
(25)  Reserved. 
(26)  Filming of TV and motion pictures. 
(27)  Los Angeles County Fair concessionaires; 
a.  Persons renting commercial spaces or concession spaces during the annual Los Angeles County Fair. 
b.  Persons operating carnival rides at the annual Los Angeles County Fair. 
c.  Persons operating carnival games at the annual Los Angeles County Fair. 
(28)  The Los Angeles County Fair Association shall pay business license taxes (based upon paid parking) for interim events held at the Los Angeles County Fairgrounds (other than the annual Los Angeles County Fair) in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. The taxes imposed by this subsection shall be paid no later than 30 days after the end of the month in which the event is held. 
(Code 1959, § 14-25; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 1845, § 2; Ord. No. 2776, § 5; Ord. No. 2861, § 10; Ord. No. 2863, § 1; Ord. No. 3121, §§ 2—5; Ord. No. 3139, § 1; Ord. No. 3226, § 1; Ord. No. 3229, § 1; Ord. No. 3262, § 1; amended during 6/86 supplement; Ord. No. 3341, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 3357, § 13; amended during 6/87 supplement; amended during 6/88 supplement; amended during 6/89 supplement; amended during 6/90 supplement; amended during 6/91 supplement; amended during 9/92 supplement; amended during 9/93 supplement; amended during 6/94 supplement; Ord. No. 3742, § 1; amended during 6/95 supplement; amended during 6/96 supplement; amended during 6/97 supplement; amended during 6/98 supplement; amended during 6/99 supplement; amended during 6/00 supplement; amended during 6/01 supplement; amended during 1/07 supplement; Ord. No. 4142, § 2, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 4146, § 3, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 4161, § 1, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 4173, § 1, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 4184, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 50-413. - Delivery or service vehicles. 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city and for whom a license is not provided by section 50-411 or section 50-412 and who delivers goods, wares or merchandise of any kind by vehicle or who provides any type of service by use of a vehicle in the city shall pay a license tax as set forth in section 50-412. Upon the payment of such tax and a fee that may be prescribed by the business license division representing the cost of manufacture, not to exceed the amount set by resolution of the city council per plate or tag, the business license division shall issue such plate or tag for every vehicle so licensed, showing the date of expiration of such license. Such plate or tag shall substantially contain the following wording: "Pomona, California, No. ____________ expires ____________/____________/____________." Such metal license plate or tag shall be conspicuously displayed upon such vehicle on or near its rear bumper. Failure by the owner or operator of such vehicle to cause the unexpired license or tag to be so attached and displayed shall be a violation by such person of this article, and he shall be subject to its penalties. 
(Code 1959, § 14-26; Ord. No. 1836, § 1; Ord. No. 2179, § 1; Ord. No. 2909, § 1; Ord. No. 3357, § 14; amended during 6/88 supplement; amended during 6/89 supplement; amended during 6/90 supplement; Ord. No. 3893, § 22; Ord. No. 4161, § 1, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 4173, § 1, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 4184, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 50-414. - Farmers' markets; pedestrian malls. 
Farmers' markets, as defined by section 32-190, consisting of stands upon or immediately adjacent to a pedestrian mall established pursuant to the Pedestrian Mall Act of 1960 shall pay a license tax in the amount indicated in the city's business license tax schedule available through the city's revenue division and available on the city's website. Such farmers' markets shall be exempt from this tax if all produce sold from such market is grown or produced by the operator of such market. Furthermore, all farmers' markets, as defined by section 32-190, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by article III of chapter 14 of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 14-27; Ord. No. 2196, § 2; amended during 6/87 supplement; amended during 6/88 supplement; amended during 6/89 supplement; amended during 6/90 supplement; amended during 6/91 supplement; amended during 9/92 supplement; amended during 9/93 supplement; amended during 6/94 supplement; amended during 6/95 supplement; amended during 6/96 supplement; amended during 6/97 supplement; amended during 6/98 supplement; amended during 6/99 supplement; amended during 6/01 supplement; amended during 1/07 supplement; Ord. No. 4161, § 1, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 4173, § 1, 7-15-2013; Ord. No. 4184, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 50-415. - Tax adjustment to Consumer Price Index. 
All minimum license taxes and all flat fee license taxes shall be adjusted effective July 1, 1979, and annually thereafter on July 1 of each succeeding year in a percentage amount equal to the change in the Consumer Price Index during the 12-month period for the Metropolitan Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
(Code 1959, § 14-28; Ord. No. 2903, § 1; amended during 6/88 supplement; amended during 6/89 supplement; amended during 6/90 supplement; Ord. No. 4184, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 4226 , § 2, 5-16-2016)  
Secs. 50-416—50-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ADDITIONAL BUSINESS LICENSE TAX IN BUSINESS PROMOTION DISTRICT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Additional license tax with business improvement districts, Business and Professions Code § 36000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-451. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Additional tax for a business license means the tax established by this article initially or as may be changed in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this article for businesses conducting their activities within a business promotion district, in addition to the regular tax imposed upon various businesses generally not in such business promotion district. 
Business means all types of businesses. 
Business promotion district means an area in the city which has been designated a business promotion district pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 14-30; Ord. No. 1927, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-452. - Adoption of state law. 
Those provisions of the law set forth in Streets and Highways Code div. 18, pt. 5 (Streets and Highways Code § 36000 et seq.), not inconsistent with this article, are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1959, § 14-30.1; Ord. No. 2081, § 1)  
Sec. 50-453. - Notices and hearings. 
(a)  Whenever this article provides for a hearing and a notice therefor, such notice shall be given as follows: 
(1)  One publication in a newspaper published and circulated in the city. 
(2)  Mailing of such notice, postage prepaid, in a sealed envelope, by the United States mail, addressed to all businesses which conduct activities within any proposed or established business promotion district, as shown upon the active business licenses on file with the director of economic development and to all property owners in such district as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll of the county at the addresses shown on such roll. 
(3)  Both publication and mailing of notices shall be completed by at least ten days prior to the holding of any hearing required by this article, and such notices shall contain the designation of the time and place of the hearing and a statement describing the subject matter of such hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a hearing is held under this article, the city council shall hear all protests and receive evidence of or against a proposed action. The council shall also rule upon all protests which shall be final, and the council may continue the hearing from time to time. Proceedings shall terminate if protest is made by businesses in the proposed business promotion district which pay a majority of the taxes within the business promotion district under the general business license tax. 
(Code 1959, § 14-31; Ord. No. 1927, § 1; Ord. No. 2081, § 6; Ord. No. 3357, § 16; Ord. No. 3893, § 23)  
Sec. 50-454. - Purpose, intent and use of revenue. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to impose a tax on businesses within a business promotion district which is in addition to the general business license tax in the city and to use such proceeds, unless otherwise provided, for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  The acquisition, construction or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the district. 
(2)  Decoration of any public place in the district. 
(3)  Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public places within the district. 
(4)  Furnishing of music in any public place in the district. 
(5)  The general promotion of retail trade activities in the district. 
(Code 1959, § 14-32; Ord. No. 1927, § 1; Ord. No. 2081, § 2) 
State Law reference— Use of revenue, Streets and Highways Code §§ 36000, 36003, 36063.  
Sec. 50-455. - Procedure for establishment of business promotion district. 
The council may establish a business promotion district by the following procedure: 
(1)  Adoption of a resolution of the intention to establish a business promotion district which shall contain the following information: 
a.  A description of the proposed boundaries of such district. 
b.  The time and place when a hearing shall be held by the council to determine whether or not to adopt a resolution to establish such district. 
c.  The uses to which the additional revenue derived from the additional tax for a business license will be put, which shall be the same as those provided for by this article. 
d.  That the establishment of a business promotion district shall cause an additional tax for business licenses for those businesses conducting their activities in such district and that such increase shall be in accordance with the schedule provided by this article, which schedule shall be set forth at length in the resolution. 
e.  That any interested person may file a written protest prior to the hearing and may also appear at the hearing and present evidence; provided, however, no person may attack the proceeding on any ground not stated in a written protest filed prior to the time of hearing. 
(2)  Notice of the hearing provided for by the resolution of intention shall be published and mailed in accordance with section 50-453(a), except, however, such notice shall consist of a complete copy of the resolution of intention to establish a business promotion district. 
(3)  The hearing specified in the resolution of intention shall be held prior to the adoption of a resolution establishing a business promotion district. Such hearing shall be held in accordance with section 50-453(b). 
(4)  If it is determined by the council after the hearing that such a district should be created, the council may approve of such a district by adopting a resolution establishing the district. This resolution shall contain the following information: 
a.  The number, date and title of the resolution of intention pursuant to which it was adopted. 
b.  The time and place the hearing was held concerning the formation of such district. 
c.  The description of the boundaries of such district. 
d.  A statement that the business in the district created by the resolution shall be subject to the provisions of the additional tax provided by this article. 
e.  A statement that a business promotion district has been created pursuant to this article. The council may, however, modify the boundaries of the district as described in the resolution of intention based upon the evidence presented, provided the council proposes such change and continues the hearing until a later time and notice of the proposed change and the time and place of the continued hearing is given in accordance with section 50-453(a). 
(Code 1959, § 14-33; Ord. No. 1927, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Streets and Highways Code §§ 36021, 36022, 36025.  
Sec. 50-456. - Rate of additional tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed the tax in this section for a business license for all businesses conducting their activities in a business promotion district, which is in addition to the regular tax imposed upon various businesses generally not in such business promotion district. 
(b)  All businesses in such district shall be subject to this additional taxation if they are subject to taxation by the city under article VIII of this chapter. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this article as an additional tax for a business license shall be based upon the following schedule: 
(1)  Class I businesses. This class shall include all businesses which front on a pedestrian mall established pursuant to the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960 between Main Street and Linden Street whose retail sales business accounts for more than 75 percent of the gross receipts of such businesses. Businesses in this class shall be taxed as an additional tax for a business license 1 4/10 times the ordinary business license tax not to exceed $7,500.00 annually. 
(2)  Class II businesses. This class shall include all businesses not fronting on a pedestrian mall established pursuant to the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960 and also businesses that have retail sales which account for more than 75 percent of the gross receipts of such business. Businesses in this class shall be taxed as an additional tax for a business license nine-tenths times the ordinary license tax not to exceed $7,500.00 annually or three-tenths of one percent of gross annual receipts or whichever amount is less. 
(3)  Class III businesses. Businesses in this class shall be taxed as an additional tax for a business license 1 6/10 times the ordinary business license tax, not to exceed $1,500.00 or three-tenths of one percent of gross annual receipts, whichever amount is less. Class III businesses shall include the following: 
a.  Secondhand dealers. 
b.  Stock and bond brokers, real estate and personal loan agents and savings and loan associations. 
(4)  Class IV businesses. Businesses in this class shall be taxed as an additional tax for a business license nine-tenths times the ordinary business license tax not to exceed three-tenths of one percent of gross annual receipts. Class IV businesses shall include the following: 
a.  Advertising agencies. 
b.  Apartments, motels or roominghouses, with more than two rentals, whether located in one or various locations. 
c.  Auto and appliance repair. 
d.  Barbershops. 
e.  Beauty shops. 
f.  Cafes or restaurants. 
g.  Child care. 
h.  Contractors. 
i.  Equipment rental, including auto and truck rentals. 
j.  Gardening. 
k.  Hotels. 
l.  Manufacturing and processing, including product research and development, newspaper and job printing, and wholesaling. 
m.  Massage parlors. 
n.  Medical and dental laboratories. 
o.  Newspaper and magazine agencies. 
p.  Photo studios. 
q.  Physical culture studios or gymnasiums. 
r.  Public utilities, including gas, electric, telegraph and telephone. 
s.  Trading stamp agencies. 
t.  Trailer parks. 
u.  Training schools. 
v.  Undertaking establishments. 
(5)  Class V businesses. Businesses in this class shall be taxed as an additional tax for a business license four-tenths times the ordinary business license tax, not to exceed three-tenths of one percent of gross annual receipts. Class V businesses shall include the following: 
a.  Attorneys at law. 
b.  Accountants, including public and certified public. 
c.  Chiropractors. 
d.  Electronic data processing centers. 
e.  Engineers. 
f.  Medical and dental doctors, including osteopaths. 
g.  Psychologists. 
h.  Public bookkeepers. 
i.  Real estate brokers. 
j.  Veterinarians. 
(6)  Class VI businesses. This class shall include all businesses not listed as class I, II, III, IV, or V in this subsection. Businesses in class VI shall be taxed as an additional tax for a business license four-tenths times the ordinary business license tax or three-tenths of one percent of gross annual receipts, whichever amount is less. 
(d)  A new business in such district shall be exempt from any assessment under this article for three months after opening doors for business and will then be assessed in accordance with its classification, with the annual amount due to be paid on a pro rata basis depending upon the portion of the year during which assessments are due and payable. 
(e)  Any business, person or institution located within the business promotion district which or who is exempt from the payment of a business license tax by the state constitution is not taxed under this article, but may make a voluntary base contribution of $87.50 and an additional $17.50 for each employee working within the business promotion district. Such contributions shall be used for the purposes provided by this article. Any business may also make contributions, in excess of the amount provided for in this article, to be used for the purposes provided for by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 14-34; Ord. No. 2686, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1927, § 1; Ord. No. 2160, § 1; Ord. No. 2357, § 1; Ord. No. 2399, § 1; Ord. No. 2787, §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 2909, § 2 (part)) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, Streets and Highways Code § 36000; tax rate, Streets and Highways Code § 36060.  
Sec. 50-457. - Maximum rate. 
The maximum tax provided for by this article for any business shall not exceed $1,500.00 per year. 
(Code 1959, § 14-39; Ord. No. 1942, § 1)  
Sec. 50-458. - Tax supplemental. 
As clarification of the tax imposed by section 50-456, but not for the purposes of amending or repealing of any provision contained therein, it is expressly the intention of that section and this article to impose the tax provided for in that section as an additional tax to that provided for an ordinary business license outside of a business promotion district, and therefore both the tax provided for in the schedule of tax set forth by section 50-456(c), plus the business license tax imposed by article VIII of this chapter, shall be paid by businesses located within a business promotion district established pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 14-34.1; Ord. No. 2081, § 3)  
Sec. 50-459. - Collection. 
The collection of the additional tax for a business license for any business promotion district shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as any other business license tax. 
(Code 1959, § 14-35; Ord. No. 1927, § 1)  
Sec. 50-460. - Changes in district boundaries. 
Changes may be made in the boundaries of any business promotion district by resolution of the council; however, no changes shall be made unless and until a hearing is held and notice thereof is given in accordance with section 50-453. Such notice shall contain the time and place when the hearing shall be held and a description of the proposed change of the district boundary. 
(Code 1959, § 14-36; Ord. No. 1927, § 1) 
State Law reference— Changes in boundaries of district, Streets and Highways Code § 36024.  
Sec. 50-461. - Changes of rate or use. 
Changes may be made in the rate or use of the additional tax imposed pursuant to this article for a business license by ordinance of the council; however, no changes shall be made unless and until a hearing is held and notice thereof is given in accordance with section 50-453. Such notice shall contain the time and place where the hearing shall be held and a description of the proposed change in the rate or use of the additional tax for a business license. 
(Code 1959, § 14-37; Ord. No. 1927, § 1; Ord. No. 2081, § 4) 
State Law reference— Rate changes, Streets and Highways Code § 36061.  
Sec. 50-462. - Payment required for issuance of business license. 
A business within a business promotion district established pursuant to this article shall not be issued a business license unless and until such business has paid both the business license tax provided for in this article and article VIII of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 14-38; Ord. No. 1939, § 1; Ord. No. 2081, § 5)  
Secs. 50-463—50-474. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - COMMERCIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 50-475. - Title. 
This article may be referred to as the "City of Pomona Commercial Improvement District Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-476. - Findings. 
The City Council of Pomona finds and declares all of the following: 
(a)  Real properties and/or businesses located and operating within commercial and other zones of the City of Pomona are economically disadvantaged, underutilized and unable to attract customers due to inadequate facilities, services, and activities in such area. 
(b)  It is in the public interest to promote the economic revitalization and physical maintenance of the commercial districts within the City of Pomona in order to create jobs, attract new businesses, and prevent the erosion of the commercial districts. 
(c)  It is of a particular local benefit to fund commercial related improvements, maintenance, and other activities through the levy of assessments upon the real properties and/or businesses that benefit from those improvements. 
(d)  Assessments levied for the purpose of providing improvements and promoting activities that benefit real properties and/or businesses are not taxes for the general benefit of the City of Pomona, but are assessments for the improvements and activities which confer special benefits upon the real properties and/or businesses for which the improvements and activities are provided. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-477. - Purpose. 
Whenever the public interest or convenience may require, the City Council of the City of Pomona may assist specifically defined and boundaried commercial districts within the City of Pomona in the formation of commercial improvement districts. The city shall determine and declare the commercial improvement district receives special benefit from the improvements, maintenance and activities, including all expenses incurred incidentally thereto, upon the commercial interest, or lots or parcels of real property on which such commercial interest occurs, in proportion to the estimated special benefit to be received by the commercial interest, or lot or parcel, as specified in the management plan. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-478. - Alternative procedures. 
The procedures established in this article shall be additional or alternative to any other procedure established by ordinance or state law. The election to proceed under this article shall be expressed in the resolution of intention to form the district which shall be referred to as a commercial improvement district ("CID" or "district"). 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-479. - Definitions. 
Activities which benefit real property and/or businesses located in the district, means, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  Promotion of public events which benefit real properties and/or businesses in the district; 
(2)  Furnishing of music in any public place within the district; 
(3)  Promotion of tourism to the district; 
(4)  Marketing and economic development, including promotion of new and existing businesses through improvement, retention and recruitment; and 
(5)  Providing security, sanitation, graffiti removal, street and sidewalk cleaning and other municipal services supplemental to those normally provided by the municipality. 
Advisory association shall mean a private nonprofit entity that is under contract with the city to administer or implement activities and improvements specified in the management plan. An advisory association may be an existing nonprofit entity or a newly formed nonprofit entity. The city council may appoint members to the advisory association prior to adoption of the resolution of intention to create the area, so that the advisory association may recommend the provisions of the resolution of intention. The city council may set membership of the advisory association board to persons paying the assessments under this part and may set the number of members as deemed necessary at time of adoption of resolution and at such time prior to the adoption of the CID. 
(1)  The advisory association shall comply with the Ralph M. Brown Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with section 54950) of Part I of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code), at all times when matters are within the subject matter of the districts are heard, discussed, or deliberated and with the California Public Records Act (Chapter 3.5 (commencing with section 6250) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code), for all documents relating to activities of the district. Notwithstanding the foregoing, except for the requirements pertaining to open meetings and documents relating to activities of the district being writing subject to the Public Records Act, an advisory association is a private entity and may not be considered to be a public entity for any purpose, nor may its board members, employers of board members, nor staff of the association be considered to be public officials for any purpose. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, prior to taking office as a member of the advisory association, each April 1 thereafter while a member thereof, and upon leaving the advisory association, board members shall file with the city clerk a statement of economic interest, under penalty of perjury. Such statement of economic interest shall be provided by the city clerk. Such statement shall identify the occupations, employers, and interests in businesses and real property owned by that member and by the employer of that member within the CID over the previous 12 months. In no event shall that member be required to provide any information regarding the primary place of residence of i) that member or ii) any real person associated with the member's employer. 
(3)  No member of the advisory association may vote on an issue where such member or that member's employer is under consideration for a contract for goods or services. Nothing in the foregoing sentence or any other provision shall preclude a member or a member's employer from providing goods or services to the advisory association, or from receiving any benefit from CID activities, improvements, or maintenance. 
Assessee means a real property and/or business which will have a special benefit conferred upon them and upon which an assessment will be imposed. 
Improvement means the acquisition, construction, installation, lease, maintenance, modification, repair, rehabilitation, or removal of any tangible property with an estimated useful life of five years or more including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Parking facilities; 
(2)  Benches, booths, kiosks, display cases, pedestrian shelters and signs; 
(3)  Trash receptacles and public restrooms; 
(4)  Lighting and heating facilities; 
(5)  Decorations; 
(6)  Landscaping and planting areas; 
(7)  Closing, opening, widening, or narrowing of existing streets; 
(8)  Facilities or equipment or both, to enhance security of persons and property within the district; 
(9)  Structures on public land; 
(10)  Ramps, sidewalks, plazas, conference centers, town centers or pedestrian malls; 
(11)  Statuary, fountains and other ornamental structures and facilities; and/or 
(12)  Facilities which are appurtenant to any of the foregoing or which are necessary or convenient for the maintenance or servicing thereof, including, but not limiting to, grading, clearing, removal of debris, the installation or construction of curbs, gutters, walls, sidewalks or paving, or water, irrigation, drainage or electrical facilities; 
Maintain or maintenance means the furnishing of services and materials for the ordinary and usual maintenance, operation, and servicing of any improvement, including: 
(1)  Repair, removal, or replacement of any part of an improvement; 
(2)  Providing for the life, growth, health and beauty of landscaping including cultivation, irrigation, trimming, spraying, fertilizing, or treating for disease or injury; 
(3)  The removal of trimmings, rubbish, debris and other solid waste; and 
(4)  The cleaning, sandblasting and painting of walls and other improvements to remove or cover graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-480. - Establishment. 
Upon presentation to the city clerk of a written petition, signed and acknowledged, by business and/or property owners in the proposed district who will pay more than 30 percent of the assessments proposed to be levied, the city council may initiate proceedings to form a CID by the adopting of a resolution expressing its intention to form a CID. The petition of property owners shall include a management plan. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-481. - Management plan—Contents. 
The management plan to be submitted before the city council can take any action on the establishment of a CID under this article shall contain all of the following: 
(a)  The name of the proposed district; 
(b)  An assessment diagram of the proposed district in sufficient detail to locate each parcel of property and/or business within the proposed district; 
(c)  A description of the boundaries of the district, including the boundaries of any benefit zones, proposed for the establishment or extension of the district in a manner sufficient to identify the lands included. Under no circumstances shall the boundaries of a proposed district overlap with the boundaries of another existing district created pursuant to this part. Nothing in this part shall require that the boundaries of a district created pursuant to this part to be contiguous. Nothing in this part prohibits the boundaries of an district created pursuant to this part to overlap with assessment districts established pursuant to other provisions of law including, but not limited to, the Parking and Business Improvement District Law of 1989 or the Business Improvement District Law of 1994; 
(d)  The improvements and activities proposed for each year of operation of the district and the maximum cost thereof; 
(e)  The total annual amount proposed to be expended for improvements, maintenance and operations; 
(f)  The proposed source or sources of financing including the proposed method and basis of levying the assessment in sufficient detail to allow each property or business owner to calculate the amount of the assessment to be levied against his or her property or business; 
(g)  The time and manner of collecting the assessments; 
(h)  The specific number of years in which assessments will be levied. In a new district, the maximum number of years shall be ten per term, or such other period as established by council at time of creation of the district. Upon renewal, a district shall have a term not to exceed 40 years. Notwithstanding these limitations, a district created to finance capital improvements with a lease or other agreement may levy assessments until the maximum maturity of the lease or other agreement. The management plan may set forth specific increases in assessments for each year of operation of the district. The increases set forth shall not be considered an increased assessment according to the provisions of Article XIII D of the Constitution of the State of California; and 
(i)  Any proposed rules and regulations to be applicable to the district. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 4089, § 1, 7-2-2007; Ord. No. 4105, § 1, 6-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-482. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall identify all assessees which will have a special benefit conferred upon them and upon which an assessment will be imposed. The proportionate special benefit derived by each identified assessee shall be determined in relationship to: 
(1)  The entirety of the capital cost of an improvement; 
(2)  The maintenance and operation expense of an improvement; and 
(3)  The cost of the service being provided. 
No assessment shall be imposed on any assessee which exceeds the reasonable cost of the proportional special benefit conferred on that assessee. Assessees within a district that are owned or used by any governmental agency, the State of California, or the United States shall not be exempt from assessment unless the city council finds that it has been demonstrated, by clear and convincing evidence, that such publicly owned real property will in fact receive no special benefit. 
(b)  All assessments must be supported by a detailed engineer's report prepared by a registered professional engineer certified by the State of California. The engineer's report may be incorporated in the management plan. 
(c)  The amount of the proposed assessment for each identified assessee shall be calculated. 
(1)  In the event of a parcel based assessment, the recorded owner of each parcel shall be given written notice by mail of the proposed assessment, the total amount thereof chargeable to the entire district, the amount chargeable to the owner's particular parcel, the duration of such payments, the reason for such assessment and the basis upon which the proposed assessment was calculated together with the date, time and location of a public hearing on the proposed assessment. 
(2)  In the event of a business based assessment, the identified owner of each business shall be given written notice by mail of the proposed assessment at the principal place of business within the district to be assessed, the total amount thereof chargeable to the entire district, the amount chargeable to the owner's particular business, the duration of such payments, the reason for such assessment and the basis upon which the proposed assessment was calculated together with the date, time and location of a public hearing on the proposed assessment. 
(d)  Each notice shall also include, in a conspicuous place thereon, a summary of the procedures applicable to the completion, return and tabulation of the ballots required including a disclosure statement that the existence of a majority protest will result in the assessment not be imposed. 
(e)  Each such notice mailed to owners of identified assessees within the district shall contain a ballot which includes the city's address for receipt of any such ballot once completed by any assessee receiving such notice whereby each such assessee may indicate his or her name, reasonable identification or the parcel and support or opposition to the proposed assessment. 
(f)  The city council shall conduct a public hearing upon the proposed assessment not less than 45 days after mailing the notice of the proposed assessment to each identified assessee. At the public hearing, the agency shall consider all protests against the proposed assessment and tabulate the ballots. The city council shall not impose an assessment if there is a "majority protest." A "majority protest" exists if, upon the conclusion of the hearing, ballots submitted in opposition to the assessment exceed the ballots submitted in favor of the assessment. In tabulating the ballots, the ballots shall be weighted according to the proposed proportional financial obligation of the assessee. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-483. - Preliminary report of the city clerk. 
When presented with a written petition, signed and acknowledged, of the business and/or property owners in the proposed district who will pay more than 30 percent of the assessments proposed to be levied, and the management plan, the city clerk shall prepare and submit a "preliminary report" in writing to the city council before the city council may take any action on such resolution of intention. The preliminary report shall include the following: 
(a)  Recommend that the proceeding be commenced as requested in the petition; 
(b)  Designate the plans and specifications of the proposed maintenance, improvements and activities for the proposed district; 
(c)  An estimate of the cost and expenses of said work for each year during which the proposed work will be done; 
(d)  An engineer's report stating the district establishment is consistent with the provisions of Article XIII D of the Constitution of the State of California in that each lot, parcel, or business interest within said district is being assessed in proportion to the estimated benefit to be received; and 
(e)  An assessment diagram showing the boundaries of the proposed assessment district and each lot, parcel or business within said district proposed to be assessed. 
Nothing shall obligate the city to bear any cost in preparation of the engineer's report or the assessment diagram of the boundaries of the proposed district. Such costs shall be borne by the petitioning owners in support of the district. Such costs may be reimbursed to such petitioning owners from assessment proceeds upon recommendation of the advisory association by inclusion in the proposed annual budget, and upon approval by the city council. Such reimbursement shall be allowed at any time after completion of the first year after formation. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-484. - Resolution of intention—Contents. 
Before the city council can establish a CID pursuant to this article, the city council shall pass a resolution declaring its intention to do so. Such resolution, in addition to all other matters it is herein required to contain, shall briefly describe the proposed improvements, state the period of time, which shall not exceed 40 years, for which the proposed improvements are to be made, state the period of time, which shall not exceed 40 years, for which the assessment shall be levied, and contain a description of the district to be benefited thereby and to be assessed to pay the costs and expenses thereof. The resolution of intention shall further do all of the following: 
State that a CID is proposed to be established pursuant to this article and describe the boundaries of the proposed district and boundaries of each separate benefit zone to be established within the district. The boundaries may be described by reference to the assessment diagram and description contained in the preliminary report of the city clerk on file in the office of the city clerk; 
State the name of the proposed district; 
State the type or types of improvements and activities proposed to be funded by the levy of assessments on assessees within the district, including any improvements to be acquired; 
State the amount of the proposed assessment for the entire district, the amount chargeable to the owner's particular parcel or business, the duration of the payments, the reason for such assessment and the basis upon which the proposed assessment was calculated; 
State the date, time and location of a public hearing on the proposed assessment; 
Include a ballot as described in section 50-482(e); 
State, in a conspicuous place, a summary of the procedures applicable to the completion, return and tabulation of the ballots, including a disclosure statement that the existence of a majority protest will result in the assessment not being imposed; 
State that the public hearing the testimony of all interested persons for or against the establishment of the district, the boundaries of the district, or the furnishing of specified types of improvements or activities will be heard; 
Refer to the preliminary report of the city clerk on file in the office of the city clerk; and 
State the manner of collection of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 4089, § 2, 7-2-2007; Ord. No. 4105, § 2, 6-2-2008)  
Sec. 50-485. - Reserved.  
Sec. 50-486. - Approval by the city council. 
Upon a demonstrated show of support, through petition, by the real property and/or business owners who will pay at least 30 percent of the proposed assessment, the city clerk will bring the issue of the proposed district to the city council. The city council may approve a resolution of intention to continue with the formation process or deny the petition at that time. Upon denial, petitioning parties may resubmit their proposal after 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-487. - Resolution of intention notice—Mail and publication. 
Notice of the proposed district shall be given as follows: 
(a)  A complete copy of the resolution of intention shall be mailed by first-class mail to each owner of a property or business in the proposed district, and to each local chamber of commerce and business organization known by the city council to be located within the proposed district, no later than 45 days before the public hearing; and 
(b)  A complete copy of the resolution of intention shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once, at least seven days before the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-488. - Hearing of protests—Majority protest. 
(a)  At any time prior to the date set for hearing protests, any person affected by the proposed assessment may make a written protest stating his or her objections thereto. Such protests must contain the information contained in the ballot mailed to the property owner in sufficient detail to allow the city clerk to: 
(1)  Identify the owner, 
(2)  Identify the amount of the proposed assessment, and 
(3)  Identify the parcel number (if a property based assessment), or the property address and name of the business (if a business based assessment). 
(b)  At the time set for hearing protests, or any time to which the hearing may be continued, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass up on all such protests. The city council shall not impose an assessment if there is a "majority protest." A "majority protest" exists if, upon the conclusion of the hearing, the ballots submitted in opposition to the assessment exceed the ballots submitted in favor of the assessment. The ballots shall be weighted in proportion to the assessment upon the affected property. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-489. - Establishment of district and levying of assessment. 
Not earlier than 45 days after the adoption of the resolution of intention to establish the proposed district, and if there is no majority protest as described in section 50-488, the city council may adopt a resolution consistent with the resolution of intention which shall establish the district and levy the assessment or if the district has been previously established, levy a new assessment. The adoption of the resolution establishing the district and levying the assessment, or if the district has been previously established, levying a new assessment, and recordation of the notice and assessment diagram pursuant to section 50-490, shall constitute the levy of an assessment in each of the fiscal years referred to in the management plan. 
The resolution establishing the district shall contain all of the following: 
(a)  The management plan; 
(b)  The number, date of adoption, and title of the resolution of intention; 
(c)  The time and place where the public hearing was held concerning the establishment of the district or the levying of a new assessment; 
(d)  A determination regarding any protests received; 
(e)  A statement that a CID has been established; 
(f)  A statement that the improvements and activities to be provided in the district will be funded by the levy of assessments. The revenue from the levy of assessments within an district shall not be used to provide improvements or activities outside the district or for any purpose other than the purposes specified in the resolution of intention, as modified by the city council at the hearing concerning the establishment of the district; and 
(g)  A finding that the property within the CID receive special benefit from the improvements and activities funded by the assessment to be levied. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-490. - Record of notice and assessment diagram of assessment district. 
Within 15 days following adoption of the resolution establishing the district and levying the assessment, the city clerk shall record a notice and assessment diagram describing the CID pursuant to California Streets and Highways Code Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 3100). All the provisions of that Division 4.5 apply to the district established pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-491. - Contesting of validity of an assessment. 
The validity of an assessment levied under the provisions of this article shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the same is commenced within 30 days after the time said assessment is levied, and any appeal from a final judgment in such action or proceeding must be perfected within 30 days after entry of such judgment. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-492. - Special fund advance. 
The city may advance funds for the first quarter of a new district so that the district may commence work prior to the initial collection of the assessments. The funds advanced will not exceed one quarter of the total assessment for the first year. The funds advanced will then be deducted from the first year's assessment collections. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-493. - Collection of assessment—Time and manner. 
The collection of assessments levied pursuant to this article shall be made at the time and in the manner set forth by the city council in the resolution of intention. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as for the ad valorem property tax, and may provide for the same lien priority and penalties for delinquent payment. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-494. - Advisory association—Appointment and duties. 
(a)  Before adopting a resolution establishing the district, the city council shall appoint an advisory association which shall make a recommendation to the city council on the expenditure of revenues derived from the levy of assessments, on the classification of properties applicable, and on the method and basis of levying the assessments. The city council may designate existing advisory boards, associations, or commissions to serve as the advisory association for the district or may create a new advisory association for that purpose. At least one member of the advisory association shall be a business licensee within the district who is not also a property owner within the district, unless no such licensee shall be assessed. 
Any advisory association appointed by the city council pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall comply with provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 54950) of Part 1 of Division of Title 5 of the Government Code). 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-495. - Same—Report, contents. 
(a)  The advisory association shall cause to be prepared a report of each fiscal year, except the first year, for which assessments are to be levied and collected to pay the costs of the improvements and activities described in the report. The report may propose changes, including, but not limited to, the boundaries of the CID or any benefit zones within the district, the basis and method of levying the assessments, and any changes in the classification of a real property and/or business, if a classification method is used. 
(b)  The report shall be filed with the city clerk and shall refer to the CID by name, specify the fiscal year to which the report applies, and with respect to that fiscal year, shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  Any proposed changes in the boundaries of the CID or in any benefits zones within the district; 
(2)  The improvements and activities to be provided for that fiscal year; 
(3)  An estimate of the cost of providing the improvements and the activities for that fiscal year; 
(4)  The method and basis of levying the assessment in sufficient detail to allow each real property or business owner to estimate the amount of the assessment to be levied against his or her property for that fiscal year; 
(5)  The amount of any surplus or deficit revenues to be carried over from a previous fiscal year; and 
(6)  The amount of any contributions to be made from sources other than assessments levied pursuant to this part. 
(c)  The city council may approve the report as filed by advisory association or may modify any particular contained in the report and approve it as modified. Any modification shall be made pursuant to section 50-489, except that any proposed increase in the amount of the levy above levels previously noticed and approved must be approved as provided in sections 50-482 through 50-489. The city council shall not approve a change in the basis and method of levying assessments that would impair an authorized or executed contract to be paid from the revenues derived from the levy of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-496. - Modification of boundaries, assessments, improvements or activities. 
(a)  Request for modification of management plan. 
(1)  The advisory association may, at any time, request that the city council modify the management plan. Any modification of the management plan shall be made pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Modification by adoption of resolution—Written request of advisory association—Hearing. 
(1)  Upon the written request of the advisory association, the city council may modify the management plan by adopting a resolution after holding hearings on the proposed modification pursuant to sections 50-482 and 50-489; 
(2)  The city council may adopt a resolution of intention which states the proposed modification prior to the public hearing required by this section. The public hearing shall be held not more than 60 days after the adoption of the resolution of intention. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in section 50-487. The public hearing shall be conducted as provided in section 50-488. 
(c)  Modification of improvements and activities funded—Adoption of resolution—Hearing. 
(1)  The city council may modify the improvements and activities to be funded with the revenue derived from the levy of the assessments by adopting a resolution determining to make the modifications after holding a public hearing on the proposed modifications. Notice of the public hearing and the proposed modifications shall be published as provided in section 50-487. 
(2)  The public hearing shall be conducted as provided in section 50-488. 
(d)  Subsequent modification of resolution—Reflection in notices and assessment diagrams. Any subsequent modification of the resolution shall be reflected in subsequent notices and assessment diagrams recorded pursuant to Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 3100 of the California Streets and Highways Code). 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 50-497. - Dissolution of district. 
(a)  Any district established or extended pursuant to the provisions of this article, may in either of the following circumstances, be disestablished by resolution of the city council if there is no indebtedness, lease agreement or other obligation outstanding or unpaid which was incurred to accomplish any of the purposes of the district: 
(1)  If the city council finds there has been misappropriation of funds, malfeasance, or a violation of law in connection with the management of the district, it shall notice a hearing on disestablishment. The notice and hearing shall be held pursuant to sections 50-487 and 50-488. 
(2)  During the operation of the district, there shall be a 30-day period each year in which the assessed property owners may request disestablishment of the district. The first such period shall begin one year after the date of establishment of the district and shall continue for a 30-day period. The next such 30-day period shall begin two years after the date of the establishment of the district. Each successive year of operation of the district shall have such a 30-day period. Upon the written petition of the owners of real property in the district who pay 30 percent or more of the assessments levied, the city council shall notice a hearing on disestablishment. The notice and hearing shall be held pursuant to sections 50-487 and 50-488. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to disestablish the district prior to the public hearing required by this section. The resolution shall state the reason for the disestablishment, shall state the time and place of the public hearing, and shall contain a proposal to dispose of any assets acquired with the revenues of the assessments levied within the property and business improvement district. The public hearing shall be held not less than 45 or more than 90 days after the adoption of the resolution of intention. Notice of the public hearing shall be published as provided in section 50-487. 
(c)  Upon the disestablishment of an district, any remaining revenues derived from the levy of assessments, or any revenues derived from the sale of assets acquired with the revenues, shall be refunded to the owner of the real property and/or business then located and operating within the district in which assessments were levied by applying the same method and basis that was used to calculate the assessments levied in the fiscal year in which the district was disestablished. If the disestablishment occurs before an assessment is levied for the fiscal year, the method and basis that was used to calculate the assessment levied in the preceding fiscal year shall be used to calculate the amount of refund, if any. 
(d)  Notice of the disestablishment of a district shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not later than 15 days after the resolution disestablishing the district is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 4086, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Secs. 50-498—50-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2018, added a new Art. XI, §§ 50-498—50-581, to the Code; however, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. XI, §§ 50-551—50-581, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of allowing future expansion of the Code. 
Cross reference— Commercial cannabis businesses, ch. 68. 
 
Sec. 50-551 - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-552. - Authority and purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes, pursuant to Sections 37101 and 37100.5 of the California Government Code, upon cannabis businesses that engage in business in the city. The cannabis business tax is levied based upon canopy square footage or business gross receipts, as described in this article. It is not a sales and use tax, a tax upon income, or a tax upon real property. 
The cannabis business tax is a general tax enacted solely for general governmental purposes of the city and not for specific purposes. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this article shall be placed in the city's general fund and be available for any lawful municipal purpose. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-553. - Intent. 
The intent of this article is to levy a tax on all cannabis businesses that operate in the city, regardless of whether such business would have been legal at the time the ordinance [from which this article derives] was adopted. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would not otherwise be legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at the time the activity is undertaken. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-554. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when used in this article: 
Business shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the city, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer. 
Cannabis means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. Cannabis also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. Cannabis also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code and is not limited to medical cannabis. 
Cannabis product means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible product, or a topical product. Cannabis product also means marijuana products as defined by Section 11018.1 of the California Health and Safety Code and is not limited to medical cannabis products. 
Canopy means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. When plants occupy multiple horizontal planes (as when plants are placed on shelving above other plants) each plane shall be counted as a separate canopy area. 
Cannabis business means any business activity involving cannabis, including but not limited to cultivating, transporting, distributing, manufacturing, compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing, packaging, delivering, testing, dispensing, retailing and wholesaling of cannabis, of cannabis products or of ancillary products and accessories, whether or not carried on for gain or profit. 
Cannabis business tax or business tax, means the tax due pursuant to this article for engaging in cannabis business in the city. 
Commercial cannabis cultivation means cultivation in the course of conducting a cannabis business. 
City business permit means a permit issued by the city to a person to authorize that person to operate or engage in a cannabis business. 
Cultivation means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis and includes, but is not limited to, the operation of a nursery. 
Employee means each and every person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, member of the owner's family, partner, associate, agent, manager or solicitor, and each and every other person employed or working in such business for a wage, salary, commission, barter or any other form of compensation. 
Engaged in business as a cannabis business means the commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a cannabis business, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the city or coming into the city from an outside location to engage in such activities. A person shall be deemed engaged in business within the city if: 
(1)  Such person or person's employee maintains a fixed place of business within the city for the benefit or partial benefit of such person; 
(2)  Such person or person's employee owns or leases real property within the city for business purposes; 
(3)  Such person or person's employee regularly maintains a stock of tangible personal property in the city for sale in the ordinary course of business; 
(4)  Such person or person's employee regularly conducts solicitation of business within the city; or 
(5)  Such person or person's employee performs work or renders services in the city. 
The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning of "engaged in business." 
Evidence of doing business means evidence such as, without limitation, use of signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media, including the use of internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a government agency or to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis business in the city. 
Calendar year means January 1 through December 31, of the following calendar year. 
Gross receipts, except as otherwise specifically provided, means, whether designated a sales price, royalty, rent, commission, dividend, or other designation, the total amount (including all receipts, cash, credits, services and property of any kind or nature) received or payable for sales of goods, wares or merchandise or for the performance of any act or service of any nature for which a charge is made or credit allowed (whether such service, act or employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, the following shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales; 
(2)  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
(3)  Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts; 
(4)  Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in the regular course of the taxpayer's business; 
(5)  Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business; 
(6)  Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they are recovered; 
(7)  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in excess of $1.00; 
(8)  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected. These agents or trustees must provide the city's finance department with the names and the addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained by the agent or trustees; 
(9)  Retail sales of t-shirts, sweaters, hats, stickers, key chains, bags, books, posters, rolling papers, cannabis accessories such as pipes, pipe screens, vape pen batteries (without cannabis) or other personal tangible property which the tax administrator has excluded in writing by issuing an administrative ruling per section 50-511 shall not be subject to the cannabis business tax under this article. However, any business activities not subject to this article as a result of the administrative ruling shall be subject to the appropriate business tax provisions of chapter 50, article VIII or any other chapter or article as determined by the tax administrator. 
Lighting means a source of light that is primarily used for promoting the biological process of plant growth. Lighting does not include sources of light that primarily exist for the safety or convenience of staff or visitors to the facility, such as emergency lighting, walkway lighting, or light admitted via small skylights, windows or ventilation openings. 
Nursery means a facility or part of a facility that is used only for producing clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
Processing means a cultivation site that conducts only trimming, drying, curing, grading, packaging, or labeling of cannabis and nonmanufactured cannabis products. 
Sale, sell and to sell means and includes any sale, exchange, or barter. It shall also mean any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to cannabis or cannabis products are transferred from one person to another and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same but does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis products by a licensee to the licensee from whom the cannabis or cannabis product was purchased. 
State means the State of California. 
State license, license, or registration means a state license issued pursuant to California Business & Professions Code Section 26050 and/or other applicable state laws. 
Tax administrator means the finance director/city treasurer of the City of Pomona or his or her designee. 
Testing laboratory means a cannabis business that: 
(1)  Offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products; 
(2)  Offers no service other than such tests; 
(3)  Sells no products, excepting only testing supplies and materials; 
(4)  Is accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state; and 
(5)  Is registered with the bureau of cannabis control. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-555. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  Beginning January 1, 2019, there is imposed upon each person who is engaged in business as a cannabis business a cannabis business tax. Such tax is payable regardless of whether the business has been issued a permit to operate lawfully in the city or is operating unlawfully. The city's acceptance of a cannabis business tax payment from a cannabis business operating illegally will not constitute the city's approval or consent to such illegal operations. 
(b)  The initial rate of the cannabis business tax shall be as follows: 
(1)  For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the city: 
a.  Seven dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses exclusively artificial lighting. 
b.  Four dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses a combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting. 
c.  Two dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses no artificial lighting. 
d.  One dollar annually per square foot of canopy space for any nursery. 
For purposes of this subsection (b), the square feet of canopy space for a business shall be rebuttably presumed to be the maximum square footage of canopy allowed by the business's city permit for commercial cannabis cultivation, or, in the absence of a city permit, the square footage shall be the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation allowed by the state license type. Should a city permit be issued to a business which cultivates only for certain months of the year, the city shall prorate the tax as to sufficiently reflect the period in which cultivation is occurring at the business. In no case shall canopy square footage which is authorized by the city commercial cannabis permit but not utilized for cultivation be deducted for the purpose of determining the tax for cultivation, unless the tax administrator is informed in writing and authorizes such reduction for the purpose of relief from the tax prior to the period for which the space will not be used, that such space will not be used. 
(2)  For every person who engages in the operation of a testing laboratory for cannabis or cannabis products shall be subject to one percent of gross receipts. 
(3)  For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a retailer (dispensary) or non-store front retailer (delivery) or microbusiness (retail sales) shall be subject to four percent of gross receipts. 
(4)  For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business for cannabis or cannabis products shall be subject to two percent of gross receipts. 
(5)  For every person who engages in cannabis manufacturing, processing, or microbusiness (non-retail), or any other type of cannabis business not described in section 50-555(b)(1), (2), (3) or (4); shall be subject to two and a half percent of gross receipts. 
(c)  The city council may, by resolution or ordinance, adjust the rate of the cannabis business tax. However, in no event may the city council set any adjusted rate that exceeds the maximum rate calculated pursuant to section 50-555(d) of this section for the date on which the adjusted rate will commence. 
(d)  The maximum rate of the cannabis tax shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the city: 
a.  Through January 1, 2021, the maximum rate shall be: 
i.  Ten dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses exclusively artificial lighting. 
ii.  Seven dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses a combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting. 
iii.  Four dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses no artificial lighting. 
iv.  Two dollars annually per square foot of canopy space for any nursery. 
(2)  For every person who engages in the operation of a testing laboratory for cannabis or cannabis products shall be subject to the maximum tax rate not to exceed two and a half percent of gross receipts. 
(3)  For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a retailer (dispensary) or non-store front retailer (delivery business), or microbusiness (retail sales activity) shall be subject to the maximum tax rate not to exceed six percent of gross receipts. 
(4)  For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business for cannabis or cannabis products shall be subject to the maximum tax rate not to exceed three percent of gross receipts. 
(5)  For every person who engages in cannabis manufacturing, processing, or microbusiness (non-retail activity) or any other type of cannabis business not described in section 50-555(d)(1), (2), (3) or (4), the maximum tax rate shall not exceed four percent of gross receipts. 
(e)  Persons subject to the cannabis business tax shall also register and pay the registration fee pursuant to section 50-556. However, they shall be exempt from paying the general business license tax required under chapter 50, article VIII for any such cannabis business activity as determined by the exclusion definitions or as determined by the tax administrator in section 50-564. A cannabis business not subject to the cannabis business tax is subject to the general business license tax required under chapter 50, article VIII except as otherwise provided by in section 50-554, [definition of gross receipts], or other applicable laws. 
(f)  Tax adjustment to consumer price index. All minimum license taxes and all flat fee license taxes shall be adjusted each fiscal year on July 1 in a percentage amount equal to the change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) during the 12-month period for the Metropolitan Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics; however, no CPI adjustment resulting in a decrease of any tax imposed by this subsection shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-556. - Registration, reporting and remittance of tax. 
(a)  Registration of cannabis business. All cannabis businesses shall be required to annually register as follows: 
(1)  All persons engaging in a cannabis business, whether an existing, newly-established or acquired business, who have not received a city cannabis permit shall register with the tax administrator within 30 days of commencing operation and shall annually renew such registration within 30 days of the business registration anniversary date of each year thereafter. In registering, such persons shall furnish to the tax administrator a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the tax administrator, setting forth the following information: 
a.  The name of the business; 
b.  The names and addresses of each owner; 
c.  The exact nature or kind of business; 
d.  The place where such business is to be carried on; and 
e.  Any further information which the tax administrator may require. 
(2)  Cannabis businesses who have received a city cannabis permit are exempt from the registration requirement of this section. 
(b)  Financial information required under subsection (a) will be used to calculate and enforce the tax imposed under this article, will be exempt from disclosure under the Public Records Act pursuant to Government Code section 6254(i) or to the extent allowed by law. 
(C)  An annual registration fee of $112.00 shall be presented with the sworn statement submitted under this section. This fee shall not be considered a tax and may be adjusted by resolution of the city council. 
(D)  The cannabis business tax imposed by this article shall be paid, in arrears, on a monthly basis. Each person owing a cannabis business tax each calendar month shall, no later than the last day of the month following the close of the calendar month, file with the tax administrator a statement of the tax owed for that calendar month and the basis for calculating that tax. The tax administrator may require that the statement be submitted on a form prescribed by the tax administrator. The tax for each calendar month shall be due and payable on that same date that the statement for the calendar month is due. 
(E)  Upon cessation of a cannabis business, tax statements and payments shall be immediately due for all calendar months up to the calendar month during which cessation occurred. 
(F)  The tax administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish alternative reporting and payment periods for any taxpayer as The Tax Administrator deems necessary to ensure effective collection of the tax. The tax administrator may also require that a deposit, be applied against the taxes for a calendar month, be made by a taxpayer at the beginning of that calendar month. In no event shall the deposit required by the tax administrator exceed the tax amount he or she projects will be owed by the taxpayer for the calendar month. The tax administrator may require that a taxpayer make payments via a cashier's check, money order, wire transfer, or similar instrument. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-557 - Payments and communications—Timely remittance. 
Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is due, it must be received by the tax administrator on or before the final due date. A postmark will not be accepted as timely remittance. If the due date would fall on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday observed by the city, the due date shall be the next regular business day on which the city is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-558 - Payment—When taxes deemed delinquent. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this article, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this article shall be deemed delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date as specified in sections 50-556 and 50-557.  
Sec. 50-559. - Notice not required by the city. 
The city may as a courtesy send a tax notice to the business. However, the tax administrator is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this article. Failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-560. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  Any person who fails or refuses to pay any cannabis business tax required to be paid pursuant to this article on or before the due date shall pay penalties and interest as follows: 
(1)  A penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax at the rate of one percent per month. 
(2)  If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month beyond the due date, an additional penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the tax, plus interest at the rate of one percent per month on the unpaid tax and on the unpaid penalties. 
(3)  Interest shall be applied at the rate of one percent per month on the first day of the month for the full month and will continue to accrue monthly on the tax and penalty until the balance is paid in full. 
(b)  Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a cannabis business tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this section, and any other amount allowed under state law. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-561. - Refunds and credits. 
(a)  No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this article, except as provided in section 50-562. 
(b)  No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this article shall be made because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a business. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-562. - Refunds and procedures. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any cannabis business tax, penalty or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this article, it may be refunded to the claimant who paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund is filed with the tax administrator within one year of the date the tax was originally due and paid. 
(b)  The tax administrator, his or her designee or any other city officer charged with the administration of this article shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of claimant's books and business records after request by the tax administrator to do so. 
(c)  In the event that the cannabis business tax was erroneously paid, and the error is attributable to the city, the city shall refund the amount of tax erroneously paid up to one year from the date that the tax was paid. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-563. - Personal cultivation not taxed. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to personal cannabis cultivation or use as those activities are authorized in the "Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act". This article shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is specifically exempted from state licensing requirements, that meets the definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under state law, and provided that the individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that personal cultivation or use. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-564. - Administration of the tax. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the tax administrator to collect the taxes, penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this article. 
(b)  For purposes of administration and enforcement of this article generally, the tax administrator may from time to time promulgate such administrative interpretations, rules, and procedures consistent with the purpose, intent, and express terms of this article as he or she deems necessary to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement. 
(c)  The tax administrator may take such administrative actions as needed to administer the tax, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting of the tax; 
(2)  Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of this article; 
(3)  Receive and record all taxes remitted to the city as provided in this article; 
(4)  Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant to this article; 
(5)  Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this article; 
(6)  Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-565. - Appeal procedure. 
Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of tax, interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under this article may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 30 calendar days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city clerk, or his or her designee, shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk, or his or her designee, shall give notice in writing to such operator at the last known place of address. The finding of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed by this article for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-566. - Enforcement—Action to collect. 
Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a debt owed to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this article shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such debt. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed a limitation upon the right of the city to bring any other action including criminal, civil and equitable actions, based upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties and/or fees imposed by this article or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-567. - Apportionment. 
If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the city, it is the intent of the city to apply the cannabis business tax so that the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed activity actually carried on in the city. To the extent federal or state law requires that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may indicate said apportionment on his or her tax return. The tax administrator may promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds useful or necessary. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-568. - Constitutionality and legality. 
This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United States and California Constitutions and state law. None of the tax provided for by this article shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection or due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States or the State of California or a violation of any other provision of the California Constitution or state law. If a person believes that the tax, as applied to him or her, is impermissible under applicable law, he or she may request that the tax administrator release him or her from the obligation to pay the impermissible portion of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-569. - Audit and examination of premises and records. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of cannabis business tax owed or verifying any representations made by any taxpayer to the City in support of his or her tax calculation, the tax administrator shall have the power to inspect any location where commercial cannabis cultivation occurs and to audit and examine all books and records (including, but not limited to bookkeeping records, state and federal income tax returns, and other records relating to the gross receipts of the business) of persons engaged in cannabis businesses. In conducting such investigation, the tax administrator shall have the power to inspect any equipment, such as computers or point of sale machines, that may contain such records. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator or his/her designee shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-570. - Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any city cannabis permit or city license required by, under or by virtue of any provision of any other chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or other charge imposed, assessed or required under any other chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city. Any references made or contained in any other chapter of this code to any licenses, license taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license fees, shall be deemed to refer to the licenses, license taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of license fees, provided for in other chapters of this Code. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section a cannabis business shall not be required to pay the license tax required by chapter 50, article VIII of this Code so long as all of the business activities within the city that would require payment of a license tax are activities subject to the cannabis business tax. 
(c)  The tax administrator may revoke or refuse to renew the license required by chapter 50, article XI of this Code for any business that is delinquent in the payment of any tax due pursuant to this article or that fails to make a deposit required by the tax administrator pursuant to section 50-553. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-571. - Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business. 
(a)  The payment of a cannabis business tax required by this article, and its acceptance by the city, shall not entitle any person to carry on any cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements of this Code and all other applicable state laws. 
(b)  No tax paid under the provisions of this article shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or any business in violation of any local or state law. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-572. - Deficiency determinations. 
If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this article is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession within three years of the date the tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under section 50-574. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-573. - Failure to report—Nonpayment, fraud. 
(a)  Under any of the following circumstances, the tax administrator may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person under this article at any time: 
(1)  If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the provisions of this article; 
(2)  If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this article; 
(3)  If the person has not, after demand by the tax administrator, filed a corrected statement, or furnished to the tax administrator adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this article; or 
(4)  If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any business tax due under this article is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in this article and any other penalties allowed by law. 
(b)  The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the tax administrator to be due or estimated by the tax administrator, after consideration of all information within the tax administrator's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this article and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-574. - Tax assessment—Notice requirements. 
The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal delivery, by overnight delivery by a nationally-recognized courier service, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the tax administrator for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this article; or, should the person have no address registered with the tax administrator for such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of this section, a service by overnight delivery shall be deemed to have occurred one calendar day following deposit with a courier and service by mail shall be deemed to have occurred three days following deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-575. - Tax assessment—Hearing, application and determination. 
Within 30 calendar days after the date of service the person may apply in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If application for a hearing before the city is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive. Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her no later than 30 calendar days after the receipt of the application, unless a later date is agreed to by the tax administrator and the person requesting the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the tax administrator to the person requesting such hearing not later than five calendar days prior to such hearing. At such hearing said applicant may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the tax administrator should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in section 50-574 for giving notice of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-576. - Relief from taxes—Disaster relief. 
(a)  If a business is unable to comply with any tax requirement due to a disaster, the business may notify the tax administrator of this inability to comply and request relief from the tax requirement. 
(1)  A request for relief must clearly indicate why relief is requested, the time period for which the relief is requested, and the reason relief is needed for the specific amount of time; 
(b)  The cannabis business agrees to grant the tax collector or his/her designee access to the location where the cannabis business has been impacted due to a disaster; 
(c)  The tax administrator, in his/her sole discretion, may provide relief from the cannabis business tax requirement for businesses whose operations have been impacted by a disaster of such tax liability does not exceed $5,000.00. If such tax liability is $5,001.00 or more than such relief shall only be approved by the city council; 
(d)  Temporary relief from the cannabis tax may be granted for a reasonable amount of time as determined by the tax administrator or the city council, as applicable in order to allow the cannabis business time to recover from the disaster; 
(e)  The tax administrator or city council, as applicable may require that certain conditions be followed in order for a cannabis business to receive temporary relief from the cannabis business tax requirement; 
(f)  For purposes of this section, "disaster" means fire, flood, storm, tidal wave, earthquake, or similar public calamity, whether or not resulting from natural causes. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-577. - Conviction for violation—Taxes not waived. 
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this article or of any state law requiring the payment of all taxes. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-578. - Violation deemed misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-579. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article, or its application to any person or circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this article or the application of this article to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-580. - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this article or which are available under any other provision of the Pomona Municipal Code and any other provision of law or equity are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-581. - Amendment or repeal. 
This article may be repealed or amended by the city council without a vote of the people to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by Article XIII C of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this article. The people of the City of Pomona affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax: 
(1)  The restoration or adjustment of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than that set by this article, if the city council has acted to reduce the rate of the tax or incrementally implement an increase authorized by this article; 
(2)  An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this article; or 
(3)  The collection of the tax imposed by this article even if the city had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax. 
(Ord. No. 4254 , § 1, 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 50-582—50-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, adopted Nov. 6, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XI. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, said article has been codified herein as Art. XII at the discretion of the editor. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-601. - Operative date. 
Operative date as used herein means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the city council declares the results of the general election held on November 6, 2018. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-602. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted to achieve the following purposes, among others, and directs that the provisions hereof be liberally interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(1)  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue & Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2. 
(2)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(3)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adopts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California Sales and Use Taxes. 
(4)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-603. - New revenue use restrictions. 
Any new revenues generated by the passage and collection of this transaction and use tax shall be available for any general fund purpose(s). 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-604. - Contract with the state. 
Prior to the operative date of this article, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax; provided that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-605. - Transaction tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of three-quarters of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-606. - Place of sale. 
For purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-607. - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use, or other consumption in the city at the rate of three-quarters of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-608. - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-609. - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
(a)  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing entity, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
(1)  The word "state" is used as part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of control, state board of equalization, state treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
(2)  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; 
(3)  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the results of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exception from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under said provision of that code; 
(4)  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and 
(5)  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in the business of this state" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-610. - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-611. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law, or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
(b)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
(1)  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(2)  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purpose of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
(3)  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this article. 
(4)  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this article. 
(5)  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(c)  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this article, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
(1)  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
(2)  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
(3)  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this article. 
(4)  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this article. 
(5)  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(6)  Except as provided in subsection (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
(7)  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
(d)  Any person subject to use tax under this article may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-612. - Amendments to state law. 
Subsequent to the effective date of this article, all amendments to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this article, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-613. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall be issued in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this article, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-614. - Termination and repeal. 
The authority to levy the taxes imposed by this article shall be in effect until and unless this article is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 50-615—50-650. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITIZENS' OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 50-651. - Established. 
There is established a citizens' oversight committee. Each council member shall appoint one committee member. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-652. - Staff liaison. 
The city manager shall designate a member of city staff to serve as the staff liaison of the citizens' oversight committee. The staff liaison shall: 
(1)  Serve as a liaison between the citizens' oversight committee and the city council and the city manager; 
(2)  Assist the committee in carrying out its duties and responsibilities as provided for by this division; 
(3)  Prepare reports as directed by the city manager or city council; 
(4)  Attend the committee's meetings as necessary to carry out the liaison's functions; and 
(5)  Provide advice, information, and material to assist the committee. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 50-653. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The citizens' oversight committee serves in an advisory capacity. The committee shall: 
(1)  Annually review the city's revenues and expenditures of the transactions and use tax; 
(2)  Hold public meetings throughout the year, as often as city council directs; 
(3)  Review annual audit reports related to the tax; and 
(4)  Prepare written reports to the city council that summarize the committee's findings and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 4253 , § 2, 11-6-2018)  
Chapter 54 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 62. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, § 1301 et seq. 
State Law reference— Cable television franchising, Government Code § 53066 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - LOCAL CABLE COMMUNICATION FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable communications system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, but such term does not include the following: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems; 
Cable television means a cable communications system. 
Franchise means and includes any authorization granted under this article in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city in accordance with article VIII of chapter 50. 
Grantee means the person to whom a franchise is granted by the council under this article and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such person. 
Gross annual receipts means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever derived from subscribers and any contributing grant or subsidy received in payment for television of FM radio signals or service received within the city. Gross annual receipts shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit. 
Hidden Valley service area means the area bordered by the 60 Freeway on the north, the Los Angeles County/San Bernardino County line on the east, Scenic Ridge Drive on the south and Phillips Ranch Road on the west. 
Property of the grantee means all property owned, installed or used by the grantee in the conduct of a cable communications business in the city under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this article. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, existing as such within the city. 
Subscriber means any person receiving for any purpose the cable communications service of the grantee. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1-1; Ord. No. 3541, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3918, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-32. - Regulation and administration. 
(a)  Regulatory authority. The city shall exercise regulatory authority under this article and applicable law. Such authority shall be vested in the city. 
(b)  Regulatory responsibility. Regulatory responsibility shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city shall have the following regulatory responsibility: 
a.  Administration and enforcement of this article, the franchise agreement, and other pertinent state and federal laws and regulations. 
b.  Performance evaluation. 
c.  Franchise award or renewal. 
d.  Service regulation, to the extent set forth. 
(2)  The city also reserves the right, at its option, to perform the following functions: 
a.  Coordinating the operation of government programming. 
b.  Coordinating plans for expansion and growth of cable services. 
c.  Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with other city, regional or state telecommunications networks. 
d.  Formulating and recommending long range telecommunications policy and service capability for the city. 
(c)  Supervision of franchise. It is the intent of the city to provide day-to-day administration and enforcement of the provisions of the franchise. Responsibilities of the city include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Monitor and recommend to the city council appropriate action related to sections of this article, related ordinances, and franchise agreements. 
(2)  Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to governmental programming. 
(3)  Provide the administrative effort necessary to conduct required performance evaluations, as outlined in this article. 
(4)  Monitor the grantee's process of handling citizen complaints and periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such complaints. 
(5)  Monitor the grantee's adherence to construction and installation schedules and its line extension policy. 
(6)  Ensure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  Monitor operational standards. 
(8)  At the council's direction, arrange for the tests and analyses of equipment and performance. 
(9)  Ensure continuity in service. 
(10)  Examine all data and reports required to be filed by this article. 
(d)  Franchise applications. Procedures for franchise applications shall be as follows: 
(1)  Form. Each application for the granting of a franchise under this article shall be made in a form approved by the city, filed with the city clerk, within the time limits set by the city council, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
b.  A statement of the organization of the applicant, including the names and business addresses of all officers, directors, and persons and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control five percent or more of the ownership of the applicant and his respective shares. If the applicant is a partnership or a subsidiary of either a corporation or partnership, the same information shall be provided for each of the partners and/or the parent entities of the applicant. 
c.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant and any parent entities shall be prepared by a certified public accountant. If the applicant intends to finance the construction and operation of the cable communications system, it shall also file a letter or evidence of the existence of the financial agreement, which shall be addressed to the city, setting forth its intention to finance the construction and operation of the system. 
d.  A description of the franchisee's current cable operations in areas outside of the city and a description of all discontinued cable communications system operations of the previous two years due to reasons of sale or transfer of assets, franchise revocation, or other relevant circumstances. The applicant shall also include a statement or schedule of all other franchises where the applicant currently has applications pending. 
e.  A detailed proposal for the operation of the cable communications system, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  A map indicating that all areas of the city are proposed to be served and shall be served by the cable communications system, along with a proposed construction schedule and line extension policy, if any; 
2.  The number and identification of channels proposed to be carried on the system; 
3.  A detailed statement of equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
4.  A schedule setting forth all proposed services, along with a schedule of rates and charges for each service or combination services; 
5.  A statement regarding proposed public access, educational access, local access, and local origination channels and equipment; and 
6.  A proposed subscriber complaint procedure. 
f.  A statement of technical ability, financial capability, and legal qualifications to own and operate a franchise. 
g.  Any other information requested by the city. 
h.  A nonrefundable application fee in an amount to be determined by the council. 
(2)  Advertisements for bids. At least 90 days prior to the date that all applications for the cable communications franchise are due, the city shall, by advertisement or by any other means, solicit applications for cable communications service and may make any other conditions or limitations respecting the solicitation for bids and making and receiving the applications. 
(3)  Report. Upon notification of the receipt of the applications by the city clerk, the city shall prepare a report and recommendations respecting the applications to the city council. The report shall be made public and shall be concluded within 90 days of the date for the filing of the franchise applications, unless otherwise extended for additional periods of time by the city council. 
(4)  Notice of public hearing. Within 45 days of the date the city report on the franchise applications is completed, the council shall adopt a resolution of its intention to grant the franchise, and it shall schedule a public hearing for the consideration of the competing applications not less than 30 days from the date of the adoption of the resolution. The city clerk shall publish a notice of the intention to hold the hearing at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to such hearing. 
(5)  Public hearing. At the time of the hearing, the council shall hear all interested persons concerning the granting of the cable communications system franchise. It shall then consider the competing applications, if any, and consider such factors as system size; channel capacity; technical quality; rates to the subscribers; income to the city; the experience, character, and financial responsibility of the applicants and their willingness and ability to meet the construction requirements; and any other considerations deemed relevant by the council. The council shall not be limited to any one particular factor in determining which franchise should be granted, but it may consider each application as a whole. The council shall not be limited to weighing each factor as may be recommended, and it shall make an independent determination of the applications. At the conclusion of the hearing or any extension thereof, the council shall, in its sole discretion, determine that: 
a.  All applications should be rejected and new applications solicited pursuant to this section or section 54-33; or 
b.  One or more applications be accepted and the remainder be rejected. The council may condition such acceptance on terms and conditions that it specifies at the conclusion of the hearing. These terms and conditions may be the same as or different from those specified in the initial resolution to seek applications and may also be the same as or different from the proposed terms and conditions for the franchise contained in the applicant's application. 
(6)  Franchise negotiations. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city and the acceptable applicants shall enter into negotiations for the determination of the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in this section, as well as those required by the council at the conclusion of the hearing. Upon the successful conclusion of the negotiations for the franchise agreement, the council may, by resolution, approve the proposed agreement. Upon acceptance of the agreement by the council and the applicant, the franchise shall become binding upon the effective date. If the applicant and the city are unable to agree on the terms of the franchise agreement, the city may conclude the negotiations, and the council may enter into negotiations with any other applicant or may solicit new applications. 
(7)  Franchise processing costs. The applicant shall bear all the costs of processing the franchise application, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  All costs of publication of notices and publications of the ordinance codified in this article; 
b.  The cost of any consultant hired to evaluate the franchise proposals; 
c.  The additional cost of the city attorney; and 
d.  Any other expenses reasonably incurred by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1-2; Ord. No. 3541, § 2 (part)) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 54-33. - Procedures for granting. 
(a)  Grant. If the city shall grant to the grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system within the city, such franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as regulated by this article and the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement may include by reference those provisions of the grantee's proposal for a franchise that are finally negotiated and accepted by the city and the grantee. 
The franchise shall be granted under the terms and conditions contained in this article, consistent with the city's Charter and/or other applicable statutory requirements. If a conflict occurs between the terms and conditions of this article, the franchise agreement, or the terms and conditions on which the city can grant a franchise, the Charter and/or statutory requirements shall control. 
Any franchise granted by the city is hereby made subject to the Charter and other general ordinance sections in effect and made effective. Nothing in the franchise agreement shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city regarding licenses, permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction unless expressly agreed to by the city. 
(b)  Franchise boundary. The service area shall be the entire city, and the grantee shall provide service to the entire city. Notwithstanding the aforementioned, the grantee may be excused from servicing the Hidden Valley service area, and a franchise may be granted to serve only the Hidden Valley service area. 
(c)  Use of public streets and ways. For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system in the city, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public streets and ways within the franchise area such optical fibers, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary for the operation of a cable communications system. 
All installations shall be under ground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing both telephone and electric service are under ground at the time of installation. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, the grantee may install its facilities above ground, provided that, at such time as those facilities are placed under ground, the grantee shall likewise place its facilities under ground without additional cost to the city. Where not otherwise required to be placed under ground by this article, the grantee's system shall be located under ground at the request of the adjacent property owner, provided that the excess cost over the aerial installation shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable passing under the roadway shall be installed in conduit. 
Prior to construction or alteration, however, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate city agencies, complete use agreements with the utility companies, obtain all construction permits and receive written approval from the city before proceeding, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(d)  Use of city facilities. At the city's option, the city may require the grantee to utilize city-owned conduit or other facilities for any portion of its cable communications system. The consideration for the use of city conduit or other facilities shall be as stated in the franchise agreement. A reasonable fee for the use of city facilities shall be established in the franchise agreement and may be adjusted at the periodic performance evaluations, so long as the cost of utilizing city-owned conduit does not exceed available alternatives. 
(e)  Use of grantee's facilities. No poles shall be erected by the grantee on city property without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspect. The location of any pole of the grantee on city property shall not become a vested right, and such poles shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever, after public hearing and review of available alternatives, the city determines that the public interest requires. The grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduits, where possible. The city shall have the right, during the life of the franchise, to install and maintain free of charge, upon any poles owned by the grantee, any wire and pole fixture that does not unreasonably interfere with the operation of the cable communications system. 
(f)  Franchise required. No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the city or be allowed to operate without a franchise defined and granted by the city unless the city expressly grants permission. Where property on both sides of a street is under common ownership, a conduit may be installed upon receipt of an excavation permit issued by the department of public works. 
(g)  Agreement and incorporation of application by reference. Upon adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and acceptance by the grantee of an execution agreement, the grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions contained in this article. The grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in this article to provide a cable communications system within the city, and by its acceptance of the franchise the grantee specifically acknowledges and agrees that this article is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise agreement. If a conflict occurs between the sections of this article and the franchise agreement, the provision which provides the greatest benefit to the city shall prevail. 
(h)  Duration and acceptance of franchise. The franchise and the rights, privileges and authority granted thereunder shall continue in force and effect for the term of years specified in the franchise agreement, beginning with its effective date. The grantee shall promise to comply with and abide by all the provisions, terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
(i)  Franchise nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right, subject to the same minimum standards set forth in this franchise, to grant at any time such additional franchises in the same franchise area and on the same terms specified in the grantee's franchise agreement for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate. 
(j)  Time is of the essence. Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence. 
(k)  Governing law. In any controversy or dispute under this article or the franchise agreement, the laws of the state shall apply to the exclusion of all other state laws. 
(l)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article or franchise agreement is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(m)  Transfer of ownership or control. Procedures for transfer of ownership or control shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any franchise granted under this article cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, hypothecated, assigned or disposed of, including, but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or other means, without the conditions as the city may establish, within the city's scope of review set forth in subsection (m)(2) of this section. No conditions of transfer shall add to the burdens of the grantee under this article or a franchise agreement. 
(2)  The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change or transfer or acquisition by any other party of the control of the grantee. The word "control" as used in this subsection is not limited to major stockholders, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of ten percent of the voting shares of the grantee. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the scope of the city's review shall be limited to the financial, character, legal and technical qualifications. The city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the city in such inquiry. 
(3)  The city shall specify documents required to properly evaluate the proposed transfer. 
(4)  The consent or approval of the city council to any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise agreement. 
(5)  In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of construction of the proposed system. 
(6)  In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without a successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement and expressly agreeing to all its terms and conditions. 
(7)  The transferee shall file with the city a copy of the instrument of assignment within ten days after the transfer is completed. 
(n)  Franchise award upon completion of initial franchise term. Procedures for award of a franchise upon completion of the initial franchise term shall be as follows: 
(1)  Formal renewal procedure. During the six-month period which begins with the 36th month before the franchise expiration, the city may, on its own initiative, and shall, at the request of the grantee, begin renewal proceedings in conformity with the renewal process as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, with any subsequent modifications or any applicable succeeding regulations. The city may either grant or deny a renewal as a result of the proceedings. The grantee has a right to appeal an adverse decision by the city to a court with appropriate jurisdiction. 
(2)  Informal renewal procedure. Notwithstanding the procedure in subsection (n)(1) of this section, the grantee may submit a proposal for franchise renewal at any time, and the city may, after notifying the public and giving them an opportunity to comment, grant or deny the proposal at any time. This informal procedure is independent of and not subject to the formal procedure cited in subsection (n)(1) of this section. 
(o)  Police powers. In accepting the franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights under this article are subject to the police power of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power. Any conflict between the sections of this article or the franchise agreement and any lawful exercise of the city's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(p)  Franchise fees. Franchise fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  The streets in the city to be used by the grantee in the operation of its cable communications system are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers. As such, the right to use such streets is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions. Therefore, the grantee shall pay to the city an annual fee in an amount designated in the franchise agreement of the gross annual receipts, subject to whatever limit may be imposed by state or federal law. This annual franchise payment shall be in addition to any other general business fees and licenses required by city ordinance and commence as of the effective date of the franchise agreement. The city shall be furnished a statement of such payment by a financial officer of the grantee reflecting the total amounts of the annual gross revenues, receipts and such charges and computations for the period covered by the payment. 
(2)  The franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed by the grantee to the city or other taxing agency. 
(3)  Acceptance by city. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this article or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(4)  Failure to make required payment. If any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in this article or the franchise agreement, the grantee shall pay, as additional compensation, an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate in effect upon the due date. 
(5)  The franchise fee shall be payable annually to the city treasurer. The grantee shall file with the city clerk a complete statement of all gross annual receipts earned within the city during the period for which such payment is made, and such payment shall be made to the city not later than 60 days after the expiration of the calendar year. 
(6)  The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this article and the franchise agreement; provided, however, that such audit shall take place within 36 months following the close of each of the grantee's fiscal years. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the city, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. 
(q)  Revocation and forfeiture. Procedures for revocation and forfeiture shall be as follows: 
(1)  Grounds for revocation. The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted under this article and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and a substantial violation under this article and the franchise agreement: 
a.  If the grantee shall default on the payment of any court judgments or in the performance of any of the material obligations under this article or the franchise agreement or other lawful requirement imposed by the city permitted by law. 
b.  If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as required in section 54-36. 
c.  If the grantee shall violate any material orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this article or the franchise agreement. 
d.  If the grantee attempts to evade any of the material sections of this article or the franchise agreement or practices any fraud or deceit upon its subscribers or the city. 
e.  If the grantee's construction schedule is delayed later than the schedule contained in the franchise agreement or beyond any extended date set by the city. 
f.  If the grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged bankrupt. 
g.  If the grantee fails to restore service after ten consecutive days of interrupted service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from the city. 
h.  If the grantee makes any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for, negotiation of, or renegotiation of the franchise. 
i.  If the grantee, due to its fault, ceases to provide any material services agreed to in the franchise agreement. 
(2)  Effect of circumstances beyond control of grantee. The grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any section of this article in any case in which performance of any such section is prevented for reasons beyond the grantee's control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest, whether held directly or indirectly. Pending litigation against the grantee shall not exclude the grantee from the performance of its obligations under this article and under the franchise agreement. Failure of the grantee to perform such obligation because of pending litigation may result in revocation or forfeiture pursuant to this subsection. 
(3)  Procedure prior to revocation. The procedure prior to revocation shall be as follows: 
a.  The city shall make written demand by certified mail that the grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand, the city shall place its request for termination of the franchise upon a regular council meeting agenda. The city shall cause to be served upon such the grantee, at least 15 days prior to the date of such council meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the city clerk at least once ten days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
b.  The council shall hear from any persons interested in the revocation and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
c.  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, as defined by the city, the council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
d.  If the council shall determine such failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, the council shall declare that the franchise shall be terminated and revoked, unless there is compliance by the grantee within 90 days or by any other later time determined by the council. 
(4)  Disposition of facilities. If the franchise expires, is revoked or otherwise terminated, the city may in its sole discretion do one of the following: 
a.  Purchase the system under the procedures set forth in section 54-38(k), which pertains to rights reserved to city. 
b.  Order the removal of the system facilities from the city within a reasonable period of time or require the original grantee to maintain and operate the system facilities until a subsequent grantee is selected. 
(5)  Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires or attachments. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of the public ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability and indemnity insurance and the performance bond required in this article shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this subsection and this article. 
(6)  Restoration by city. If the grantee fails to complete any work required by section 54-35 or 54-37 or any other work required by city law or ordinance within the time established and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may cause such work to be done. The grantee shall reimburse the city the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the city may recover such costs through the surety bond provided by the grantee. The city shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce this subsection. 
(7)  Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or revocation of the franchise, the city may require the grantee to continue to operate the system for an extended period of time, not to exceed six months, unless the city deems a longer period would be in the public interest, from the date of such expiration or revocation. The grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable communications system under the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise agreement and shall continue to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that are provided at the time. The city shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce this subsection. 
(8)  City's right not affected. The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(r)  Receivership and foreclosure. Procedures for receivership and foreclosure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Termination by insolvency. The franchise shall, at the option of the city council, cease to exist and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such 120 days or unless: 
a.  Such receiver or trustee shall have, within 120 days after his election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms of this article and the franchise granted pursuant to this article and the receiver or trustee, within such 120 days, shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and 
b.  Such receiver or trustee shall, within such 120 days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted in this article. 
(2)  Termination of judicial action. If a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plan, property and equipment of the grantee or any part thereof occurs, the council may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise granted in this article and all rights and privileges of the grantee under this article shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless: 
a.  The council shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner this article provides; and 
b.  Such successful bidder shall have agreed with the city to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of this franchise. 
(s)  Notices. All notices from the grantee to the city pursuant to the franchise agreement shall be to the city manager. The grantee shall maintain within the city, throughout the term of its franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall also maintain within the city payment stations where customers can pay bills, unless otherwise approved by the city and a business office and telephone and shall be required to advise the city of such address and telephone number and any changes thereof. 
(t)  Failure of city to enforce franchise terms. The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the city to act upon, to insist upon, or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions of such franchise, on any one or more occasions. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1-3; Ord. No. 3541, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3918, §§ 2, 3) 
State Law reference— Cable television franchises authorized, Government Code § 53066.  
Sec. 54-34. - Grant of separate franchise for Hidden Valley service area. 
The city council, in its discretion, may award a separate franchise solely for the Hidden Valley service area. The grantee for such service area would be required to comply with all of the sections of this article. However, the city council shall have the discretion, in awarding such franchise, to modify the requirements of section 54-32(d)(1), which pertains to the form of franchise applications; 54-32(d)(2), which pertains to advertisements for bids for franchise applications; section 54-36(a), which pertains to security/performance bonds; section 54-36(b), which pertains to liability and insurance; section 54-38(a)(5), which pertains to service provision of community programming; 54-38(a)(6) to more appropriately address the needs of the reduced service area. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1-3.5; Ord. No. 3918, § 4)  
Sec. 54-35. - Design and construction. 
(a)  Authority to construct. Authority to construct a cable communications system shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Authorization to commence construction and application procedures. Within 30 days of the acceptance by the grantee of a franchise under this article, the grantee shall register the cable communications system with the Federal Communications Commission and apply for pole attachment contracts with the relevant local public utilities. Within 30 days after completion of the make-ready survey identifying the routes of the system facilities, the grantee shall apply for all additional licenses from the state, city or other necessary parties. All necessary applications for permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations shall be applied for in a timely fashion so that such filing and processing shall not interfere with or cause delay with the construction schedule as outlined in the franchise agreement. Failure to make such timely application and timely filing shall constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of section 54-33. 
(2)  Power to contract. Upon grant of the franchise and in order to construct and maintain a cable communications system in the city, the grantee may: 
a.  Enter into contracts with any public utility companies or any other owner or person; 
b.  Lease any poles or underground areas located within or without the city; 
c.  Obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate city, county, state, and federal officials necessary to cross or otherwise use highways or roads under their respective jurisdictions; 
d.  Obtain permission from the Federal Aviation Administration to erect and maintain antennas; or 
e.  Obtain whatever other permits a city, county, state or federal agency may require. 
(b)  Construction and technical standards. Construction and technical standards shall be as follows: 
(1)  The grantee shall install, operate, and maintain a cable communications system in accordance with the highest and best accepted standards of the industry, to the extent that subscribers receive the finest quality service possible. Specifically, the system shall be maintained in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and the Federal Communications Commission technical standards. 
(2)  Prior to the erection or installation by the grantee of any towers, poles, underground conduits or fixtures for use in connection with the installation, construction, maintenance or operation of the cable communications system under this article, the grantee shall first submit to the city and other designated parties for approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings if required, together with a map and plans indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, or underground conduit for use in a cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until any necessary approval has been received from the city, provided, further, that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. After completion of construction the grantee shall submit as-built plans of the completed system and updates as required. 
(3)  Contractor qualifications. Any contractor or subcontractor hired for any proposed work, construction, installation, maintenance and repair of system equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the state and all local ordinances. In addition, the grantee shall evidence a commitment to hiring persons locally and meeting federal mandates. 
(4)  The grantee's system and associated equipment erected within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of such streets, alleys or other public ways. 
(5)  Substructure location. The city does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights-of-way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by excavation. The grantee must contact the underground service alert or other established regional notification service prior to any excavation. 
(6)  Additional specifications shall be as follows: 
a.  Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable communications system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then-current technological standards. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. 
b.  The grantee shall at all times comply with the following: 
1.  The National Electrical Safety Code, 2002 edition (IEEE-SA). 
2.  The California Electrical Code. 
3.  The state public utility commission general orders 95 and 128. 
4.  Applicable Federal Communications Commission or other federal, state and local regulations. 
c.  In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located. 
d.  Any antenna structure used in the cable communications system shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure standards as required by federal and state law or regulation. 
e.  All worker facilities, conditions and procedures that are used during construction, installation and maintenance of the cable communications system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and/or CAL OSHA, whichever application is the more stringent. 
f.  RF leakage shall meet the standards promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission. The cable communications system shall cause no measurable interference with signal reception to any operating receiver not connected to the system. 
g.  The grantee shall provide standby power-generating capacity at the cable communications system control center, at each mainline transmission amplifier location, rated for at least four-hour duration. 
(7)  The city shall, at its own expense, have the right to inspect all construction and installation work performed subject to this article and applicable franchises and shall make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance to such provisions; provided, however, that the city shall be permitted to charge the grantee its usual and customary fees for the inspection of construction in the streets and provided, further, that such inspection and tests shall not interfere with the provision of subscriber services. Any delays in construction due to such inspections shall not be reason for default. 
Charter reference— Adoption by reference, § 512. 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, Government Code § 50022.1 et seq. 
(c)  Use of streets. Use of streets shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property and utilities. The grantee's system facilities, including poles, lines, equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and maintained so that such facilities shall not: 
a.  Endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of persons; 
b.  Interfere with any planned improvement of the city, county, or state; 
c.  Interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except to the minimum extent necessary during actual construction, maintenance or repair; 
d.  Interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private property owners, except as necessary during construction, maintenance or repair; and 
e.  Obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or telephone facilities or other utilities located within the city. 
(2)  Restoration to prior condition. If any damage to pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfaces occurs, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalks, driveways, landscaping, or surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good condition as before such work was commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely manner in accordance with standards for such work set by the city. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than ten days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter. 
(3)  Erection, removal and common use of poles. Erection, removal and common use of poles shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Where poles already exist for use in serving the city and available for use by the grantee, but it does not make arrangements for such use, the city may require the grantee to use such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and reasonable. 
b.  Where a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee, but agreement thereof with the grantee cannot be reached, the city may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the city determines that the use would be in the public interest and would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operation. 
(4)  Relocation of facilities. If, at any time during the period of the franchise, the city, county or state shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(5)  Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building move permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the movement of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the removal, raising or lowering, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than five nor more than ten working days' notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(6)  Tree trimming. If the grantee deems it necessary to trim trees upon and overhanging the public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the cable communications system, the grantee shall obtain from the community services department all required inspection job permits prior to initiation of such tree trimming activity. 
(7)  Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property shall be available to the grantee by operation of law or shall be arranged by the grantee with the owner of such property. On public rights-of-way, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public streets, ways and easements within the franchise area in order to develop and maintain a cable communications system. 
(8)  Failure to commence, pursue, or complete work. Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by this article or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may, at its option, cause such work to be done. The grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city to the grantee within 30 days after receipt of such report. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1-4; Ord. No. 3541, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 54-36. - General financial and insurance requirements. 
(a)  Security/performance bonds. The grantee under this article shall file with the city clerk and shall at all times maintain in force and effect for the term of the franchise and any renewal a security bond for faithful performance and labor and material liens, in the amount of $10,000.00. The bond may be used to compensate the city for any failure by the grantee to perform its obligations, including, but not limited to, obligations to pay the following: 
(1)  Liquidated damages, claims, liens, and/or taxes due the city or other governmental entities or authorities, which are due to the construction, operation, maintenance, and/or removal of the system. 
(2)  Fines, damages, and costs arising out of noncompliance with orders, permits, and/or directions of any city department having jurisdiction over the grantee's acts or defaults under this article or the franchise. Reasonable attorney's fees and other legal expenses incurred are included in this subsection. 
(3)  Damages, losses, and/or costs suffered by the city by reason of the failure of the grantee to satisfactorily complete and activate the system as provided in this article and/or in the franchise. 
(b)  Liability and insurance. On and after the effective date of the franchise and continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and any renewal, the grantee shall file with the city clerk certificates of insurance, in a form acceptable to the city. Failure to furnish and maintain such certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a substantial violation of this article. Evidence of insurance shall be filed within 45 days of its renewal date. The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees to maintain throughout the term of the franchise general liability insurance covering the grantee in the minimum of: (i) $1,000,000.00 for property damage, per occurrence; (ii) $5,000,000.00 for property damage, aggregate; (iii) $5,000,000.00 for personal bodily injury to any one person; and (iv) $10,000,000.00 for bodily injury, aggregate, per single accident or occurrence. Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the following: comprehensive form, premises, operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury. The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees to maintain throughout the term of the franchise automobile liability insurance for owned, nonowned, or rented vehicles in the minimum amount of: (i) $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and consequent death to any one person; (ii) $2,000,000.00 for bodily injury and consequent death per occurrence; and (iii) $500,000.00 for property damage per occurrence. The grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise agrees to maintain throughout the term of the franchise workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance, valid in the state, in the minimum amount of: (i) the statutory limit for workers' compensation; and (ii) $100,000.00 for employer's liability. Any certificate of insurance obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk during the term of the franchise, and may be changed from time to time to reflect changing liability limits. The grantee shall immediately advise the city of any litigation that may affect this insurance. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to the franchise shall contain the following endorsement: "It is understood and agreed that in the event this insurance policy is canceled or denied renewal by the insurance company city shall first be provided 30 days' written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew." All insurance policies provided under the provisions of the franchise agreement shall be written by companies authorized to do business in the state and approved by the state department of insurance. At any time during the term of this article the city may request that the grantee include the city as an additional named insured for all insurance policies written under the provisions of the franchise agreement. 
The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards and commissions, and city employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages, including but not limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements and liabilities assumed by the city in connection therewith: 
(1)  Arising out of or through the acts or omissions of the grantee, its servants, agents or employees or to which the grantee's negligence shall in any way contribute; 
(2)  Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for any person, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or of any other right of any person caused by the grantee, its servants, agents or employees; 
(3)  Arising out of the grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any federal, state, or local statute, ordinance or regulation applicable to the grantee. 
The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: The city shall give the grantee prompt notice of the making of any claim or commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by this section. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the city from cooperating with the grantee and participation in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its sole cost and expense. 
(c)  Indemnification. The city and the grantee each hereby agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the other against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments against the indemnifying party for the indemnifying party's negligence or other bad acts. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1-5; Ord. No. 3541, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 54-37. - Operation and maintenance. 
(a)  Books and records available to city. Under this article The grantee shall maintain an office within the franchise area or at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges unless otherwise approved by the city and shall manage all of its operations in accordance with a policy of totally open books and records. The city shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint lots, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise. Access to such records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that such records contain proprietary information. 
(b)  Reports required. The grantee shall file with the city the following reports: 
(1)  Federal Communications Commission annual report. An annual report of the cable television system (FCC form 325, schedules 1, 2, 3 and 4). 
(2)  Facilities report. An annual total system facilities report setting forth the physical miles of plant construction, rebuilt or in operation during the fiscal year. Such report shall also contain any revisions to the system as-built maps filed with the city. 
(3)  Printed material. The grantee's schedule of charges, its contract or application forms for subscriber service, its policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, its delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers shall be filed with the city and conspicuously posted in the grantee's local office. Subsequent changes or updates of these materials shall be promptly filed with the city. 
(4)  Regulatory communications. All petitions, applications and communications related to the operation of the cable communications system submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of the grantee's system shall be submitted simultaneously to the city by delivery to the city clerk who shall advise interested city departments of such filing. 
(5)  System reports. The following financial and operational reports shall be submitted annually to the city clerk within 60 days of the end of the calendar year: 
a.  The corporate surety bond for faithful performance and labor and material liens or a certified copy thereof and written evidence of payment of the required premium. 
b.  All certificates of insurance or certified copies thereof. 
c.  A financial report for the previous calendar year, including gross annual receipts, itemized in a fashion to permit calculation of the franchise fee payable to the city. 
d.  All consumer rules, regulations, terms and conditions which it has adopted for the conduct of its business. 
e.  A summary of the previous year's activities, including but not limited to subscriber totals and new services. 
f.  A summary of complaints received and the disposition of such complaints for the previous year. 
g.  City staff and the grantee shall meet at least once a year to discuss the grantee's operations and cable industry issues. 
(6)  Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city at the times and in the form prescribed such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property as the city and the grantee agree may be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city in connection with the franchise. 
(c)  Records required. The following records shall be required: 
(1)  Mandatory records. The grantee shall at all times maintain the following: 
a.  A record of all written complaints received. 
b.  A full and complete set of plans, records and as-built maps showing the exact location of all cable communications system equipment installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber drops. 
(2)  Other records. The city may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents from time to time. 
(3)  Inspection of property. At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the city of all franchise property, together with any appurtenant property situated within or without the city for the purpose of enforcement of franchise requirements. The grantee shall also permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee for the purpose of enforcement of franchise requirements. All travel and related expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination outside the county shall be paid by the grantee. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1-6; Ord. No. 3541, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 54-38. - Service requirements. 
(a)  Services to subscribers. Under this article the grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as follows: 
(1)  The grantee shall notify the subscribers and the city of any planned changes in the grantee's rate schedule 30 days before the effective date of such changes. 
(2)  The grantee shall use its best efforts to ensure diversity of programming. Should the grantee desire to change the selection of the programs or services currently offered on any of its tiers, it shall use its best efforts to notify subscribers and the city not less than 30 days prior to the proposed implementation date. 
(3)  A basic service taking into account trends in the industry and changes in marketing strategy, exclusive of any pay services, shall be offered to subscribers throughout the term of this franchise. This shall not preclude the grantee from exploring new trends in the industry. 
(4)  The grantee shall provide leased access channels, in accordance with the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 or its successor regulations. 
(5)  Community programming. The grantee shall provide and maintain on the basic service a minimum of one local origination channel. The grantee shall cooperate with the city in developing programs for this channel; however, responsibility for the development of local programming will rest solely with the grantee. At such time as the local origination channel is programmed with original video programming at least 80 percent of the time, the grantee shall, at the request of the city, seek to designate an additional channel for local origination programming within six months of the date of request. The grantee shall cooperate with the city to facilitate the cablecasting of city training programs as requested by the city. 
(6)  The grantee shall provide one full basic service drop to all city buildings and public educational agencies at the request of the city, free of charge, if such buildings are within 150 aerial feet of a passing feeder line. 
(b)  Services to institutions. In any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the city council, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. 
(c)  Lockout devices. The grantee shall provide to the potential subscriber, as part of its promotional literature, information concerning the availability of a lockout device for use by a subscriber. Such a device shall be made available by the grantee to any premium subscriber, upon request. Such device shall permit the subscriber to prevent reception on tiers or channels containing objectionable program material. The grantee reserves the right to charge for the use of the lockout device. The lockout device described in this subsection shall be made available to all subscribers requesting it, beginning on the first day that any cable service is activated. 
(d)  Grantee services. The grantee shall provide at least the following services: 
(1)  Standard installation. Standard installation shall consist of an aerial drop not exceeding 150 feet from the centerline of the street to the subscriber's receiver. The charge to the subscriber for an aerial drop in excess of 150 feet and service requiring an underground drop or concealed wiring shall not exceed the additional installation costs incurred by the grantee. The subscriber shall be notified, in writing, of the estimated additional installation costs before installation begins. Permission of the property owner regarding installation to the residence shall be obtained prior to such installation. Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The grantee shall use due care and shall repair any damage to the subscriber's property caused by such installation. Restoration shall be undertaken within ten days after notification to the grantee of damage and shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter. 
(2)  Additional outlets. The grantee shall provide additional outlets as customers may request according to the grantee's rate schedule. 
(3)  Transfers. When a current customer moves from one address within the franchise area to a second address within the franchise area and there is no lapse in service, the grantee shall transfer service at a rate according to the grantee's rate schedule. 
(4)  Reconnection. The grantee shall restore service to subscribers wishing restoration of service, provided the subscriber shall first satisfy any previous obligations owed to the grantee. 
(5)  Relocation or extension of cable. The grantee shall relocate or extend a subscribers' cable for a charge stated in the grantee's rate schedule. 
(6)  Discontinuance of existing service areas. The grantee shall not discontinue any cable communications service to areas already served within the city unless and until permission has been given by the city council to do so, after a public hearing has been duly noticed and heard by the council. Discontinuance of such service without council consent may be grounds for revocation of the franchise. The city may reinstate the requirement of a citywide service area when such service is deemed economically feasible by the city after a public hearing thereon. 
(7)  Prohibited activities. Neither the grantee nor its officers, employees, or agents shall directly or indirectly repair or maintain television sets, receivers, or antennas not provided as the grantee's service, except that nothing shall prohibit the grantee, at the subscriber's request and without payment, from examining or adjusting the customer's terminal to determine whether reception difficulties originate in the terminal or in the grantee's system. 
(e)  Extension of service. Service shall be extended in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The grantee shall provide service to any new dwelling units within the service area and any additional areas annexed to the city where there are at least 50 dwelling units per proposed aerial cable plant mile or 100 dwelling units per proposed underground plant mile. 
(2)  In areas with less than 50 dwelling units per proposed aerial cable plant mile or 100 dwelling units per proposed underground cable plant mile, the grantee shall offer a cost sharing arrangement with residents. The cost sharing arrangement shall consist of the following: 
a.  On the request of five or more potential subscribers desiring service, the grantee shall prepare at its cost an engineering survey and cost analysis to determine the cost of plant extension required to provide service to each subscriber from the closest point where available quality signals exist. 
b.  The grantee shall contribute 50 percent of the total construction cost to extend the line. 
c.  Initially, each new subscriber shall contribute a proportional amount of the remaining 50 percent of the cost of the cable transmission system. 
d.  Any subsequent additional subscribers desiring service along the route of an extended line shall contribute an amount equal to 50 percent of the cost to provide service from the last upstream point where the activated plant would have existed, if it were not already extended. 
(3)  For new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give the grantee reasonable notice of such construction or development and at least five days' advance notice of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the grantee's expense. The grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for such trenching. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall notify the grantee of the issuance of all trenching permits to any developer. The cost of trenching and acquisition of easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner. However, if the grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults and laterals within five working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, should the trenching be closed after the five-day period, the cost of new trenching is to be borne by the grantee. Except for the notice of the particular date on which trenching will be available to the grantee, any notice provided to the grantee by the city of a preliminary plant request shall satisfy the requirement of reasonable notice if sent to the local general manager or system engineer of the grantee prior to approval of the preliminary plant request. 
(f)  Service calls and complaint procedures. Procedures for service calls and complaints shall be as follows: 
(1)  Unless otherwise approved by the city, the cable communications company shall establish, operate and maintain in the city or at a location which subscribers may call without incurring a message or toll charge a business office and maintenance and repair facility for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects of the establishment, construction, maintenance, and operation of the system and for the payment of subscribers' service charges and providing facilities for the production of local programming or at a location mutually agreed upon by city and the grantee. 
(2)  The grantee shall have a listed local telephone number for service calls, and such telephone service shall be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Such number shall be within the local calling area of all residents of the service area and shall be made available to subscribers and the general public. 
(3)  The grantee shall respond to and resolve subscribers' complaints or requests for service in connection with repairs and maintenance and malfunctions of system facilities as quickly as possible, but shall in any case respond within 24 hours on regular workdays. Outages and complaints or requests which may pose a potential health and safety hazard shall be responded to immediately. The grantee shall respond to billing complaints within seven business days. 
(4)  The grantee shall prepare and file with the city copies of all of its procedures with regard to the handling of general inquiries, billing inquiries, service requests, and complaints from subscribers. This shall include the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed and shall include information concerning the city office responsible for the administration of the franchise, such as the address and local calling telephone number of such office to contact. Such information shall be made available to the public upon request. 
(5)  When there have been similar complaints made or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the city, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the cable service, the city shall have the right and authority to request that the grantee test, analyze, and report on the performance of the system. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the city in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within 14 days after notice. Such report shall include the following information: 
a.  The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special tests. 
b.  What system component was tested. 
c.  The equipment used and procedures employed in testing. 
d.  The action taken, if any, to resolve the problem. 
e.  Any other information pertinent to such tests and analyses which may be required. Where there are recurring service problems the city may require that tests be supervised and/or conducted, at the grantee's expense, by a professional licensed cable TV engineer. The engineer shall sign all records of special tests and forward to the city such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken. 
(6)  The grantee shall keep full records in connection with all written inquiries, complaints and requests in connection with the performance and operation of the system. Such records shall identify the person contacting the grantee and the person responding on behalf of the grantee, the subject matter of the contact, the date and time it was received, the resolution of the matter in question or the action taken by the grantee in connection with the contact and the date and time thereof, and such other information as may be deemed pertinent by the grantee or the city. These records shall be maintained for at least three years and made available for periodic inspection by the city. 
(7)  The grantee shall service or replace all defective or inoperable equipment it provides to the subscriber without charge; provided, however, the grantee may charge a subscriber for service to or replacement of any equipment damaged intentionally or negligently or lost by such subscriber. 
(8)  The city may review and monitor unresolved customer complaints. 
(9)  The grantee shall provide a standard identification document to all employees and subcontractors who will be in direct contact with the public. Such document shall include a telephone number that can be used to verify identification. 
(g)  Tests and performance monitoring. Tests and performance monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Not later than 90 days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, technical performance tests as required by the Federal Communications Commission shall be conducted by the grantee to demonstrate full compliance with technical standards established by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(2)  Such tests shall be performed by or under the supervision of a qualified cable television professional engineer. A copy of any report submitted to the Federal Communications Commission shall be submitted to the city, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures, and the qualifications of the engineer responsible for the test. 
(3)  System monitor test points shall be established at or near the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line and at or near trunk line extremities. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be required by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(4)  A copy of the annual performance tests report required by the Federal Communications Commission shall be submitted to the city within 60 days of its completion. 
(h)  Antennas. The grantee shall not, as a condition to providing cable communications service, require any subscriber or potential subscriber to remove any existing antenna structures for the reception of over-the-air television signals. 
(i)  Rights of individuals. Rights of individuals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Nondiscrimination required. The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex or mental or physical handicap, provided that the subscriber shall pay all applicable fees for the service desired. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this article by reference. 
(2)  Privacy; monitoring. The grantee shall not permit the transmission of any signal (aural, visual or digital), including polling or monitoring the channel selection, from any subscriber's premises without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber. This is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful only for signal transmission control or measurement of system performance. The grantee shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber. The grantee shall not predicate regular subscriber service on the subscriber's grant of such permission. Without written authorization from the subscriber, neither the grantee nor any other person shall activate, use, operate, or tap any channel from a subscriber's location. A subscriber may revoke any authorization previously given by delivering to the grantee a written statement of the intent. The grantee shall not tabulate nor permit others to tabulate any subscriber use of the cable communications system which would reveal the opinions or commercial product preferences of individual subscribers, whether residential or business, or of any occupant or user of the subscriber's premises. However, if a subscriber has given written authorization for his participation in a shop-at-home or similar service, the grantee may tabulate responses essential to the functioning of that shopping service, but may not use any such tabulation of individual preferences for any other purposes. Tabulations of aggregate opinion or preference are permitted, provided the aggregations are sufficiently large to ensure individual privacy. 
(3)  Disclosure of subscriber information. The grantee shall at all times comply with the privacy provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
(4)  Information accessibility. Information shall be made accessible as follows: 
a.  Each individual shall have the right to information concerning this article and the rules and regulations formulated pursuant to it by the city or the grantee. The location and hours of operation for the delivery of such information shall be published in the newspaper of the greatest circulation at least once a year within the city and in such other medium as the city may determine. 
b.  At the time of service installation, the grantee shall provide all subscribers with the following information: 
1.  A complete schedule of rates, fees, charges, and terms and conditions of service currently applicable to the type of installation and service ordered. 
2.  A complete statement of the subscriber's right to privacy. 
3.  The address and telephone number of the grantee's office responsible for handling complaints. 
c.  Such information as may be prescribed in this subsection shall be made available to the public and individual subscribers in such form required for reasonable understanding and as may be agreed upon by the city and the grantee. 
d.  Each document required to be filed or submitted under this article or pursuant to it, except those which contain personally identifiable information about any subscriber of those required and designated confidential by the Federal Communications Commission, is a public document, available for public inspection and copying at the requester's expense, at the city during normal business hours. The charge for such copying shall approximate the cost of mechanical reproduction and shall not include a charge for labor. 
e.  Each individual citizen of the city shall have the right to appear before such boards, commissions, agencies or other entities created by the city pursuant to this article. Such appearances shall be in the manner and form as the city may determine. 
(j)  Continuity of service mandatory. Continuous service shall be maintained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Right of subscribers. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive continuous uninterrupted service insofar as they meet the financial and other obligations required by this article and the franchise agreement. If the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service for a period of six months following actual termination or sale. If the grantee changes or if a new operator acquires the system, the grantee shall cooperate with the city and the new grantee in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues and shall be obligated to pay expenses for any period during which it operates the system. 
(2)  Failure to provide continuity. If the grantee fails to operate the system for a period of ten consecutive days or more without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, take over operation of the system or designate a company to operate the system until service is restored under conditions acceptable to the city. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues received by the city that are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. 
(k)  Rights reserved to the city. The following rights are reserved to the city: 
(1)  Right to purchase system. The city shall have the right to purchase the system in accordance with the following: 
a.  If the grantee attempts to sell or transfer the franchise or forfeits its right to the franchise or the city terminates the franchise pursuant to this article or at the normal expiration of the franchise term if the grantee does not seek renewal of the franchise or renewal is denied and all of the grantee's appeal opportunities have been exhausted, the city has the right of first refusal to purchase the cable communications system, at a price to be determined in accordance with this subsection. 
b.  The date of valuation shall be no earlier than the day following the date of the proposed sale, expiration or termination. 
c.  The price of the cable communications system shall be the price set forth in the purchase and sale agreement between the grantee and proposed purchaser for a sale or transfer. If forfeiture, termination or expiration occurs, the value shall be the fair market value of the operating cable communications system minus the value of the franchise. 
d.  Upon receipt of notice of the city's intent to purchase the system at the city's interpretation of the price established in subsection (k)(1)c. of this section, the grantee shall have 30 days within which to accept that price as the purchase price of the system. If the purchase price is not acceptable, the parties shall have 120 days in which to negotiate an acceptable purchase price. 
e.  If the city and the grantee are unable to agree upon the value price of the cable communications systems within the time limits set forth in subsection (k)(1)d. of this section, either party may require, by written notice to the other, that the value of the cable communications system be submitted to arbitration. In such event the purchase price shall be the value of the cable communications system as determined by the arbitration panel as follows: 
1.  The city and the grantee shall each select an arbitrator within 15 days after such written notice. Such arbitrator shall be a disinterested person with reasonable knowledge and experience relative to the subject to be arbitrated. The two arbitrators thus selected shall immediately thereafter select a third arbitrator who shall likewise be a disinterested person having reasonable knowledge and experience relative to the subject to be arbitrated. 
2.  Within 30 days after appointment of all arbitrators and upon ten days' written notice to the parties, the panel of arbitrators shall commence a hearing on the issue of valuation and shall receive all relevant information from the parties. 
3.  The hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the request of either party. All hearing proceedings, debate and deliberations shall be open to the public and at such times and places as contained in the notice. However, if two arbitrators agree, debate and deliberations may be held in closed session. 
4.  The value of the system as determined by the arbitration panel shall be the current worth of the operating cable communications system minus the value of the franchise based upon what a willing buyer will pay a willing seller. 
5.  Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the panel of arbitrators shall prepare findings and a decision agreed upon by all of the panel which shall be filed with the city and served by mail upon the grantee. Unless the parties extend by mutual agreement the time which the panel of arbitrators has to make decision, the proceedings shall become null and void and shall be started anew. 
6.  The decision of the panel regarding the value of the system shall be final and binding upon the parties. 
7.  Either party may seek judicial relief in the following circumstances: 
i.  A party fails to select an arbitrator. 
ii.  The arbitrators fail to select a third arbitrator. 
iii.  One or more arbitrators is alleged to be unqualified. 
iv.  Designated time limits have been exceeded. 
v.  The panel has not proceeded expeditiously. 
vi.  The decision was procured by corruption, fraud or undue means. 
vii.  The arbitration panel exceeded its authority. 
viii.  Based upon the record, the panel abused its discretion. 
8.  If a court of competent jurisdiction determines that judicial relief is appropriate, the court, in addition to its other authority, in its discretion may order the arbitration procedure repeated and issue findings, orders and directions. 
9.  The expenses of the arbitrators shall be borne by the parties, and the expenses of the third arbitrator and those expenses incurred by the panel as a whole shall be borne equally by the parties. 
f.  Upon receipt of the decision of the arbitration panel, the city shall have 30 days in which to notify the grantee of its intent to exercise its option to purchase the system. The purchase price shall be the value of the system as determined by the arbitration panel. 
g.  Upon exercise of this option and the payment of such sum by the city and its service of official notice of such action upon the grantee, the grantee shall immediately transfer to the city possession and title to all facilities and property, real and personal, of the cable communications system, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the city in lieu of some portion of the purchase price set forth in this subsection, and the grantee shall execute such warranties, deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the city as shall be necessary for this purpose. 
h.  The city shall have the right to employ qualified consultants if necessary or desirable to assist in the administration of this article or the franchise agreement. 
(2)  Right of inspection of records. There shall be kept in the city's designated office a separate record of relevant franchise documents. The grantee shall provide such information in such form as may be required by the city and such other records the city may require from time to time. 
(3)  Amendment of franchise or article. Neither the city nor the grantee may amend the franchise or this article without the express written acceptance of the other party. 
(l)  Rights reserved to grantee. Should the grantee become dissatisfied with any material decision or ruling of the city pertaining to cable communications matters, the grantee may pursue such other remedies as are available. 
(m)  Miscellaneous provisions. Miscellaneous provisions are as follows: 
(1)  The grantee and city shall agree to cooperate with each other in accordance to the terms of this article and the franchise agreement. Should either party believe that the other is not acting timely or responsibly within the confines of applicable regulations and procedures in responding to a request for action, that party shall notify the agents designated for that purpose by the other. The agent will use his best efforts to facilitate the particular action requested. 
(2)  Public notice of any public meeting relating to this article shall be given at least ten days prior to the meeting, by posting at city hall. 
(3)  The captions to sections throughout this article are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this article. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this article. 
(4)  The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the sections of this article by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance with any section. 
(5)  Theft of services, vandalism, tampering. 
a.  No person, whether or not a subscriber of the cable system, may intentionally or knowingly damage or cause to be damaged or vandalize any wire, cable, conduit, equipment or apparatus of the grantee. 
b.  Persons convicted of violating the provisions of Penal Code § 593d will be subject to criminal penalties of fines, imprisonment, or both. Violators of Penal Code § 593d will be subject to civil liabilities as a result of a franchised cable communications operator's actions to enjoin or retain such violations, as referenced in Penal Code § 593d(a), (c). 
(n)  Schedule of damages. The schedule of damages shall be as follows: 
(1)  The following liquidated damages shall apply and liability therefor shall accrue from the date of mailing of notice as provided in section 54-36(a), except as otherwise provided in subsection (n)(2) of this section. Such damages shall be payable from the surety bond as provided in section 54-36: 
a.  Failure of the cable communications system to perform in a public emergency or vital information situation at the rate of $1,000.00 per occurrence, enforceable only after activation of the emergency transmission capability described in subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  Failure to provide the local origination channels or increased local origination capacity required at the rate of $200.00 per day every day until provided. 
c.  Failure to render payment for the reimbursement of the city's franchise expenses, franchise fee or damages payments at the rate of $100.00 per day every day from the time due until paid. 
d.  Failure to obtain and maintain the surety bond at the rate of $100.00 per day every day from the time due until paid. 
e.  Failure to deliver evidence of the grantee's insurance coverage within 45 days at the rate of $100.00 per day every day from the date due until compliance. 
f.  Failure to complete construction as outlined in the franchise proposal at the rate of $100.00 per day from the date of scheduled completion until construction is complete. 
(2)  No liquidated damages shall be assessed unless or until the grantee has been notified in writing of the alleged violation from the city and provided a minimum 60-day opportunity to cure. Any staff finding of any violation shall be subject to a public hearing and appeal to the city council. No appeal to the city council shall constitute a waiver of the grantee's right to judicial review of any finding. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1-7; Ord. No. 3541, § 2 (part)) 
State Law reference— Customer service standards, Government Code § 53054 et seq.  
Secs. 54-39—54-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STATE ISSUED VIDEO FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 54-101. - Regulation of state video franchises. 
(a)  Under state law effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission ("PUC") possess the authority to grant state video franchises ("state franchises") pursuant to California Public Utilities Code section 5830(p). The City of Pomona (the "city") will acquire certain rights and responsibilities with respect to state video franchise holders, including the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government ("PEG") purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of state franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. 
(b)  Any notice that a state franchisee is required to provide to the city under Public Utilities Code section 5860(d) shall be delivered to the city manager. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or restrict in any way the imposition of any existing or future generally applicable, nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral tax, fee, or charge to a state franchisee city franchisee, or the services such franchisees provide. 
(d)  The city shall ensure PEG transmission, content, and programming provided by the city to a state franchisee is in a format compatible with the state franchisee's system. In the alternative, the transmissions, content, and programming may be provided in an industry standard format in accordance with Public Utilities Code section 5870(g)(1). 
(Ord. No. 4111, § 2, 12-15-2008)  
Sec. 54-102. - State video franchise and PEG fees established. 
(a)  Any holder of a state franchise ("state franchisee") operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay a fee to the city an amount equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state franchisee. 
(b)  Any state franchisee operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay an additional fee to the city equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state franchisee, which fee shall be used by the city for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law. Any state franchisee that has held a city-issued franchise agreement shall, consistent with Public Utilities Code section 5870, continue to provide and support PEG channel facilities and institutional networks, and to provide cable services to city/community buildings to the maximum extent permitted by law. Such connections shall include existing connections to schools recognized under previously issued city-franchises. A state franchisee operating with in the city that utilizes the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least one PEG channel. Such PEG channel shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide transmission of PEG programming. Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channel for the purpose of funding PEB-related activities. PEG access channel shall be carried on the basic service tier. To the extent feasible, the PEG access channel shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier, and the channel number of the PEG access channel shall be the same channel number used by the incumbent cable operator, unless prohibited by federal law. 
(c)  "Gross revenue", for the purposes of (a) and (b) above, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code § 5860. 
(d)  Commencing from, and after, the effective date of the ordinance [from which this subsection derives], the city's PEG Fee set forth in Ordinance No. 4111 shall continue to apply to any new or existing state franchisee operating in the city and shall automatically be reauthorized upon the expiration of any existing or future state video franchise(s) held by any state-franchised video service provider operating within the city. This section shall so renew until such time that the city council takes formal affirmative action to cease the renewals. 
(Ord. No. 4111, § 2, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 4245 , § 3, 2-26-2018; Ord. No. 4246 , § 2, 3-5-2018)  
Sec. 54-103. - Audit authority. 
Not more than once annually, the city may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a state franchisee to ensure compliance with section 54-102. 
(Ord. No. 4111, § 2, 12-15-2008)  
Sec. 54-104. - Customer service penalties under state franchises. 
(a)  The holder of a state franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
(b)  The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor the compliance of state franchisee(s) with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. 
(c)  The city manager, or his/her designee, shall provide the state franchisee(s) written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and shall allow the state franchisee(s) 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period shall be subject to the following penalties by the city manager, or his/her designee. 
(1)  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each violation. 
(2)  For the second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation. 
(3)  For each subsequent violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each violation. 
(d)  A state franchisee may appeal a penalty assessed by the city council by providing to the city clerk written notice within 60 days of imposition of the penalty requesting a hearing. Such hearing shall be heard by the city council no more than 45 days after receipt of such notice by the city clerk. At such hearing, after relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, the city council shall vote to either uphold or vacate the penalty. The city council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4111, § 2, 12-15-2008)  
Sec. 54-105. - City response to state franchise applications. 
(a)  Applicants for state franchises within the boundaries of the city shall concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 4111, § 2, 12-15-2008)  
Sec. 54-106. - Indemnification and insurance requirements for state franchisees. 
(a)  Defense of litigation. 
(1)  State franchisee shall at the sole risk and expense of state franchisee, upon demand of the city, made by and through the city attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise, brought or instituted or had by third person or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting the city, its elected officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of such state video franchise. 
(2)  State franchisee shall pay and satisfy and shall cause to be paid and satisfied any judgment, decree, order, directive, or demand rendered, made or issued against state franchisee, the city, its elected officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees in any of these premises; and such indemnity shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other assurance required hereunder, or otherwise; provided, that neither state franchisee nor city shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action, action, suit, or other proceeding, without first obtaining the written consent of the other. 
(b)  Insurance required. Upon being granted a state franchise, the state franchisee shall file with the city attorney and shall thereafter during the entire term of the installation and/or occupation in the public rights-of-way with any of state franchisee's equipment, the state franchisee shall maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense each of the following policies of insurance: 
(1)  General comprehensive liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars, together with bodily injury liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 for injuries including accidental death, to any one person, and subject to the same limit for each person in an amount not less than $500,000.00 on account of any one occurrence, and property damage liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00 resulting from any one occurrence; provided, however, as follows: 
(2)  The city shall be named as an additional insured in any of such insurance policies; and 
(3)  Where such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers state franchisee or any other entity or person, it shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. 
(Ord. No. 4111, § 2, 12-15-2008)  
Sec. 54-107. - Permits and construction. 
(a)  State franchisee shall do the following: 
(1)  State franchisee shall utilize existing poles, conduits, and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public property or on privately owned property unless and until first securing the written approval of the city manager. 
(2)  Whenever state franchisee shall not utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities, or whenever existing conduits and other facilities shall be located beneath the surface of the streets, or whenever the city shall undertake a program designed to cause all conduits and other facilities to be located beneath the surface of the streets in any area or throughout the city, in the exercise of its police power or pursuant to the terms hereof, upon reasonable notice to state franchisee, any such conduits or other facilities of state franchisee shall be constructed, installed, placed or replaced beneath the surface of the streets. Any construction, installation, placement, replacement, or changes which may be so required shall be made at the expense of the state franchisee, whose costs shall be determined as in the case of public utilities. 
(b)  The city shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional use, for any public or municipal purpose, whether governmental or proprietary, of any poles, conduits, or other similar facilities erected, controlled or maintained exclusively by or for state franchisee in any street; provided, such use by city does not interfere with the use by state franchisee. 
(c)  In those areas of the city where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone, communication and electric services are underground or hereafter are placed underground, the state franchisee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of his transmission and distribution facilities underground. The term "underground" shall include a partial underground system; provided that, upon obtaining the written approval of the city manager, equipment may be placed in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground. 
(d)  The state franchisee at his or her expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any property of state franchisee when, in the opinion of the city manager the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structure or improvements or governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including but not limited to movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the city shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The state franchisee shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of state franchisee in place, as herein provided. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of state franchisee, and state franchisee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder. 
(e)  Upon the failure, refusal, or neglect of state franchisee to cause any work or other act required by law or hereunder to be properly completed in, on, over, or under any street within any time prescribed therefore, or upon notice given, where no time is prescribed, the city manager may cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall submit to state franchisee an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The state franchisee shall, within thirty days after receipt of such statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4111, § 2, 12-15-2008)  
Sec. 54-108. - Applicability. 
It is the intent of the city council that this article not ever be construed so as to exempt a state franchise holder from compliance with all ordinance, rules or regulations of the city now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted where are consistent with this article or California Public Utilities Code section 5800 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 4111, § 2, 12-15-2008)  
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for traffic or parking regulations for specific locations saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle removal, § 18-81 et seq.; vending from vehicles, § 30-711 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 34; storage of vehicles, § 34-3; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; sleeping motor vehicles, § 46-605; vehicles for hire, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, Vehicle Code § 21000 et seq.; general powers of local authorities, Vehicle Code §§ 21, 21100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this chapter but are defined in the Vehicle Code, the definitions in the Vehicle Code shall apply. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coach means any motorbus, motorcoach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
Curb means the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb is marked by curbing construction or not so marked. The term "curb" does not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
Divisional island means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Loading zone means the space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or freight. 
Ordinance means the ordinance, rule or regulation adopted by the council relating to the movement of traffic and enforcement thereof. 
Parkway means that portion of the street right-of-way, other than a roadway or sidewalk. 
Passenger loading zone means the space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles while receiving or discharging passengers. 
Police officer means every officer of the city police department or any civilian authorized to direct or regulate traffic. 
Pushcart means a vehicle propelled by a person but not ridden upon. 
Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
(Code 1959, §§ 32-1.0—32-1.1, 32-1.4—32-1.8, 32-1.10—32-1.15; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Applicable definitions generally, Vehicle Code §§ 100 et seq., 21000 et seq.  
Sec. 58-2. - Obedience. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate the traffic regulations as specified or promulgated by this chapter. A violation of any such traffic regulations shall constitute an infraction. 
(Code 1959, § 32-3.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-3. - Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons. 
No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a civilian authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 32-3.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Obedience to persons authorized to direct traffic, Vehicle Code § 21100.3.  
Sec. 58-4. - Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other city officer or employee in his enforcement of this chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other city employee or officer in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Code 1959, § 32-3.4; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Police department, § 14-111 et seq.  
Sec. 58-5. - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person or agency, unless authorized by the city traffic engineer, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the sections of this Code or the provisions of any ordinance or resolution of the city pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 32-4.7; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Display of unauthorized traffic signs, signals, markings, etc., Vehicle Code § 21465.  
Sec. 58-6. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1959, § 32-10.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-7. - Railroad trains blocking crossings. 
No person or government agency shall operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular use of any roadway for a period of time in excess of ten consecutive minutes, except when: 
(1)  Necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the movement of trains; 
(2)  Necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track; 
(3)  The train is in motion, except while engaged in switching operations; 
(4)  The train is disabled; 
(5)  There is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing; or 
(6)  Necessary to comply with a governmental safety regulation. 
(Code 1959, § 32-10.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 58-8—58-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-41. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The chief of police, by and with the approval of the city traffic engineer, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic with the approval of the state traffic control devices committee. 
(c)  The chief of police may authorize the temporary placing of official traffic control devices when required by an emergency. The chief of police shall notify the city traffic engineer of his action as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
(Code 1959, § 32-2.7; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-42. - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the operations division of the police department shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1959, § 32-2.4; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-43. - Traffic accident reports. 
The operations division of the police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the supervising officer of traffic services and the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 32-2.5; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Accident reports, Vehicle Code § 16000 et seq.  
Sec. 58-44. - Police department traffic safety report. 
The police department shall prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the police department for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 1959, § 32-2.6; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Police department, § 14-111 et seq.  
Sec. 58-45. - Authority to direct traffic. 
Officers of the police department, members of the fire department and such civilians as are directed by a member of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, notwithstanding any sections to the contrary contained in this chapter or the Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1959, § 32-3.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of traffic officers, Vehicle Code § 21100(c).  
Secs. 58-46—58-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC ENGINEER AND TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic signal and control devices, § 70-67. 
State Law reference— Traffic signs, signals and markings, Vehicle Code § 21350 et seq.; obedience to local traffic signs, Vehicle Code § 21461.5. 
 
Sec. 58-71. - Position of traffic engineer established. 
The position of city traffic engineer is hereby established. The director of public works shall exercise the powers and duties of the city traffic engineer as provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for all city traffic engineering division functions in the police department. 
(Code 1959, § 32-2.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-72. - Responsibility of traffic engineer. 
Unless provided otherwise, in making decisions or taking actions pursuant to this chapter, the city traffic engineer shall make decisions or take actions as are reasonably necessary to preserve public safety and promote the orderly movement of traffic.  
Sec. 58-73. - Powers and duties of traffic engineer. 
(a)  It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to: 
(1)  Determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals; 
(2)  Conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures; 
(3)  Conduct engineering and traffic surveys of traffic conditions and cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and 
(4)  Carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this Code or city ordinances. 
(b)  Whenever the city traffic engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. 
(c)  When appropriate, the city traffic engineer shall seek the participation of the traffic services function of the operations division when significant traffic control changes are proposed by the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 32-2.3; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-74. - Coordination of powers and duties of traffic engineer with board of parking place commissioners. 
Whenever the city traffic engineer seeks to perform duties and powers granted under this chapter within the boundaries of the vehicle parking district, more specifically defined as that area bounded by Holt Avenue to the north, Towne Avenue to the east, Mission Boulevard to the south and White Avenue to the west, the city traffic engineer shall seek input and concurrence from the board of parking place commissioners. In addition, the board of parking place commissioners may, from time to time, make recommendations to the city traffic engineer on matters, including, but not limited to, onstreet parking, traffic circulation, parking and traffic signage, encroachments, vacations and lighting and other related matters that directly or indirectly impact the use of vehicle parking district lots. 
(Code 1959, § 32-2.3.1; Ord. No. 3923, § 1)  
Sec. 58-75. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices upon streets and highways as required under the Vehicle Code or this chapter or other city traffic ordinances to make effective the provisions of the Vehicle Code, this chapter or the ordinances and may place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such appropriate official traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to properly indicate and to carry out the provisions of the Vehicle Code, this chapter or the ordinances or to warn or guide traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 32-4.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of official traffic control devices, Vehicle Code § 21100(d); when signs required, Vehicle Code § 21461.5.  
Sec. 58-76. - Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices. 
The city traffic engineer is to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this chapter whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. 
(Code 1959, § 32-4.5; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— When signs required, Vehicle Code § 21103.  
Sec. 58-77. - Hours and days of operation of traffic control devices. 
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except when such hours or days are specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 32-4.6; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-78. - Official traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes. 
No section of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate official traffic control devices are in place giving notice of such section of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1959, § 32-4.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— When signs required, Vehicle Code § 21103.  
Sec. 58-79. - Installation of traffic signals. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall, subject to the fiscal determination of the council, install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by an engineering and traffic survey, and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those city traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the state department of transportation traffic manual. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain at each signal-controlled intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions. 
(Code 1959, § 32-4.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-80. - Traffic lanes. 
The city traffic engineer shall have authority to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 32-4.3; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-81. - Distinctive roadway markings. 
The city traffic engineer is to place and maintain upon highways distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1959, § 32-4.4; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Distinctive roadway marking authorized, Vehicle Code §§ 21459, 21460.5.  
Sec. 58-82. - Speed limit signs. 
(a)  Whenever the city council, as adopted by ordinance, determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that a speed greater than 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon any street other than a state highway otherwise subject to a prima facie limit of 25 miles per hour and the council declares a prima facie speed limit of 30, 35, 40, 45, or 50 miles per hour or a maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour, whichever is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe, the city traffic engineer shall post the appropriate speed limit signs. 
(b)  Whenever the city council, as adopted by ordinance, determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the limit of 55 miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of any street, other than a state highway where the limit of 55 miles per hour is applicable, and the council declares a prima facie speed limit of 50, 45, 40, 35, 30, or 25 miles per hour, whichever is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe, the city traffic engineer shall post the appropriate speed limit signs. 
(c)  Whenever the city council, as adopted by ordinance, determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the limit of 55 miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of a highway, other than a state highway, for a distance not exceeding 2,000 feet in length between districts, either business or residence, and the council declares a reasonable and safe prima facie limit thereon lower than 55 miles per hour, but not less than 25 miles per hour, which declared prima facie speed limit, the city traffic engineer shall post the appropriate speed limit signs. 
(d)  Speed limits established pursuant to this section shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon such street or highway. 
(Code 1959, § 32-5.1(a)—(d); Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3271, § 1; Ord. No. 3277, § 1; Ord. No. 3374, § 1; Ord. No. 3382, § 1; Ord. No. 3399, § 1; Ord. No. 3694, § 1; Ord. No. 3851, § 1; Ord. No. 3921, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority to place speed limit signs, Vehicle Code § 21351.3.  
Sec. 58-83. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner. 
(Code 1959, § 32-5.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-84. - Authority to place devices altering normal course for turns. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1959, § 32-6.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate turning movements, Vehicle Code § 22101.  
Sec. 58-85. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1959, § 32-6.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to restrict turns, Vehicle Code §§ 22101, 22113.  
Sec. 58-86. - Right turns at signal-controlled intersections. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect appropriate signs prohibiting a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection. 
(Code 1959, § 32-6.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to restrict turns at intersections, Vehicle Code § 22113; turning at red light prohibited if forbidden by sign, Vehicle Code § 21453.  
Sec. 58-87. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever the city council by ordinance designates one-way streets or alleys, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain official traffic control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective unless such devices are in place. 
(Code 1959, § 32-7.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets and alleys, Vehicle Code § 21657.  
Sec. 58-88. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes on streets upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 32-7.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Reversible lane signals, Vehicle Code § 21454.  
Sec. 58-89. - Authority for through streets, stop signs and yield signs. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs, or other official traffic control devices to designate through streets or to designate intersections or other roadway junctions at which vehicular traffic on one or more of the roadways should yield or stop and yield before entering the intersection or junction. 
(Code 1959, § 32-8.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to erect stop signs and yield signs, Vehicle Code §§ 21351.5, 21353 et seq.  
Sec. 58-90. - Establishment of crosswalks. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain marked crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to install signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Code 1959, § 32-11.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish crosswalks, Vehicle Code § 21106; pedestrians generally, Vehicle Code § 21949 et seq.  
Secs. 58-91—58-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE OPERATION 
 
Sec. 58-121. - State speed laws applicable. 
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city except where the city council has adopted by ordinance, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, other speed limits that shall be applicable on specified streets or in certain areas. 
(Code 1959, § 32-5.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Speed generally, Vehicle Code § 22348 et seq.  
Sec. 58-122. - Speed limits for specific streets. 
Speed limits for specific streets are as follows: 
Streets 	Miles 
Per Hour 
 
Alvarado Street. 
San Antonio Avenue to Garey Avenue ..... 30 
Arrow Highway. 
Eastern city limit to western city limit ..... 45 
Avenida Rancheros. 
Mission Boulevard to Santa Clara Drive ..... 45 
Bonita Avenue. 
Eastern city limit to western city limit ..... 40 
County Road. 
Eastern city limit to Garey Avenue ..... 35 
Dudley Street. 
Gillette Road to Holt Avenue ..... 35 
Mission Boulevard to Phillips Boulevard ..... 30 
East End Avenue. 
Holt Avenue to southern city limit ..... 40 
Fairplex Drive. 
Northern city limit to McKinley Avenue ..... 45 
McKinley Avenue to West McKinley Avenue ..... 35 
West McKinley Avenue to Murchison Avenue ..... 45 
Murchison Avenue to Holt Avenue ..... 40 
Ficus Street. 
Walnut Avenue to Riverside Drive ..... 30 
First Street. 
Eastern city limit to Eleanor Street ..... 40 
Eleanor Street to Park Avenue ..... 25 
Park Avenue to Oak Avenue ..... 40 
Franklin Avenue. 
Eastern city limit to Park Avenue ..... 35 
Park Avenue to White Avenue ..... 30 
Fulton Avenue. 
Bonita Avenue to Arrow Highway ..... 35 
Garey Avenue. 
Northern city limit to Alvarado Street ..... 40 
Alvarado Street to Holt Avenue ..... 35 
Holt Avenue to Mission Boulevard ..... 30 
Mission Boulevard to Franklin Avenue ..... 35 
Franklin Avenue to Southern city limit ..... 40 
Grand Avenue. 
Eastern city limit to Hansen Avenue ..... 35 
Grove Street. 
Towne Avenue to Dawn View Avenue ..... 25 
Hamilton Boulevard. 
Orange Grove Avenue to Phillips Boulevard ..... 35 
Phillips Boulevard to Lexington Avenue ..... 30 
Harrison Avenue. 
Towne Avenue to Garey Avenue ..... 30 
Holt Avenue. 
Mills Avenue to Fairplex Drive ..... 35 
Humane Way. 
Valley Boulevard to Mission Boulevard ..... 40 
Indian Hill Boulevard. 
American Avenue to Holt Avenue ..... 40 
Kingsley Avenue. 
East city limits to Washington Avenue ..... 35 
Washington Avenue to San Antonio Avenue ..... 25 
La Verne Avenue. 
Garey Avenue to Arrow Highway ..... 35 
Mountain Avenue to Garey Avenue ..... 40 
Lexington Avenue. 
Eastern city limit to Reservoir Street ..... 25 
Reservoir Street to Garey Avenue ..... 35 
Garey Avenue to Hamilton Boulevard ..... 30 
Lincoln Avenue. 
Eastern city limit to San Antonio Avenue ..... 30 
McKinley Avenue. 
Towne Avenue to Fairplex Drive ..... 35 
Mission Boulevard. 
Eastern city limit to San Antonio Avenue ..... 40 
San Antonio Avenue to Hamilton Boulevard ..... 35 
Hamilton Boulevard to Dudley Street ..... 40 
Dudley Street to Phillips Drive ..... 45 
Phillips Drive to Temple Avenue ..... 50 
Monterey Avenue. 
Reservoir Street to San Antonio Avenue ..... 25 
San Antonio Avenue to Main Street ..... 35 
Main Street to Hamilton Boulevard ..... 30 
Murchison Avenue. 
Fairplex Drive to Ridgeway Street ..... 45 
Ninth Street. 
Eastern city limit to Hansen Avenue ..... 35 
North Ranch Road. 
State Route 71 Expressway to Village Loop Road ..... 35 
Old Pomona Road. 
State Route 71 Expressway to Village Loop Road ..... 40 
Olive Street. 
Reservoir Street to Garey Avenue ..... 30 
Orange Grove Avenue. 
Arrow Highway to Fairplex Drive ..... 35 
Palomares Street. 
McKinley Avenue to Mission Boulevard ..... 25 
Mission Boulevard to Franklin Avenue ..... 35 
Park Avenue. 
Garey Avenue to Rio Rancho Road ..... 35 
Philadelphia Street. 
Eastern city limit to Garey Avenue ..... 35 
Phillips Boulevard. 
Eastern city limit to Towne Avenue ..... 35 
Towne Avenue to Hansen Avenue ..... 40 
Phillips Drive. 
State Route 71 Expressway to Mission Boulevard ..... 25 
Phillips Ranch Road. 
Village Loop Road to Scenic Ridge Drive ..... 40 
Pomona Boulevard. 
State Route 71 Expressway to Valley Boulevard ..... 45 
Reservoir Street. 
Holt Avenue to Mission Boulevard ..... 35 
Mission Boulevard to southern city limit ..... 40 
Ridgeway Street. 
Murchison Avenue to Valley Boulevard ..... 40 
Rio Rancho Road. 
Garey Avenue to State Route 71 Expressway ..... 35 
State Route 71 Expressway to Phillips Ranch Road ..... 40 
Riverside Drive. 
Eastern city limit to western city limit ..... 45 
San Antonio Avenue. 
Towne Avenue to Philadelphia Street ..... 35 
San Bernardino Avenue. 
Mills Avenue to Towne Avenue ..... 35 
Santa Clara Drive. 
Village Loop Road to Avenida Rancheros ..... 35 
Second Street. 
Park Avenue to West terminus ..... 35 
South Campus Drive. 
Ridgeway Street to Temple Avenue ..... 45 
Temple Avenue. 
Mission Boulevard to western city limit ..... 45 
Towne Avenue. 
Foothill Boulevard to southern city limit ..... 40 
Valley Boulevard. 
Ridgeway Street to western city limit ..... 45 
State Route 71 Expressway to Ridgeway Street ..... 40 
Val Vista Street. 
Loma Vista Street to Gillette Road ..... 30 
Village Loop Road. 
Old Pomona Road to Santa Clara Drive ..... 25 
Phillips Ranch Road to Old Pomona Road ..... 35 
Santa Clara Drive to Phillips Ranch Road ..... 35 
Walnut Avenue. 
Eastern city limit to Ficus Street ..... 30 
White Avenue. 
Northern city limit to McKinley Avenue ..... 45 
McKinley Avenue to I-10 Freeway ..... 40 
I-10 Freeway to Lexington Avenue ..... 35 
(Code 1959, § 32-5.1(e); Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3271, § 1; Ord. No. 3277, § 1; Ord. No. 3374, § 1; Ord. No. 3382, § 1; Ord. No. 3399, § 1; Ord. No. 3694, § 1; Ord. No. 3851, § 1; Ord. No. 3921, § 1; Ord. No. 3963, § 2, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 4084, § 1, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 4087, § 1, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 4094, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 4113, § 1, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 4123, § 1, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 4130, § 1, 5-3-2010; Ord. No. 4178, § 1, 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 4-6-2015; Ord. No. 4219 , § 1, 3-7-2016) 
State Law reference— Local alteration of speed limits, Vehicle Code §§ 22352, 22357 et seq.  
Sec. 58-123. - One-way streets and alleys. 
In accordance with section 58-87 and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the following streets and alleys: 
Gordon Street, north to south, Third Street to Mission Avenue. 
Kingsley Avenue, west to east, between Garey Avenue and Bradford Street. 
Thomas Street, north to south, between Third Street and Fourth Street. 
Alleys: 
Gordon Street to Main Street, west to east, between First Street and Pomona Mall West. 
Gordon Street to Park Avenue, east to west, between First Street and Pomona Mall West. 
Kingsley Avenue to Holt Avenue, north to south, between North Reservoir Street and Washington Avenue. 
Thomas Street to Main Street, east to west, between Pomona Mall West and Third Street. 
Thomas Street to Main Street, east to west, between Third Street and Fourth Street. 
(Code 1959, § 32-7.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3507, § 1) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets and alleys, Vehicle Code § 21657.  
Sec. 58-124. - Driving on new pavement or freshly painted markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Code 1959, § 32-9.5; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-125. - Funeral procession. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this section. 
(b)  Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(c)  A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by other method. 
(Code 1959, §§ 32-9.1—32-9.3; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions, Vehicle Code § 21100(a).  
Sec. 58-126. - Cruising. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a highway past a traffic control point, designated by the ranking peace officer on duty within the affected area, under conditions in which traffic is congested at or near the control point, three or more times in one direction within a three-hour period. A peace officer shall give written notice upon such person passing the control point the second time stating that passing the control point a third time shall constitute a misdemeanor. The beginning and end of the portion of the street subject to cruising controls shall be clearly identified by signs that state the appropriate provisions of Vehicle Code § 21100(k) and this section. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following vehicles: 
(1)  In-service emergency vehicles; 
(2)  Taxicabs for hire; 
(3)  Buses; and 
(4)  Other vehicles being driven for business purposes. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 32-16.5; Ord. No. 3295, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit cruising, Vehicle Code § 21100(k).  
Secs. 58-127—58-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq.; local regulation of stopping, standing and parking, Vehicle Code §§ 21100(1), 22500 et seq.; curb markings to prohibit parking, Vehicle Code § 21458. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-161. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer, as authorized by the council, shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such street, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any state highway within the city without approval of the state department of transportation. 
(b)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(Code 1959, § 32-12.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-162. - Permit for loading or unloading at angle to curb. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to authorize the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading property, subject to the terms and conditions to such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property alongside the curb or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 32-12.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-163. - Designation of no stopping zones and no parking areas. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine the location of no stopping zones and no parking areas for the purpose of establishing left turn lanes, right turn lanes, vehicle maneuvering zones and sight clearance zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the lanes and zones and stating the hours during which this section and the provisions of the Vehicle Code are applicable. 
(b)  No stopping zones and no parking zones for purposes other than specified in subsection (a) of this section shall be established by resolution of the council. 
(c)  No stopping zones and no parking areas shall be indicated by signs or by red paint upon the top and face of all curbs in such zones and areas. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-164. - Prohibited stopping, standing, or parking. 
Parking, park, stand or standing, as used in this article (unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended) means to stop or leave standing any vehicle (whether occupied or not) other than: 
(1)  In obedience to an official traffic control device; 
(2)  By direction of a peace officer or other traffic control personnel; 
(3)  Temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading and unloading of merchandise or passengers as allowed by this chapter; or 
(4)  When necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic. 
No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  Within any divisional island, unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings. 
(2)  In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that, for the purpose of establishing left turn lanes, right turn lanes, vehicle maneuvering zones and sight clearance zones, such no stopping or no parking areas are needed. 
(3)  In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(4)  Within any parkway. 
(5)  Provided that signs giving notice of no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking, on any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities; where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic; where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement. 
(6)  At any place when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4208, § 2, 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 58-165. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except for the active process of loading or unloading persons or freight. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-166. - Parking for washing, polishing, greasing, or repairing vehicle. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of washing, polishing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.3; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3280, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-167. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon either side or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.4; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-168. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.5; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-169. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the lefthand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.6; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-170. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the lefthand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the lefthand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.7; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-171. - Parking on grades. 
No person driving or in control of or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand on any highway unattended when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.8; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-172. - Emergency parking signs. 
Whenever the city traffic engineer determines that emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private processions or assemblages, he shall place temporary signs indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the city traffic engineer shall remove such signs thereafter. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.10; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-173. - Parking more than 72 hours prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.11; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-174. - Removal of vehicle parked more than 72 hours. 
If a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of 72 hours, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may issue a citation therefor or may remove the vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of the Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13.12; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-175. - Parking for disabled persons. 
(a)  Persons using blue curb parking spaces shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Blue curb parking spaces shall be operative 24 hours a day, Sundays and holidays included. 
(2)  Parking zones for the disabled are subject to any temporary parking prohibitions established by the city. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to designate special blue curb parking spaces for the purpose of providing onstreet parking for exclusive use by disabled persons. 
(c)  The city manager shall designate parking stalls or spaces in publicly owned, leased, or controlled offstreet parking facilities for exclusive use of disabled persons. 
(d)  Vehicles lawfully displaying a special identification license plate or placard issued to a disabled person or disabled veteran shall be exempt from time limit parking zone restrictions posted on signs or painted on curbs. 
(Code 1959, §§ 32-17.0—32-17.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4208, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
State Law reference— Disabled parking, Vehicle Code § 22511.5 et seq.  
Sec. 58-176. - Nonmotorized vehicle parking. 
No person shall park or leave standing a nonmotorized vehicle or camper, regardless of width or length, when it has been detached from its motor vehicle on any street or highway in the city, except for loading and unloading of persons or goods. 
(Code 1959, § 32-18.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 58-177—58-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOADING ZONES 
 
Sec. 58-201. - Designation of loading zones and passenger loading zones. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the zones and stating the hours during which this section and the Vehicle Code are applicable. 
(b)  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the surface of all curbs in such zones. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time of any day for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers and freight and shall not consume more than three minutes or the loading or unloading of freight more than 20 minutes. 
(c)  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in such zones. White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply any day as follows: 
(1)  When such zone is in front of a hotel, residence, or a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
(2)  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
(Code 1959, § 32-14.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-202. - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
(a)  Permission granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
(b)  Within the total time limits specified in subsection (a) of this section, this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading, but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted by this section. 
(Code 1959, § 32-14.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-203. - Designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1959, § 32-14.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 58-204—58-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 58-231. - Authority of traffic engineer and definitions. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, to prohibit, regulate or limit stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and shall place and maintain official traffic control devices indicating the prohibition, regulation or limitation and stating the hours during which this division and the Vehicle Code are applicable. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter and any other chapter or section of this Code or the city zoning ordinance, pertaining to abandoned or inoperative vehicles, the following terms and meanings shall apply: 
Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle which is left parked or standing upon a highway, street, road, alley or other public thoroughfare or offstreet parking facility for 72 or more consecutive hours. 
Inoperative vehicle means any vehicle that exhibits one or more of the following: 
(1)  Is clearly missing any functional or legally required body or other mechanical parts; 
(2)  Has one or more tires which is flat or without adequate air pressure to allow the vehicle to be driven safely; 
(3)  Is elevated by jacks, blocks, or other devices which elevate tires above ground level; 
(4)  Is incapable of self-propelled movement under its own power; or 
(5)  Contains no license plates, registration tags or other evidence of current state department of motor vehicles registration. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3955, § 2, 6-17-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-232. - Time limit parking zones. 
(a)  Time limit parking zones such as 24 minutes, 40 minutes, one hour, two hours, etc., shall be indicated by either posted signs or by green paint upon the surface of all curbs in such zones. The posted sign or the green curb shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than indicated at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. 
(b)  On any calendar day, with the exception of Sundays and holidays, successive acts of parking within a distance of 300 feet from any other act of parking on any street, part of a street, or municipal parking lot shall be deemed a single act of parking within the meaning of this section, subject to the longest parking limitation applicable to the portion of such street, part of a street, or municipal parking lot lying between the parking places so used. 
(c)  Exemption for vehicle parking district lots. Vehicles parked in vehicle parking district (VPD) lots shall be subject to the parking restrictions as stated on signs posted at each lot. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3869, § 1; Ord. No. 4208, § 4, 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 58-233. - Parking prohibited during designated hours for street sweeping. 
When signs are erected in conformity to Vehicle Code § 22507.6, no person shall park a vehicle upon any street and highway located within the city on the days and during the hours designated on such signs in order that the department of public works may more efficiently sweep the city streets. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-234. - Parking on private property. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle on private property except upon a surface improved and maintained with asphaltic concrete, concrete or other nonpervious surface acceptable to the building official. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be left in any guest parking location in the city, whether such guest parking is required by the city zoning ordinance or this Code, longer than 72 hours, unless otherwise permitted by the property owner. Any vehicle in violation of this subsection shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and subject to enforcement sections of the zoning ordinance or this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.3; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3423, § 2; Ord. No. 3955, § 4, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 58-235. - Parking on city property. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city manager shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted. 
(b)  When signs authorized by this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs or pavement markings. 
(c)  Any motor vehicle parked on city property in violation of this section may be towed away and stored by a police officer, person or private towing service designated by the chief of police under the direction of a police officer. Before this shall apply, however, the area must be conspicuously posted giving notice that any vehicle parked in violation thereof shall be subject to removal and storage at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. The owner of any vehicle so removed and stored may reclaim it, but such owner shall first pay the cost that is incurred in removing and storing such vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.4; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-236. - Restricted parking upon major avenues to display vehicles for sale or rent. 
(a)  No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle for the purpose of advertising or displaying the vehicle for sale or rent in or upon the following streets within the boundaries of the City of Pomona: 
Arrow Highway. 
McKinley west of Garey Avenue to Fairplex Drive. 
Foothill Boulevard. 
Garey Avenue. 
Holt Avenue. 
Indian Hill Boulevard. 
Mission Boulevard. 
Orange Grove Avenue. 
Reservoir Street from Holt Blvd. to the south city limits. 
San Antonio Avenue between Mission Blvd. and Towne Avenue. 
Towne Avenue. 
Valley Boulevard from Westbound 71 to west city limits. 
White Avenue. 
Any and all streets adjacent to Mission Boulevard and/or Holt Avenue for a distance of 100 yards therefrom. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this section is subject to impoundment pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 22651.9 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of section 58-236(a) shall be subject to a fine of $50.00. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.5; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3280, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3955, § 3, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 7-12-2004; Ord. No. 4011, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 4032, § 1, 7-11-2005)  
Sec. 58-237. - County fair parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, park or leave standing, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight of any one day or period, such a vehicle on portions of streets named in this section or such additional streets as the city council, on recommendation of the chief of police, may designate, during such time as the Los Angeles County Fair may be in session or during any functions at the county fairgrounds that the city council, on recommendation of the chief of police, may necessitate such restrictions. These portions of certain streets are as follows: 
Alameda Street, from Artesia Street to Mckinley Avenue. 
Alameda, from Preciado to McKinley. 
Alleyway, north/south, between White Avenue and Yorba. 
Alta Vista Drive, in its entirety. 
Anderwood Court, from Alameda Street to and including cul-de-sac. 
Artesia, from Berkeley to Alameda. 
Berkeley Avenue, from White Avenue to Wilart Place. 
Canyon Way, from McKinley to Hillcrest. 
El Paraiso, from Midvale to Canyon Way. 
Evergreen Drive, in its entirety. 
Fair Avenue, from Arrow Highway to and including southerly cul-de-sac. 
Fairview Place, from McKinley to its end. 
Fulton Road, from LaVerne Avenue to southerly end of street. 
Ganesha Boulevard, from Interstate 10 to McKinley. 
Ganesha Place, from Alameda to McKinley. 
Hacienda Place, from Preciado Street to McKinley Avenue. 
Hacienda Place, from McKinley Avenue to and including northerly cul-de-sac. 
Hillcrest, from Val Vista to Pasa La Paz. 
Hillcrest Place, in its entirety. 
Kenoak, from Preciado to Interstate 10. 
Laredo Avenue, from Fair Avenue to northerly end of street. 
Larkin Way, from McKinley Avenue to northerly cul-de-sac. 
Los Robles, in its entirety. 
McKinley, from Park Avenue to White Avenue. 
Midvale, from McKinley south to its dead end. 
North Hill Road, from McKinley to Hillcrest. 
Oak Knoll Drive, in its entirety. 
Paige Drive, from McKinley to Val Vista. 
Preciado Street from White Avenue to Old Settlers Lane. 
Sunset Drive, in its entirety. 
Tonner, from Paige to Hillcrest. 
Val Vista, from White to Altura Court. 
Warren Place, from Fulton Road to and including cul-de-sac. 
Westwood, from Berkeley to Willow. 
Willow Street, from Yorba to Berkeley. 
Yorba Drive, south from Aliso, to its end. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop or leave standing any such vehicle on the following streets and portions thereof that border the county fairgrounds, at any time: 
E Street, in its entirety 
McKinley, from White Avenue to E Street 
White Avenue: 
From McKinley Avenue to Interstate 10 
From the north city limits to McKinley Avenue 
(c)  The chief of police is authorized to remove any vehicle found stopped, parked or left standing in violation of this section, providing signs are posted giving notice of the removal. Any vehicle removed pursuant to this section shall be taken to a storage garage, and the owner of the vehicle shall be required to pay the storage and cost of removal. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.6; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3392, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 4119, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 58-238. - Parking space markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces for onstreet and offstreet parking. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.7; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-239. - Preferential parking district program. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a preferential parking district program to be administered by the public works department, pursuant to the authority granted by Vehicle Code § 22507. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section and section 58-240, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjacent dwelling unit means a residential dwelling unit fronting upon or having direct access to a residential street by means of a front door, entryway or driveway or any combination thereof. 
Guest means any person visiting a resident in any established preferential parking district, but does not include any person attending events scheduled by any public or private educational institution, including, but not limited to, classes, workshops, seminars and sporting events. 
Preferential parking district means a district of certain streets or portions thereof which are designated by the city traffic engineer as a preferential parking district in which certain vehicles displaying valid preferential parking permits shall be exempt from posted parking restrictions, or in which vehicles may not park unless an authorized permit or other indicia is displayed thereon, or unless such vehicle is otherwise exempt as provided in this section. 
Resident means a person who lives in an adjacent dwelling unit located in a preferential parking district established or under consideration for establishment. 
(c)  Designation of districts. The city traffic engineer is empowered to establish preferential parking districts pursuant to this section. In order to reduce the secondary impacts of the establishment of preferential parking districts, the city traffic engineer may expand the area of any established preferential parking district to encompass other adjacent streets surrounding a district. Residents who desire preferential parking in such expanded area must first meet the prerequisites for establishment of preferential parking districts as set forth in subsection (d) of this section no later than one year from the establishment of the original district. 
(d)  Prerequisites for establishment of districts. Prerequisites for establishment of preferential parking districts are as follows: 
(1)  In order to commence consideration of a preferential parking district, residents in the area shall provide a petition signed by residents living in at least 75 percent of adjacent dwelling units in the area proposed for designation. Petitions shall contain all of the following information: 
a.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of each resident representing each dwelling unit. 
b.  The name and telephone number of a spokesperson who shall represent petitioners. 
c.  A statement that the petitioners desire, agree and request preferential parking privileges; a shortage of reasonable, available and convenient parking for adjacent residents exists; and the currently posted time limits are causing a hardship to petitioners. 
d.  The desired posted time limits or hours wherein a preferential parking permit would be required to be displayed. 
(2)  The city council, on its own motion, after a duly noticed public hearing, may commence the consideration of a preferential parking district. 
(3)  After the residents' petition has been submitted or upon motion of the city council, the city traffic engineer shall study the proposed area and determine whether reasonably convenient parking is available to the residents. The city traffic engineer shall complete the study and reach a decision within 90 days of the council motion or receipt of the residents' petition. 
(e)  Findings. The city traffic engineer shall establish a preferential parking district only if he finds that: 
(1)  A shortage of reasonably available and convenient parking for residents of adjacent dwelling units exists; and 
(2)  Residents representing at least 75 percent of adjacent dwelling units desire, agree and request the establishment of a preferential parking district, or the city council has made a motion to establish such district. 
(f)  Notification. Upon the city traffic engineer's decision to grant or deny establishment of a preferential parking district, notices of such decision to all adjacent property owners and/or occupants will be sent by first-class United States mail. The date of the notification shall be the date it was placed in the mail. 
(g)  Appeals. Any resident aggrieved by the decision of the city traffic engineer to grant or deny establishment of a preferential parking district may appeal such decision to the city council. Such appeal must be filed within 15 calendar days from the date of the notification. 
(h)  Posting required. After exhaustion of all administrative appeals, the city traffic engineer shall designate established preferential parking districts by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that the parking of vehicles which do not display a permit issued for such district is prohibited and the hours and days when such parking is prohibited. During the hours and on the days designated on such signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle on any street in a preferential parking district unless there is displayed on such vehicle a valid permit issued for such district or such vehicle is otherwise exempt. 
(i)  Issuance of permits. Any resident of a designated preferential parking district in such district may apply for a preferential parking permit to the public works department. Any resident of a designated preferential parking district may apply for guest parking permits. The applicant shall provide the following information: name, address, telephone number, a utility bill or property tax bill, or any other document evidencing residence within a preferential parking district. Upon approval of the application and payment of a preferential parking permit fee as set forth in subsection (k) of this section, the public works department shall issue a preferential parking permit and/or guest parking permits granting such resident preferential parking privileges. Except as provided in subsection (l) of this section, the public works department may issue no more than two guest parking permits at any one time to any one resident. 
(j)  Exemption of certain vehicles. No person shall, without a preferential parking permit, park or leave standing any vehicle or trailer in a preferential parking district in excess of the parking restrictions authorized pursuant to this chapter, except for repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, fuel or delivery vehicles doing business in the preferential parking district. 
(k)  Permit fee. Prior to issuance of a preferential or guest parking permit, the applicant shall pay a fee which shall cover the cost of administering the preferential parking program. Preferential parking permit fees shall be in amounts established by resolution of the city council. The schedule for such fees shall remain on file in the offices of the public works department and the city clerk. 
(l)  Temporary guest parking permits. The city traffic engineer may, upon request of a resident possessing guest parking permits, approve and issue temporary guest parking permits, whenever more than two guest parking permits are required for special events. Residents seeking temporary guest parking permits must contact the city traffic engineer at least two business days prior to the special event. 
The city traffic engineer shall also have the sole discretion to issue special temporary guest parking permits to residents in need of health care providers. A resident requesting such permit shall submit a verified statement under penalty of perjury to the city traffic engineer indicating the medical necessity of such temporary permit and the approximate period of time for which the permit would be needed. Other supporting materials may be requested to substitute the need for such special temporary permits. 
(m)  Termination of districts. The city traffic engineer is empowered to terminate a preferential parking district upon finding that the residents representing at least 75 percent of the adjacent dwelling units within a specified preferential parking district request termination of the preferential parking district. Residents may request termination of a preferential parking district by submitting a petition containing signatures of residents representing at least 75 percent of the adjacent dwelling units; the reason for requesting termination; the name, address and telephone number of each person representing each dwelling unit; and the name and telephone number of a spokesperson who shall represent the petitioners. The city council, on its own motion, after a duly noticed public hearing, may terminate a preferential parking district. 
(n)  Penalties and revocation of permits. It is a violation of this section for any person to use any preferential or guest parking permit in any other district than the district for which the permit was issued. It is unlawful to sell, rent, lease, transfer or duplicate any preferential or guest parking permits. In addition to the remedies provided, any preferential or guest parking permit may be revoked by the city traffic engineer upon a five-day written notice sent by United States first class mail where it is determined that the permittee, guest or both have violated any requirement established by this section. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.8; Ord. No. 3872, § 1)  
Sec. 58-240. - Fairplex preferential parking program. 
(a)  Established. Pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22507, there is hereby established a Fairplex preferential parking program. Such Fairplex preferential parking program is a preferential parking district, sponsored by the Los Angeles County Fairplex Commission. The streets to be included in this program are designated on the official Fairplex preferential parking program map which is on file in the offices of the police department, the city clerk and the public works department. 
(b)  Posting; permit required. The city traffic engineer shall designate the Fairplex preferential parking district with the placing and maintaining of appropriate signs indicating that the parking of vehicles which do not display a permit issued for such district is prohibited. It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle on any street in a preferential parking district unless there is displayed on such vehicle a valid permit issued for such district or such vehicle is otherwise exempt. 
(c)  Issuance of permits. Any resident of the Fairplex preferential parking district may apply for a preferential parking permit to the public works department. Any resident of the Fairplex preferential parking district may apply for guest parking permits. The applicant shall provide the following information: name, address, telephone number, a utility bill or property tax bill, or any other document evidencing residence within the Fairplex preferential parking district. Upon approval of the application, the public works department shall issue a preferential parking permit and/or guest parking permits granting such resident preferential parking privileges. Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, the public works department may issue no more than two guest parking permits at any one time to any one resident. 
(d)  Exemption of certain vehicles. No person shall, without a preferential parking permit, park or leave standing any vehicle or trailer in a preferential parking district in excess of the parking restrictions authorized pursuant to this chapter, except for repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, fuel or delivery vehicles doing business in the preferential parking district. 
(e)  Permit fee. There is no permit fee for the residents and guests under the Fairplex preferential parking program. 
(f)  Temporary guest parking permits. The city traffic engineer may, upon request of a resident possessing guest parking permits, approve and issue temporary guest parking permits, whenever more than two guest parking permits are required for special events. Residents seeking temporary guest parking permits must contact the city traffic engineer at least two business days prior to the special event. 
The city traffic engineer shall also have the sole discretion to issue special temporary guest parking permits to residents in need of health care providers. A resident requesting such permit shall submit a verified statement under penalty of perjury to the city traffic engineer indicating the medical necessity of such temporary permit and the approximate period of time for which the permit would be needed. Other supporting materials may be requested to substantiate the need for such special temporary permits. 
(g)  Penalties and revocation of permits. It is a violation of this section for any person to use any preferential or guest parking permit in any other district than the district for which the permit was issued. It is unlawful to sell, rent, lease, transfer or duplicate any preferential or guest parking permit. In addition to the remedies provided, any preferential or guest parking permit may be revoked by the city traffic engineer upon a five-day written notice sent by United States first class mail, where it is determined that the permittee, guest or both have violated any requirement established by this section. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15.9; Ord. No. 3872, § 2)  
Sec. 58-241. - Downtown parking zone. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a downtown parking zone. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Downtown parking zone means the area bound by the northern side of West 1st Street, the eastern side of South Towne Avenue, the southern side of East Mission Boulevard, and the western side of South Parcels Street. 
(2)  Block means one side of the segment of a street between adjacent intersections, or between an intersection and the terminus of the street or the city boundary. 
(c)  Time limits. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, vehicles parked on streets within the downtown parking zone shall not stand or park for a period of time exceeding the time limit restrictions indicated on posted signs or green curbs. 
(1)  Successive acts of parking on one block within one day shall be deemed a single act of parking within the meaning of this Section. 
(2)  Time limit restrictions are in effect from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m., except: 
a.  Sundays and holidays; 
b.  As authorized by Section 58-175, Parking for disabled persons; 
c.  As authorized by city-issued parking permits; or 
d.  As authorized by VPD-issued parking permits, which allow parking in specified VPD lots and parking on streets within the downtown parking zone between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 4208, § 5, 8-3-2015)  
Secs. 58-242—58-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicle size, weight and load, Vehicle Code § 35000 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 58-271—58-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRUCK ROUTES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local reduction of weight limits, Vehicle Code § 35701 et seq. 
 
Sec. 58-291. - Designation. 
(a)  Whenever any section of this chapter, this Code or city ordinance designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street by appropriate signs as "truck routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
(b)  When any such truck routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any such vehicle from having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the state public utilities commission or to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(Code 1959, § 32-16.0; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-292. - Parking restrictions. 
(a)  Whenever any section of this chapter, this Code or city ordinance designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street by appropriate signs as "truck route" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
(b)  When any such truck routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall park his vehicle on such routes and none other, except for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on streets not designated truck routes or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such streets not designated truck routes for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the state public utilities commission or to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(Code 1959, § 32-16.1; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-293. - Tow-away authority. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to remove any commercial vehicle over the gross weight of three tons parked on a city street which has not been designated as a truck route, unless such vehicle is parked for the purposes of making pickup or delivery of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such street and further provided that signs are posted giving notice of the removal pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22651(n). 
(Code 1959, § 32-16.2; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-294. - Routes designated. 
Truck routes are as follows: 
All state highways throughout the city. 
Arrow Highway, from the west city boundary east to the east city boundary. 
Holt Avenue, from Indian Hill Boulevard east to the east city boundary. 
Indian Hill Boulevard, from Holt Avenue north to the Interstate 10. 
Mission Boulevard, from Reservoir Street east to east city boundary. 
Reservoir Street, from the south city boundary north to Mission Boulevard. 
Towne Avenue, from Interstate 10 north to State Highway Route 66. 
Valley Boulevard, from the west city boundary east to State Highway Route 71. 
(Code 1959, § 32-16.3; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3358, § 1; Ord. No. 3479, § 1; Ord. No. 3963, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 4255 , § 1, 1-28-2019)  
Sec. 58-295. - Prohibited parking of commercial vehicles. 
The parking of commercial vehicles over 10,000 gross vehicle weight on any street, highway or alley in the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 32-16.4; Ord. No. 3216, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 58-296—58-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OVERSIZE VEHICLE TRANSPORTATION PERMITS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Special permits for oversized vehicles, Vehicle Code § 35780 et seq. 
 
Sec. 58-321. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Oversized vehicle means any vehicle or combination of vehicles that exceed the legal width, length or weight limitations as defined by the Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1959, § 28-403; Ord. No. 3624, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-322. - Issuance. 
Transportation permits for oversized vehicles shall be issued by the director of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 28-402; Ord. No. 3624, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-323. - Denial. 
(a)  Applications for transportation permits may be denied under the following conditions, unless authorized by the director of public works: 
(1)  The load and/or vehicle exceeds policy limits. 
(2)  Insufficient information is supplied to ensure compliance with permit policy. 
(3)  The load does not justify the size of the vehicle. 
(4)  The applicant cannot provide sufficient information about the vehicle and/or load to determine if a permit is justified. 
(5)  The load exceeds 14 feet in width, unless authorized by variance approval from the director of public works, or the load is an acceptable piece of equipment that is allowed 14 feet six inches in width. 
(6)  The load exceeds 135 feet of combination vehicle and load length unless authorized by the director of public works. 
(7)  The load generates the need for a combination of hauling equipment greater than the seven loading groups or some other type of special hauling equipment. 
(8)  The routes required would present an undue hazard to other traffic. 
(9)  The overall height creates a clearance less than three inches between the top of the vehicle/load and the lowest point of the structure on the traveled way, regardless of where that point is. 
(10)  The applicant or permittee requested to move on legal holidays, unless authorized on the face of the permit. Holiday hours are from 12:01 a.m. on the first day to 12:00 p.m. of the last day of the holiday period. 
(11)  The transporter is currently on suspension for violation of permit requirements or payments of fees. 
(12)  Weights or dimensions are of a type which cannot conform to statute size and weight: 
a.  Loads that cannot be repositioned to stay within statute size, even if additional hauling equipment would be mandated. 
b.  Any tractor, motor truck or power unit not qualified for maximum gross weight. 
c.  Any trailer or semitrailer when coupled together with a power unit would not by Vehicle Code § 35551 or 35551.5 qualify for 80,000 pounds of gross weight. The tractor and semitrailer combination will require a minimum of 35 feet six inches between axles two and five. 
(13)  Any motor vehicle or semitrailer with a fixed load has equipment or features that can reasonably be reduced to a lesser size or weight unless permitted elsewhere in this division. 
(14)  The applicant or permittee requests to move during fog or other inclement weather when visibility is less than 1,000 feet. 
(15)  Extralegal weight will be moved on hauling equipment incorporating fixed inline axles with a dimension greater than ten feet zero inches between the first and last axle on any given unit unless all axles outside the ten feet zero inches dimension are steerable. On tandem axles with spacings greater than eight feet zero inches, weight will be restricted to that allowed in the Vehicle Code. 
(16)  Front overhang exceeds 30 feet zero inches from the bumper or, if there is no front bumper, from the front of the front tire or for loads that exceed the legal rear overhang unless authorized elsewhere in this division. 
(17)  Extralegal weight is requested and the vehicle is equipped with an air- or hydraulic-operated booster axle system. 
(18)  Extralegal weight is requested and mixed suspension types are used within any axle group. 
(b)  When a transportation permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be written on the application and returned to the applicant. A copy will be retained for the city's file. 
(Code 1959, § 28-404; Ord. No. 3624, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-324. - Appeals. 
The following appeal procedures shall apply for applicants who believe they have been denied a permit under this division because of misinterpretation of policy by the city's issuing representative: 
(1)  The applicant should make every effort to resolve the guideline conflict with the issuing office. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit the appeal to the city traffic engineer. 
(3)  If the guideline conflict cannot be resolved at the city traffic engineer level, the applicant may submit written justification and other evidence to the director of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 28-405; Ord. No. 3624, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-325. - Fees. 
The specific fee to be charged under this division shall be determined by a review at the beginning of each fiscal year by the director of public works to ensure that the income derived from such fees reflects the actual cost of administration. 
(Code 1959, § 28-406(b); Ord. No. 3624, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-326. - Monthly billing. 
Under this division any applicant normally requesting ten or more permits per month may be billed monthly for accumulated permit fees on his request. Failure to pay within 60 days of billing may result in suspension of permit privileges. 
(Code 1959, § 28-407; Ord. No. 3624, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-327. - Time limitations on single trip permits. 
The effective period of a single trip permit issued pursuant to this division shall include a reasonable time in transit plus additional time for anticipated delays due to adverse conditions. Requests to cover return trips on one permit will be approved with the effective duration to allow a reasonable travel time, with two days additional for transfer of the load and also additional time for possible inclement weather, up to a maximum total time of 14 days. The permit shall include a full description of all loads hauled within the authority of the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 28-408; Ord. No. 3624, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 58-328—58-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - VEHICLE PARKING DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 58-361—58-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF PARKING PLACE COMMISSIONERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Appointed boards and commissions, § 801 et seq. 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-521 et seq. 
State Law reference— Board of parking place commissioners, Streets and Highways Code § 31770 et seq. 
 
Sec. 58-381. - Created. 
There is created, pursuant to Streets and Highways Code § 31770.1, a board of parking place commissioners which shall have all of the powers and duties of boards of parking place commissioners under the Vehicle Parking District Law of 1943 (Streets and Highways Code § 31500 et seq.). 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.50; Ord. No. 3508, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-382. - Composition and appointment of members. 
There shall be seven members of the board of parking place commissioners. Each member thereof shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.51; Ord. No. 3508, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3844, § 2 (part)) 
State Law reference— Commission membership, Streets and Highways Code § 31771.  
Sec. 58-383. - Qualifications of members. 
It is intended that the board of parking place commissioners shall be persons of business experience and knowledge of the city's downtown activities to the end that the affairs of the vehicle parking district shall be administered in the interests of the district. A commissioner may be an owner or lessee of property or an officer, employee or agent of a sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation owning or leasing property within the district or similarly qualified person; provided, however, all commissioners must be residents of the city and must also meet the qualifications required by section 801 of the Charter. Any such commissioner, however, shall not vote upon or influence in any manner a decision of the commission or council which relates particularly to the commissioner's property or business or which affects the commissioner's property or business more than other properties or businesses in the district or take action which is a violation of the laws relating to conflicts of interest, pursuant to the Political Reform Act of 1974 (Government Code § 87100 et seq.). 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.52; Ord. No. 3508, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3844, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3923, § 2)  
Sec. 58-384. - Terms of office; selection of chair. 
(a)  The term of office of each member of the board of parking place commissioners shall be four years. The term of commissioners appointed by the city council shall coincide with the councilmember's term of office and shall end concurrently with the ending of the term of the councilmember/mayor who nominated that commissioner. However, in no event shall a commissioner serve for a period longer than the term of the councilmember/mayor who nominated that commissioner. Each member serves until his successor is appointed and qualifies or until the city council vacates that commissioner's office. 
(b)  The board of parking place commissioners shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice-chair of the board to serve for one year. During the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall act as the chair. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.53; Ord. No. 3844, § 3 (part)) 
State Law reference— Terms of members, Streets and Highways Code § 31774.  
Sec. 58-385. - Removal of members. 
(a)  Any member of the board of parking place commissioners may be removed by a majority vote of the entire council when, in the discretion of the city council, the best interests of the city will be served thereby. Additionally, the council shall remove a commissioner, pursuant to Streets and Highways Code § 31778, whenever a petition signed by the owners of more than one-half of the area of assessable land within the vehicle parking district requesting the removal of the commissioner is filed with the council. 
(b)  If a member is absent without cause from three successive regular meetings of the board, the city clerk shall declare his position to be vacant and shall notify the city council. A member is not absent without cause if the absence is: 
(1)  Due to illness; or 
(2)  Unavoidable and the member gives the secretary of the board notification before the day of the meeting that he will be absent and states the reason for the absence. 
(c)  Whenever a vacancy occurs, the city council shall fill the vacancy in the same manner as was used for the original appointment. A member appointed to fill a vacancy serves for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1959, §§ 32-19.54, 32-19.56; Ord. No. 3508, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3844, § 3)  
Sec. 58-386. - Meetings. 
The board of parking place commissioners shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as fixed by the board, and it shall cause a record to be kept of all of its proceedings, which record shall be a public record. The board shall comply in all respects with the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code § 54950 et seq.). 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.55; Ord. No. 3508, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3844, § 3 (part))  
Secs. 58-387—58-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OFFSTREET PARKING AND TRAFFIC CONTROL FUND 
 
Sec. 58-411. - Created. 
There is hereby established a fund to be known as the offstreet parking and traffic control fund of the city, referred to in this division as "the fund." 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.36; Ord. No. 1268, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-412. - Disposition of parking meter revenues. 
All revenues from parking meters located on streets within the city shall be deposited in the offstreet parking and traffic control fund. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.37; Ord. No. 1268, § 2; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-413. - Replacement of maintenance, operation, capital and replacement costs. 
Quarterly or at such intervals as the council may designate, amounts representing the cost for maintenance, operation, and capital improvements or replacement of the parking meters shall be transferred from the offstreet parking and traffic control fund and deposited in the respective fund from which the original expenditure was made. Such transfers shall be made only after authorization by the city council after a verified statement of expenditures is submitted by the director of finance, providing that other sums may be withdrawn by authorization of the council for traffic control. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.38; Ord. No. 1268, § 3; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-414. - Apportionment of excess revenues between districts. 
The net revenue remaining in the offstreet parking and traffic control fund at the end of each fiscal year after withdrawals and transfers, as set forth in section 58-413, shall be apportioned to the various vehicle parking districts. Such apportionments to each vehicle parking district in any year shall be measured by the net amount available in the fund multiplied by the ratio between the total assessments levied in any one district and the total combined assessment for all districts. The amount of assessment in a vehicle parking district to be used is the denominator of the formula in this section only so long as the amount of the assessment in a district has not been equalled by apportionments from the fund. Amounts so apportioned to vehicle parking districts shall be used solely for the acquisition, improvement, enlargement, lease or operation of municipal offstreet parking lots. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.39; Ord. No. 1268, § 4; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-415. - Transfer to general fund after assessment equalled. 
When all assessments levied against property within the several vehicle parking districts have been equalled by amounts apportioned by the council from the offstreet parking and traffic control fund, such net revenues accruing shall be transferred to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.40; Ord. No. 1268, § 5; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-416. - Transfer of funds between districts. 
Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the transfer or loan of funds between the established vehicle parking districts. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.41; Ord. No. 1268, § 6; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-417. - Accounting. 
The city treasurer shall keep an accurate account of the offstreet parking and traffic control fund and shall report deposits and withdrawals and the condition of the fund at such intervals as deemed necessary by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.42; Ord. No. 1268, § 7; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 58-418—58-440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TRANSFER OF LAND BETWEEN VEHICLE PARKING DISTRICTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Parking district land substitution proceedings, Vehicle Code § 31900 et seq. 
 
Sec. 58-441. - Permitted. 
It shall be lawful for any vehicle parking district duly constituted and established under and by virtue of the laws of the state to transfer land under its jurisdiction used for offstreet parking to another vehicle parking district, and it shall be lawful for any vehicle parking district to receive and accept land for offstreet parking where such land is transferred from another vehicle parking district in the manner provided in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.43; Ord. No. 1364, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-442. - Action of transferring district. 
Before any vehicle parking district shall transfer any land under its jurisdiction used for offstreet parking to another vehicle parking district, the board of parking place commissioners of that district proposing to transfer any such land shall first pass and adopt a resolution prescribing the form of notice that shall be given to persons interested in the district and, in addition thereto, shall pass and adopt a resolution of intention to transfer such land, which resolution shall include a description of the land proposed to be transferred, the manner and terms of the transfer and the conditions in connection therewith. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.44; Ord. No. 1364, § 2; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-443. - Action of receiving district. 
Before any vehicle parking district may receive and accept any land proposed by another vehicle parking district to be transferred in accordance with this division, the board of parking place commissioners of the vehicle parking district to receive and accept any such land shall first pass and adopt a resolution prescribing the form of notice that shall be given to all persons interested in the district and, in addition thereto, shall pass and adopt a resolution of intention to receive and accept such land, which resolution shall include a description of the land proposed to be received and accepted into the jurisdiction of the district, the manner and terms of the transfer and the conditions in connection therewith. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.45; Ord. No. 1364, § 3; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-444. - Notice; public hearing. 
Before any vehicle parking district, through its board of parking place commissioners, shall transfer any land within its jurisdiction. Before any vehicle parking district, through its board of parking place commissioners, shall receive and accept any land from another vehicle parking district, notice of the adoption of the resolution of intention pursuant thereto shall be given to all persons interested in the district in the manner prescribed by the board of parking place commissioners, and the resolution of intention shall provide for a public hearing in connection with any such proposed transfer. Notice of the resolution of intention shall be given as provided in this section at least five days prior to the holding of any public hearing by the board of parking place commissioners of any such district for the purpose set forth in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.46; Ord. No. 1364, § 4; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-445. - Approval of council. 
Following the holding of public hearings as provided in this division, no vehicle parking district shall transfer any land under its jurisdiction used for offstreet parking and no vehicle parking district shall receive or accept any such land from another district until the consent of the city council is first had and obtained. The council shall either approve or disapprove any such action on the part of any vehicle parking district by resolution duly passed and adopted by the council. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.47; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 58-446—58-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - METERED PARKING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4163, §§ 1, 2, adopted August 6, 2012, repealed the former div. 5, §§ 58-471—58-484, and enacted a new div. 5 as set out herein. The former div. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959, §§ 32-19.0—32-19.13. For complete derivation, please refer to the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 58-471. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parking meter means any mechanical or electronic device which provides for the payment of a fee to park in a designated parking space within a parking meter zone. 
Parking meter space means a parking space of sufficient size to permit the parking of one vehicle only for a fee within a parking meter zone. 
Parking meter zones means portions of streets or city-owned or city-leased land upon which the parking of vehicles is regulated with the aid of parking meters. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-472. - Construction of division. 
No section of this division shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-473. - Designation and marking of parking spaces. 
(a)  Whenever the council has established parking meter zones, the public works department shall designate parking meter spaces by white lines upon the surface of the roadway or pavement. 
(b)  When markings are in place designating spaces or the angle for parking, as provided in this section, no person shall park a vehicle except entirely within such parking space or between lines indicating angle parking. 
(c)  Whenever the parking of vehicles is required within parallel parking spaces, a vehicle or combination of connected vehicles exceeding the dimensions of such a space may also occupy one or more adjoining spaces, provided that all other sections of this division applicable to each such space must be observed. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-474. - Council to establish parking meter zones. 
The council shall, by ordinance, establish parking meter zones, including therein such streets, portions of streets or city-owned or city-leased land as parking conditions may require. Each ordinance establishing a parking meter zone shall not be required to be codified in the City Code. Rather, the city clerk shall maintain a list of ordinances establishing each parking meter zone(s), maps or exhibits depicting the location of all parking meter zones. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-475. - Installation of parking meters. 
The city engineer shall cause to be installed at or near designated parking meter spaces such parking meters as shall have been approved by the council. Each parking meter shall display the parking fee and instructions for payment for the designated parking meter spaces. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-476. - Maintenance of meters. 
The department of public works shall be responsible for the servicing, maintenance and repair of all parking meters. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-477. - Parking meter fees. 
The amount of the parking meter fees, the parking time allowed following payment of such fees, the hours during which such fees are required, and the directions which shall appear on the parking meters shall be such as may be prescribed by the council in the ordinance establishing the parking meter zone. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-478. - Issuance of citations. 
It shall be the duty of each police officer to take the number of any meter at which any vehicle is over parked, as provided in this division, the state vehicle license number of such vehicle, the time and date of such over parking, the make and type of such vehicle; and to issue, in writing, a citation for illegal parking. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-480. - Legal time limited. 
It is unlawful for any person, except as otherwise provided by this division, to permit any vehicle parked by him or her to remain parked in any parking meter space longer than the amount of time paid for by the parking meter fee. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-482. - Mechanical failure of meter to be grounds for acquittal. 
Any person unintentionally violating any provision of section 58-479 or 58-480, by reason of mechanical failure of a parking meter not caused by such person, may be acquitted of such violation upon establishing such fact by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 58-483. - Tampering with meter. 
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter except by authority of the city engineer, the chief of police, the director of finance or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
Secs. 58-484—58-510. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CONTROLLED PARKING LOTS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 58-511. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled parking lot means a lot used for vehicle parking regulated by parking control devices. 
Controlled parking space means a parking space of sufficient size to permit the parking of one vehicle in a space designated for parking in a controlled parking lot. 
Parking certificate means a card or piece of paper issued by a parking control device stating in substance that when such card is placed in a vehicle such vehicle is permitted to park in a controlled parking lot on a particular date. 
Parking control device means any mechanical apparatus or device which is set into motion by the inserting of a coin and which automatically issues a parking certificate. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.14; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-512. - Construction of division. 
No section of this division shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other section of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.15; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-513. - Council to establish. 
The council may by resolution establish controlled parking lots upon property owned by the city and may, upon recommendation of the board of parking place commissioners, establish controlled parking lots upon property held by the city for a vehicle parking district. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.16; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-514. - Marking of parking spaces; parking of vehicles wholly within spaces. 
Whenever the council by resolution has established a controlled parking lot, the superintendent of streets shall designate controlled parking spaces by white lines upon the surface of the pavement. When markings are in place designating controlled parking spaces, no person shall park a vehicle except entirely within such space and between the lines indicating such space. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.17; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-515. - Parking certificate required. 
No person, except as otherwise provided by this division, shall permit any vehicle parked by him to remain in any controlled parking lot or in any controlled parking space without having first obtained a parking certificate dated the date which such vehicle is parked and displaying such parking certificate in a prominent place on the dashboard or front seat of the vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.18; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-516. - Penalty for failure to obtain and display parking certificate. 
Upon failure of any person to abide by section 58-515, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.19; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-517. - Certain parking permitted without parking certificate. 
A vehicle may be parked and remain parked in a controlled parking space without obtaining or displaying a parking certificate during the hours other than those designated by resolution of the council as hours during which the parking certificate is required to be displayed. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.20; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-518. - Issuance of citations for violations. 
It shall be the duty of such city employees designated by the council to issue citations for violations of this division. In discharging this duty such employees shall be under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.25; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 58-519—58-535. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Parking Control Devices 
 
Sec. 58-536. - Maintenance. 
The superintendent of streets shall be responsible for the servicing, maintenance and repair of all parking control devices. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.24; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-537. - Designation of denomination of coins to be deposited. 
The denomination of the coin to be deposited in the parking control device in order to obtain a parking certificate shall be designated by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.21; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-538. - Unlawful to tamper with or break. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to injure, tamper with or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking control device except by authority of the city traffic engineer, the chief of police, the director of finance or the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.22; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part)) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, Penal Code § 594 et seq.  
Sec. 58-539. - Use of slugs. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking control device any slug or other substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.23; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part)) 
State Law reference— Use of slugs, Penal Code § 640a.  
Secs. 58-540—58-560. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - MECHANICAL PARKING ATTENDANTS 
 
Sec. 58-561. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mechanical parking attendant means any device, meter or machine located in a prominent position on a municipal parking lot, which issues a receipt upon the insertion of a designated coin or token. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.26; Ord. No. 1894, § 1; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-562. - Construction of division. 
No section of this division shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other section of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.27; Ord. No. 1894, § 2; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-563. - Establishment of lots. 
The council shall, by resolution, establish mechanical parking attendant lots on city-owned or city-leased land as parking conditions require, upon the recommendation of the board of parking place commissioners of the vehicle parking district having jurisdiction over such lots. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.28; Ord. No. 1894, § 3; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-564. - Installation by traffic engineer. 
The city traffic engineer shall cause to be installed such mechanical parking attendants as may be required. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.29; Ord. No. 1894, § 4; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-565. - Establishment of regulations. 
The denomination of the coin that shall be deposited in the mechanical parking attendant, the parking time allowed following deposit of such coins, and the hours during which such deposits are required may be prescribed by a resolution of the board of parking place commissioners for the vehicle parking district having jurisdiction over the lot upon which such mechanical parking attendant is to be installed. The notice and hearing requirements which the board has used for the changing of fees or charges shall be used when determining such matters. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.30; Ord. No. 1894, § 5; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-566. - Display of parking receipt required. 
It shall he the duty of the driver or the person depositing the coin in the mechanical parking attendant to display the receipt issued within the parked vehicle so as to be easily seen by a monitoring police officer or authorized attendant, as provided by the orders of the board of parking place commissioners of the vehicle parking district. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.31; Ord. No. 1894, § 6; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-567. - Sign to give notice that deposit of coin and display of receipt required. 
There shall be a sign of sufficient size to: 
(1)  Give reasonable notice of the fact that it is a violation of this division to park in a lot controlled by a mechanical parking attendant without the depositing of the designated coin or token; and 
(2)  Require the exhibition of the receipt within the parked vehicle in a place which can be easily seen by a monitoring police officer or authorized attendant. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.32; Ord. No. 1894, § 7; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-568. - Effect of mechanical failure of attendant. 
Any person who deposited the required coin into the mechanical parking attendant and, by reason of mechanical failure of the apparatus not caused by such person, does not receive the receipt shall be deemed not in violation of this division upon the immediate notification of such defect to the police department or, in the alternative, if such person places an explanation for his lack of such receipt in the place within the vehicle designated by the board of parking place commissioners for the placement of the receipt. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.33; Ord. No. 1894, § 8; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-569. - Unlawful to tamper with or break. 
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of mechanical parking attendants except by authority of the city traffic engineer, the chief of police, the director of finance or the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.34; Ord. No. 1894, § 9; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 58-570. - Issuance of citation for violation. 
A police officer or authorized attendant observing violation of this division shall issue a citation in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Code 1959, § 32-19.35; Ord. No, 1894, § 10; Ord. No. 3216, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 58-571—58-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES OR INLINE SKATES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-601. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Roller skates and inline skates, including roller blades, means any shoe, boot or other footwear to which one or more wheels is attached. 
Skateboard means any platform of any composition or size to which two or more wheels are attached and which is intended to be ridden or propelled by one or more persons standing or kneeling upon it and to which there is not affixed any seat or any device or mechanism to turn and control the wheels. 
(Code 1959, § 28-521; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-602. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the riding of skateboards, roller skates or inline skates or other similar device on and along sidewalks, walkways, roadways and parking areas and other areas open to the public on certain public property and private property when such activity endangers pedestrians and motorists. The city council finds that the practice of such activities, which is increasing, within and upon such areas creates physical hazards to the health and safety of pedestrians and motorists. 
(Code 1959, § 28-520; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-603. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to any device designated, intended or used solely for (i) the transportation of infants or disabled or incapacitated persons, or (ii) the transportation and containment of goods or merchandise to and from the place of purchase or storage. Furthermore, the community services director may, by resolution, suspend the enforcement of this article to accommodate special events when so requested by the event organizer pursuant to section 46-561. 
(Code 1959, § 28-530; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-604. - Enforcement; violations. 
This article shall be enforced by any sworn police officer or private security patrol officer whose training and credentials have been approved by the police department. A violation of this article shall constitute an infraction. 
(Code 1959, § 28-531; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-605. - Signage and posting requirements. 
Signs prohibiting the activities described in this article shall: (i) be placed and posted in conspicuous and visible areas; (ii) have a dimension of not less than one square foot in area, with lettering of not less than one inch high; (iii) state that such activities are prohibited on the property; and (iv) cite the respective section of this Code being invoked, in order to provide reasonable notice. The required signs must be posted prior to the application and enforcement of this article. The required signs shall be continually maintained by the property owner or management. An example of a sign written in compliance with this section reads as follows: 
SKATEBOARD RIDING AND ROLLER SKATING PROHIBITED 
Pomona City Code Section _____ 
(Code 1959, § 28-527; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-606. - Withdrawal from application of article. 
The owner, manager or other person in charge of a private property or shopping center may withdraw the property or center from the application of this article by removing the signs required by sections 58-610 and 58-611 and notifying the chief of police in writing of such withdrawal. 
(Code 1959, § 28-528; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-607. - Use on or along Civic Center Plaza. 
No person shall ride, operate or utilize any skateboard, roller skates, inline skates, or any other similar device, whether powered by human or motorized means, or propel or use any coaster or toy vehicle on or along any sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, roadway, or parking lot of Civic Center Plaza, an area bounded by Mission Boulevard to the north, Seventh Street to the south, Garey Street to the east, and Park Street to the west. 
(Code 1959, § 28-522; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-608. - Use on or along commercial zoned areas. 
No person shall ride, operate or utilize any skateboard, roller skates, inline skates, or any other similar device, whether powered by human or motorized means, or propel or use any coaster or toy vehicle on or along any sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, roadway, or parking lot of any commercially zoned area within the city as such commercial zone area is defined in this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 28-523; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-609. - Use in city-owned parking lots, garages, or other parking facilities. 
No person shall ride, operate or utilize any skateboard, roller skates, inline skates, or any other similar device that is propelled by human or motorized means or propel or use any coaster or toy vehicle upon any city-owned, city-operated or city-controlled parking lot, garage, or other parking facilities. 
(Code 1959, § 28-524; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-610. - Use on private property open to the public. 
No person shall ride, operate or utilize any skateboard, roller skates, inline skates, or other similar device that is propelled by human or motorized means or propel any coaster or toy vehicle upon any privately owned, operated, or controlled property open to the public without first obtaining the consent of the property owner, his designee, or a lawful occupant. In addition, the property owner is authorized to post or erect signs at the owner's expense prohibiting the riding of the devices described in this section in or on those premises, if a request has been made and approved by the chief of police, in accordance with established sign standards described in section 58-605. 
(Code 1959, § 28-525; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-611. - Use on pedestrian walkways or parking areas within commercial shopping centers or stores. 
No person shall ride, operate or utilize any skateboard, roller skates, inline skates, or other similar device that is propelled by human or motorized means or propel any coaster or toy vehicle upon any pedestrian walkway or parking area within a commercial shopping center or store. This section shall not apply unless and until the owner, manager or other person in charge of the shopping center or store shall have accomplished the signage and posting requirements of section 58-605. The owner, manager or other person in charge of the shopping center shall deliver a written notification to the chief of police, not less than 24 hours prior to posting the signs described in section 58-605, that the shopping center is invoking this section as of a certain date which shall be specified in the notice. 
(Code 1959, § 28-526; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 58-612. - Facilities for trick riding. 
No person shall erect, construct, or place any ramp or similar device for the purpose of performing or allowing to be performed any acrobatic, fancy, stunt, or trick riding on or along any city street, sidewalk, or property or facility owned, operated, or controlled by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 28-529; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 58-613—58-630. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY SKATE PARKS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 38. 
 
Sec. 58-631. - Designation. 
City-owned and/or operated areas designed for the recreational purpose and use as a skate park shall be so designated with the posting of signs as authorized under this article. 
(Code 1959, § 28-532; Ord. No. 3850, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3972, § 1, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 58-632. - Protective gear required. 
(a)  Any person riding a skateboard, roller skates, inline skates or other allowed recreational equipment at a city-owned and/or operated skate park must wear a protective helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads. 
(b)  Any person riding a skateboard, roller skates, inline skates or other allowed recreational equipment at a city-owned and/or operated skate park in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of an infraction which may be enforced pursuant to section 58-604. 
(c)  All city-owned and/or operated skate parks shall be posted with signs providing the public and skate park patrons with notice of the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3972, § 2, 12-16-2002)  
Sec. 58-633. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  The following activities shall be prohibited at all city-owned and/or operated skate parks: 
(1)  Use of bicycles or motorized vehicles within designated skate park areas. 
(2)  Bringing, placing, or maintaining obstructions or obstacles on city-owned and/or operated skate parks or on parking lots, curbs or other park areas adjacent to a designated skate park. 
(3)  Bringing glass, food, beverages, litter, or trash onto the skating areas. 
(4)  Possession or use of tobacco, drugs, or alcohol. 
(5)  Possession of guns or knives of any kind or graffiti implements or placing graffiti, as graffiti is defined in section 18-121, on any property within or around city-owned and/or operated skate parks. 
(6)  Littering or disposing of trash or waste anywhere other than in designated trash receptacles. 
(7)  A violation of any state, local or federal law or ordinance. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of subsection (a) of this section shall be banned from use of the skate parks for a minimum of 30 days and shall be guilty of an infraction, which may be enforced pursuant to section 58-604. Such penalty shall be cumulative to any other penalty imposed by this Code; the Penal Code; or any other federal, state, or local law, rule, statute, ordinance, or regulation. This section shall not in any way limit the applicability of any such provisions. All persons using a city-owned and/or operated skate park shall comply with all state, local or federal laws or ordinances. 
(c)  The community services department is hereby authorized to post signage in all city-owned and/or operated skate parks providing the public and skate park patrons with notice of the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3972, § 3, 12-16-2002)  
Secs. 58-634—58-670. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TOW SERVICE FRANCHISES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30; vehicles for hire, ch. 66. 
 
Sec. 58-671. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for and specify the means for the city to attain the best possible tow truck services for the city. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-1), 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 58-672. - Authority to grant. 
The city council may at its discretion, by the adoption of an ordinance, grant a nonexclusive franchise to a tow truck operator to provide towing services to the city under and pursuant to the provisions of article XIII of the Charter and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-2), 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 58-673. - Terms and conditions. 
(a)  All franchises granted to franchisees pursuant to this article shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term to be specified by the city council in the ordinance granting a franchise and in the franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee, subject to the requirements of city Charter sections 1301 through 1303. 
(b)  No section of this article shall be deemed to require restricting the number of franchises to one or any particular number, and no section of this article shall be deemed to require the city council to grant any franchise if the council determines that the grant of any such franchise is not in the best interest of the city and the public. 
(c)  All tow truck operator franchises shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified in this article, as well as any terms or conditions specified in the ordinance granting the franchise and the franchise agreement. 
(d)  In granting any tow truck operator franchise, the city council may prescribe such other terms and conditions, not in conflict with this article, as are determined by the city council to be in the best interest of the city and public. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-3), 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 58-674. - Transfer or assignment. 
A tow truck operator franchisee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, mortgage or dispose of in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the city council. The city council's approval of a transfer or assignment of the franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be conditioned upon the franchisee's sale or disposal of all ownership rights in the franchised tow truck business. A tow truck operator franchisee who desires to transfer or assign his franchise, because he intends to sell or dispose of all interests in the tow truck business that is franchised with the city, shall make a written request for a transfer or assignment of the franchise. The written request, a nonrefundable deposit set by resolution of the city council and the proposed sale agreement or other document evidencing disposal of the franchised tow truck business shall be submitted to the department of finance at least 120 calendar days before the requested effective transfer or assignment date. The department of finance and the police department shall investigate the proposed transferee or assignee and determine whether the transferee or assignee is qualified to serve as a tow truck operator franchisee pursuant to the criteria and requirements set forth in this article and make a recommendation to the city council. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the prior consent of the city council shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-4), 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 58-675. - Selection of franchisees. 
(a)  If the chief of police determines that, due to an increase in the volume of calls and/or expiration or termination of an existing franchise, an additional or new tow truck operator franchisee is needed to provide tow truck services to the city, the chief may first approach the remaining or current franchisees regarding the possibility of increasing their towing capacity to meet the increased city demands. If the remaining or current franchisees are unable or unwilling to meet the increased demands of the city, the chief shall request that the department of finance send out a notice of request for qualifications for a tow truck operator franchise. The request for qualifications shall be prepared by the department of finance and shall be approved by the chief of police. The department of finance shall select the most qualified tow truck operator, provided that the city receives at least one qualified proposal. The name of the most qualified proposer, if there is one, shall be forwarded to the chief of police who shall conduct a background investigation of the operator and his employees and verify all information included in the proposal submitted to the city. Upon successful completion of the background investigation, the chief of police shall recommend in writing to the city council an award of a franchise based on the objective criteria established by the chief of police and as set forth in this article. Franchises shall be awarded at the city council's discretion in a manner consistent with the provisions of article XIII of the city Charter and this article. In preparing requests for and evaluating the proposals received by the city, the department of finance shall comply with the procedures and criteria established by the chief of police and in accordance with this article. 
(b)  At least 120 calendar days prior to the expiration of any existing franchise agreement, the chief of police, director of finance and city manager shall enter into discussions with the franchisee regarding the potential extension of the franchise agreement. If the parties reach a mutually acceptable agreement to extend the franchise, a new franchise shall be awarded at the city council's discretion in a manner consistent with the provisions of article XIII of the city Charter and this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the city council to approve, deny or modify any franchise agreement extension, negotiated by city staff. If no agreement for the extension of the franchise is reached prior to the expiration of the franchise term, including any option periods, the franchise will be considered expired, and notice of a request for qualifications must be sent out under the procedures outlined in this section. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the initial selection process after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives shall be conducted utilizing an expedited request for the qualification procedure to all existing tow truck operators on the city's current rotation, as well as any tow truck operators who have requested inclusion on the rotation within the preceding six calendar months. Again, nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city council to approve any specific franchise application or to limit the ability of the city council to approve, deny or modify any franchise agreement submitted to it for approval. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-5), 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 58-676. - Conditions. 
(1)  The tow service operator shall be able to hold a minimum of 75 vehicles on a lot within the City of Pomona. Lighting shall be sufficient to afford easy visibility to all areas of the lot. The lot must be in a commercial or industrial area in a zone for which the business use is permitted and located within the city. The business must comply with all city, county, and/or state standards and must at all times possess a valid and current city business license in accordance with article VIII of chapter 50. All vehicles towed by a franchisee pursuant to the terms of the franchise shall be stored within the City of Pomona and available for release at the premises specified in condition 3 below. 
(2)  The tow service operator shall have his lot completely enclosed with a minimum of a six-foot high fence equipped with a security device, as approved by the community development department. Security in the lot shall be adequate to preclude theft, vandalism or damage by activity while in the carrier establishment. No stored vehicles shall be visible from any adjacent roadway. No vehicles shall be parked or stored on the public streets at any time. The business must provide offstreet parking for its equipment and be able to accommodate at least four additional vehicles for customer parking. In addition to the four customer parking spaces, at least one additional customer parking space shall be provided for parking for disabled persons. The diabled persons parking space shall be van accessible. Storage vehicles should be secured away from customer parking and the office area. 
(3)  The tow service operator shall have an office and lot in the same location with the city, with a sign posted including the company name, address, phone number and hours of operation, to be clearly visible from the roadway. 
(4)  Any tow operator seeking award of a non-exclusive tow franchise shall meet all requirements set forth in this article and shall be required to demonstrate either of the following: 
a.  Operation as a vehicle tow and storage provider for a minimum of four consecutive years within the State of California; or 
b.  Operation as a contracted vehicle tow and storage provider for a public agency within the State of California for a minimum of two years. 
(5)  The tow service operator shall maintain a sign listing the rates and charges of all towing and storage services offered. Such sign shall be conspicuously placed in the office or other places where customer financial transactions take place. 
(6)  The tow service operator shall have a driver on call 24 hours a day, seven days a week, when the carrier is at the top of the rotation list, and shall respond to calls within 20 minutes or 40 minutes for heavy-duty tows. If the carrier is unable to respond within the required time period and does not notify the police department that there will be an extended delay, a member of the police department shall forward a memorandum to the chief of police within 24 hours reporting the delay and the nonresponse. The business must be open to the public at least eight hours per day, Monday through Friday. 
(7)  The tow service operator shall have no more than two telephone numbers listed with the police department. 
(8)  The tow service operator shall agree to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and the redevelopment agency of the city and its officers, employees, appointed or elected officials from all claims, demands or liability arising out of or encountered in connection with its agreement with the city or the performance of work in preparation for the towing operation or claims, demands and liability occurring during the towing and subsequent storage and maintenance activities, whether such claims, demands or liability are caused by the tow service or its employees or agents. 
(9)  The tow service operator shall use business-band two-way radios and shall not use a shortwave police scanner or C.B. radio to answer police calls. 
(10)  The tow service operator shall affix temporary markings on the windshield of all cars ordered impounded by the police department. In addition an operator may post a tag on the windshield of the car. 
(11)  The tow service operator shall collect all towing or hauling and storage charges on each vehicle from the owner. In no event shall the city be liable for any such charge, and the carrier by accepting a franchise shall be considered as so agreeing. A detailed accounting of the number of released vehicles subject to the franchise fee shall be submitted with the monthly payment to the city. The right is reserved by the city to audit, at any time, any and all amounts collected by the towing carrier for hauling and storage charges. It is the responsibility of the tow carrier to maintain and to make available, as requested, sufficient documentation to support such an audit; however, in no event shall the city require documentation to be maintained by the franchisee for a period longer than three calendar years. 
(12)  When called from the top of the rotation list by the police department, the tow service operator shall respond to the department's call and pick up all vehicles that have been involved in an accident or a traffic violation, unless the vehicles are needed for criminal evidence or the owner or someone designated by the owner is present and is capable of removing a vehicle or calling a tow company of his choice to remove a vehicle, provided the street can be cleared for safe public use, as determined using reasonable dispatch by the officer on the scene. 
(13)  The tow service operator shall not release any vehicle in his possession for which a storage form was completed until all state and city requirements are met. This does not apply to vehicles legally obtained through lien sale or for which ownership is transferred to the franchisee for payment of towing and storage fees. 
(14)  The tow service operator shall furnish each owner of an automobile impounded by the tow truck operator with a fully itemized billing. 
(15)  The tow service operator shall implement a written policy for lien fees, whereby a lien cannot be placed upon a vehicle until after 72 hours of impoundment in accordance with state law. The policy shall comply with all requirements of Vehicle Code §§ 22851—22851.12 and shall be posted with the sign listing the tow rates. 
(16)  The tow service operator shall tow and store police vehicles inside the city, vehicles within ten miles of the city boundaries, and vehicles seized as evidence in criminal investigations free of charge. The tow service operator shall tow any city vehicle, with the exception of city vehicles requiring a heavy-duty tow, within the city boundaries free of charge. The tow service operator shall tow any city vehicle requiring a heavy-duty tow, regardless of location, and any city vehicle located outside the city or police vehicle more than ten miles from the city boundaries, at a cost equal to 50 percent of the established rate for such tows. 
(17)  The tow service operator shall agree to abide by the rotation system established by the chief of police in accordance with this article. 
(18)  The tow service operator shall have at least five tow trucks, one of which shall be a medium-duty wrecker; five qualified drivers, each of whom shall be over the age of 18; and adequate equipment to handle police calls, impounds and storage of motor vehicles available when on top of the rotation list. In addition, the city prefers that one of the five tow trucks be a heavy-duty wrecker or heavy-duty tilt trailer. Any operator who does not have the necessary equipment available for a timely response to handle a particular police call shall forfeit his spot on the rotation list to the next qualified tow operator. 
(19)  The tow service operator shall have tow truck vehicles that are like new in appearance. 
(20)  The tow service operator shall have a schedule of rates available upon demand in all vehicles at all times. 
(21)  The police department reserves the right to inspect all drivers, vehicles, equipment and yards. The police department also reserves the right to require that all towing vehicles be inspected by an automotive professional certified by the state bureau of automotive repair and selected by the police department. All vehicle inspection fees shall be borne solely by the franchisee and shall be due and payable upon presentation of the vehicle for inspection. A yearly inspection of all vehicles is required, and the franchisee shall not interfere in any way with any such inspections. The towing franchisee is responsible for arranging the annual vehicle inspection with the police department. Any towing vehicle that fails an inspection shall not be used to provide towing service in the city until it is repaired and passes reinspection. In lieu of these inspection procedures, the chief of police may deem the inspection procedures of the state highway patrol that are in effect at the time to be sufficient to meet the requirements of this subsection. 
(22)  The tow service operator shall not charge rates in excess of the rate schedule approved by the city council. Requests for a rate increase shall be made in writing to the chief of police. The chief of police shall review the request and make recommendations to the city council as to whether or not increases should be granted. 
(23)  The tow service operator shall obtain and produce, upon request, proof of workers' compensation, insurance to the extent required by law in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, and commercial liability and commercial automobile/truck insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, $2,000,000.00 aggregate. Such policies will name the city as additional insured and in addition shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be reduced, suspended, voided or canceled by either party during the term of the franchise, except upon 30 days' written notice to the city. 
(24)  The tow service operator shall provide, free of charge, storage for four vehicles in an inside garage for V.I.N. and mechanical inspections, at the request of the police department. 
(25)  The tow service operator shall pay the city a franchise fee in accordance with this article. 
(26)  The tow service operator shall agree not to charge an after-hours fee to persons who appear to claim a stolen vehicle on a Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. Upon approval of the police department, the operator may release personal property from an impounded vehicle at the request of the vehicle owner or his agent. There shall be no charge for the release of personal property during normal business hours. Operators may charge an after-hours release fee for property released after normal business hours. 
(27)  All towing vehicles shall be equipped with the auxiliary equipment required for vehicles towing for the state highway patrol, in accordance with attachment C of the state department of highway patrol tow service agreement (CHP 234 (Rev. 1-98) OPI 061) or any successor tow service agreement. 
(28)  Operators shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations for providing towing service. 
(29)  The city reserves the option under this article and all franchise agreements granted pursuant to this article to require any tow operator to submit, on a quarterly basis, to the police department and not later than 20 days after the end of each quarter, response time statistics for all police tows, if the city determines that there are problems related to response times for any tow operator. This requirement shall continue in effect until otherwise waived by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-6), 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 4171, § 1, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 4176, § 1, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 58-677. - Fees. 
(a)  Any tow truck operator granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall pay the city franchise charges and fees as may be determined by separate resolution of the city council. The franchise agreement entered into between the city and tow operator shall provide that any subsequent changes in the franchise fees and charges shall be applicable to the operator upon 30 days' written notice of such changes to the operator. 
(b)  Franchise fee payments due to the city under this section shall be computed monthly. For the purpose of the franchise fee payment computation, the applicable accounting period shall be a calendar month, unless otherwise agreed to in writing in advance by the city and the franchisee. 
(c)  The monthly franchise fee payments shall be due and payable on or before the 20th day of the month immediately following the month for which the franchise fee is calculated. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report from the franchisee showing the basis for the computation and a written statement, signed under penalty of perjury by an officer of the franchisee, which identifies in detail the sources and amounts of gross revenues received by the franchisee during the month for which payment is made. No acceptance or deposit of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance or deposit of any payment be construed as a release of any claim that the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this section. 
(d)  Any franchise fees which remain unpaid for more than ten calendar days after the date specified in subsection (c) of this section shall be delinquent and shall result in a penalty equal to ten percent of the unpaid amount. Such unpaid amount shall thereafter accrue interest at ten percent per year, compounded daily, until fully paid. 
(e)  The city reserves the right under the franchise to conduct quarterly audits to verify the number of vehicles upon which the franchise fee is computed. In addition, the franchisee or the franchisee's designated representatives shall, upon 15 days' written notice from the city, make available to the city its accounting records for confidential inspection and audit. If the results of the audit show an underpayment of less than five percent or an overpayment, the city shall pay its own costs associated with the audit. If the results of any audit show a franchise fee underpayment of greater than five percent, the franchisee will pay all costs associated with the audit, the total amount in error as indicated by the audit, and a penalty equal to ten percent of the amount in error. If the results of the audit show an underpayment of greater than ten percent, the franchisee will pay the cost of the audit, the total amount in error as indicated by the audit, a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount in error, and interest on the amount in error at the rate of ten percent per annum, compounded daily from the date the underpayment should have been paid pursuant to subsection (c) of this section until the date the underpayment is paid in full. 
(f)  If the results of the audit are disputed, the city may, at its sole discretion, elect to arbitrate the dispute. If the city elects to arbitrate, the city and the franchisee shall each select an independent auditor at their own cost. The two auditors will agree upon the results of the audit. If the two independent auditors cannot agree upon the results of the audit, a third auditor will be selected by the two independent auditors to make a final determination, and the cost will be split between the city and the franchisee. The determination of the third independent auditor will be final. 
(g)  By accepting any franchise granted pursuant to this article, the franchisee irrevocably waives the defenses of any statute of limitation, laches, waiver or other legal or equitable doctrine of similar import or effect in any action brought by the city to recover any franchise fee, interest or penalties due under this section. 
(h)  By accepting any franchise granted pursuant to this article, the franchisee agrees that if he challenges the right of the city to collect the franchise fee provided by this section, any relief requested by the franchisee and awarded to him by virtue of such challenge shall be prospective only, and only from the date of the filing of the initial pleading seeking such relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. The franchisee hereby waives any and all claims or rights to collect back from the city or obtain credit against future payment obligations any amounts collected by the city prior to the filing of the initial pleading seeking such relief. If the franchisee's challenge to any franchise fee payments should result in an initial judgment in his favor, the franchisee shall continue to make all franchise fee payments in accordance with this section pending an appeal by the city. If the court of appeal or trial court, if the city elects not to appeal, determines that the city is not entitled to collect any or all of the franchise fees, the city shall refund to the franchisee those portions of the franchise fee which the court deems the city was not entitled to collect and which were made subsequent to the filing of the initial action by the franchisee, exclusive of interest on such amount. 
(i)  The city shall retain the right to impose alternative forms of taxes and/or fees if the franchise fees provided for in this section are no longer assessable due to a subsequent change in federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-7), 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 58-678. - Agreements. 
All franchises granted by the city council pursuant to this article shall be memorialized in a written agreement between the franchisee and the city and shall be entered into within 30 days of the effective date of any city council action awarding a franchise. The written agreement shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. Each written agreement shall provide that the terms and conditions of each franchise as set forth in this article shall be incorporated by reference into the agreement. A franchise agreement may be extended, at the sole and absolute discretion of the city council, for a period not to exceed 90 days or any extension period contained in the written agreement between the parties, whichever is longer. All franchises granted pursuant to this article shall be for an initial term of three years and shall contain an option to extend the franchise for a minimum of one year to a maximum of three three-year extension periods. In no event shall any parol agreement pertaining to extension of a franchise be entered into or considered binding upon the city. All terms and conditions contained in the prior written agreement between the franchisee and the city shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-8), 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 58-679. - Rotation system. 
(a)  The tow truck operators who obtain a franchise pursuant to this article shall provide towing service to the city pursuant to the rotation system established by the chief of police. The chief of police shall develop a list of the franchised tow truck operators. The franchise tow truck operator at the top of the list shall be on call to provide towing service to the city in accordance with the rotation system established by the chief of police. Once a tow truck operator completes its designated on-call service, the operator's name shall be moved to the bottom of the list, and the operator then at the top of the list shall begin its designated on-call service. The city may request services from a franchised tow truck operator who is not on call or who is not franchised under this article in emergencies when the city manager, chief of police or the watch commander deems an emergency to exist. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the city reserves the right to call an operator out of order should the call require a heavy-duty tow and the next operator in rotation does not possess the necessary equipment to make the tow. In addition, the city also reserves the right to make a special request for a particular tow operator, out of rotation, should the circumstances necessitate the request in order to serve the best interests of the city. All franchised tow truck operators shall hold the city harmless from any mistake made in the rotation assignments. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-9), 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 58-680. - Cancellation, suspension and revocation. 
(a)  No franchise agreement or franchise renewal agreement granted pursuant to this article shall be cancelled, without cause, within one year of its effective date. The city council also reserves the right to suspend or revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this article and to rescind all rights and privileges associated with it at any time if the franchisee: 
(1)  Defaults in the performance of his material obligations under this article or the franchise agreement and fails to cure such default within 30 calendar days after receipt of written notice of the default from the city and a reasonable opportunity to cure the default in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
(2)  Fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage as required by this article and as set forth in the franchise agreement; 
(3)  Violates any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the franchisee relative to the franchisee's tow truck business unless such order or ruling is being contested by the franchisee by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith; 
(4)  Practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or upon persons to whom he provides tow truck service as determined by a court of law; or 
(5)  Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay his debts and obligations or is adjudged to be bankrupt. The city's revocation of the franchisee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of the city to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any other provision of law. 
(b)  Prior to suspending or revoking a franchise granted under this article, the city shall give the franchisee notice and an opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city shall first notify the franchisee of the violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail and demand that the franchisee cure the default within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than ten days for the franchisee's failure to pay any sum or other amount due to the city under this article or the franchisee's franchise agreement with the city and 30 days in all other cases. If the franchisee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed or if the franchisee fails to commence correction of the violation within the time prescribed, the city shall give the franchisee 14 calendar days' written notice of a public hearing to be held before the city council. The written notice shall specify the alleged violations supporting the recommendation for suspension or revocation of the franchise. 
(2)  At the hearing the city council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence submitted by staff and the franchisee or his agent or representative. If the city council finds that the franchisee has committed a material breach under the franchise agreement or this article and that the franchisee has not corrected the violation or has not diligently commenced correction of the violation after receiving proper notice in accordance with this article, the city council may suspend or revoke the franchise. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the city council's right to suspend or revoke a franchise, the chief of police shall have the right to suspend, for a period not to exceed 30 days, any franchise granted pursuant to this article and to rescind all rights and privileges associated with it during the suspension period if the franchisee violates any section of this article, state or federal law which places the health or safety of the public in immediate danger. 
(Ord. No. 3965, § 1(11.3-10), 10-21-2002)  
Chapter 62 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 18; stormwater management, § 18-431 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30; utility users tax, § 50-201 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 54; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74; subdivisions and zoning, ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Undergrounding of lines. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Undergrounding means the location or relocation of utilities so that all of the utility facilities are located under the surface of the ground, except for appurtenances and associated equipment, including, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts. All such undergrounding work, where required, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations and tariffs, applicable to the affected utility, adopted or approved by the state public utilities commission. 
Utility and utility facilities mean wire, conduit and similar devices designed and/or utilized for supplying and/or distributing electrical energy and/or services, telephone, telegraph or cable television service to a consumer. 
(b)  Required. Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, the undergrounding of utility facilities shall be required in all of the following circumstances, except as expressly provided in subsection (c) of this section: 
(1)  Construction or reconstruction based on certain cost. All utilities to serve any property upon which it is proposed to construct or reconstruct any building or structure or combination thereof, for which a building permit is required, where the estimated cost of such construction is $3,000.00 or more shall be underground. 
(2)  Relocations. All structures to be relocated into or within the city upon any parcel of land shall be required to install underground utilities where the usable floor area of such building or structure to be relocated is a total of 850 square feet or more. 
(3)  Responsibility for compliance. The owner and person who occupies any property to which this section applies shall be responsible for compliance with this section, including, but not limited to, obtaining the installation of required facilities by the appropriate utility companies. 
(c)  Exemption. The building official shall grant an exemption from this section if he finds: 
(1)  The temporary nature of the development makes such installations unreasonable. 
(2)  All of the following facts are present: 
a.  All adjacent properties are served by overhead utility facilities; 
b.  Compliance with this section constitutes an undue financial hardship which renders the proposed development economically unfeasible; and 
c.  The owner of the property involved agrees, in writing, to join and participate without protest in an undergrounding utility district should one be initiated pursuant to applicable law. Such agreement shall be recorded and shall bind all assignees and successors in interest to the then owner of the property. 
Such facts shall be founded upon evidence submitted at a hearing substantially in accordance with section 74-190. 
(3)  The development comprises a single R-1 lot surrounded by improved developed property, all of which have aboveground utilities. 
The decision of the building official is final. 
(Code 1959, § 5-150; Ord. No. 3449, § 4)  
Secs. 62-32—62-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 62-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the state public utilities commission. 
Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
Underground utility district and district mean that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited, as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to section 62-54. 
Utility includes all persons supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-1; Ord. No. 2217 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-52. - Public hearing by council. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-2; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-53. - Report by director of public works. 
Prior to holding the public hearing described in section 62-52, the director of public works shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-3; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-54. - Designation by resolution. 
If, after any public hearing held pursuant to this division, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising the district and shall fix the time within which the removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for the removal and for the installation of the underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-4; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-55. - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in section 62-54, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except such overhead facilities as may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for the owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in section 62-54 and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed and except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-5; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-56. - Exception for emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the sections of this division, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the director of public works in order to provide emergency service. The director of public works may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem appropriate, for unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-6; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-57. - Other exceptions. 
This division and any resolution adopted pursuant to section 62-54 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
(1)  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(2)  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting. 
(3)  Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited. 
(4)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts. 
(5)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
(6)  Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
(7)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(8)  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-7; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-58. - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to section 62-54, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify the affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any persons occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility at a new location. Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 62-54, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this division, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-8; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-59. - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to section 62-54, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment and other work required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-9; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-60. - Responsibility of property owners. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within an underground utility district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in section 62-59 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served. Failure to do so is a nuisance. If this is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 62-54, the director of public works shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of the notice. 
(b)  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. If service is by mail on such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of the premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll and when no address appears, to general delivery in the city. If notice is given by mail, the notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the director of public works shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  The notice given by the director of public works to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if the work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the director of public works will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon the property. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the notice given pursuant to subsection (c) of this section is a nuisance. 
(e)  If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the director of public works shall forthwith proceed to do the work. However, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communication services are being furnished thereto, the director of public works shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the director of public works, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon the premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
(f)  The director of public works shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. The notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(g)  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
(h)  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the director of public works, and the director of public works is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid. The assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. In collecting such assessment, the city will conform to the procedures in Government Code §§ 38773.1 and 38773.5. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-10; Ord. No. 2217 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to define nuisance, Government Code § 38771; nuisance abatement, Government Code § 38773.  
Sec. 62-61. - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expenses all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this division in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the poles within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 62-54. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-11; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Sec. 62-62. - Extension of time. 
If any act required by this division or by a resolution adopted pursuant to section 62-54 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Code 1959, § 33.5-12; Ord. No. 2217 (part))  
Secs. 62-63—62-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TELEPHONES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 62-101—62-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PAY TELEPHONES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 62-121. - Prohibited locations. 
(a)  No pay telephone shall be installed, located, or maintained on unimproved private property. 
(b)  Any pay telephone that is located or maintained on unimproved private property shall be removed by the pay telephone vendor or the owner of the property upon which the pay telephone is located within 90 days after the effective date of annexation of the property into the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any existing pay telephone in a newly annexed area which is the subject of a written contract authorizing its installation which was entered into prior to annexation and which contains provisions for termination shall be removed by the first date after annexation on which permissive termination of the written contract by either party could take effect, if either party elected to terminate, or within 90 days after the effective date of annexation, whichever occurs later. 
(c)  Any pay telephone installed on improved private property to which improvements have been made but which are subsequently discontinued or abandoned for a period of 90 days or more shall be removed or rendered inoperative by the pay telephone vendor or the owner of the property upon which the pay telephone is located at the end of the 90 days. 
(Code 1959, § 5-180; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-122. - Location requirements. 
Any pay telephone on private property shall be located either within a building or outside a building, where it is within view from indoors or near a well-lit walkway and/or driveway. All outdoor pay telephones shall be located as close as possible to the building entrance. Outdoor pay telephones shall be sufficiently illuminated to allow any person using the pay telephone to be seen from a distance of at least 50 feet. No obstacles such as utility poles, trees or landscaping shall obstruct a clear view of an outdoor pay telephone from the public street. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall an outdoor pay telephone be located closer than five feet from any public right-of-way. For purposes of this section, "public right-of-way" shall mean i) any street, curb, or gutter, ii) any sidewalk located adjacent to a street, curb, or gutter, iii) any alley, or iv) any other land owned by the city or other public entity used for public access. 
(Code 1959, § 5-181; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4078, § 2)  
Sec. 62-123. - Tax on vendors. 
Vendors of pay telephones located on private property shall pay an annual license tax as required by section 50-411(b). 
(Code 1959, § 5-182; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-124. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  Any pay telephone which is installed, located, maintained, or operated in violation of section 62-121 or 62-122 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Any pay telephone that is used on improved private property as an instrumentality for, or contributes substantially by its presence to, any of the following conditions is hereby declared to be a public nuisance: 
(1)  Selling or giving away any controlled substances (as defined in Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code); soliciting, agreeing to engage in, or engaging in any act of prostitution or other criminal activity; 
(2)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages on nearby outdoor public or private property except where outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages is specifically authorized pursuant to a license issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; 
(3)  Loitering on nearby public or private property. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean lingering, staying at or failing to leave the property when requested to do so by a police officer, owner, operator or other person in control of the property under circumstances indicating the person has no lawful purpose connected with the usual and ordinary use of the pay telephone; 
(4)  Excessive noise; 
(5)  Disturbance of the peace, public drunkenness, harassment of passersby, gambling, public urination or lewd conduct; or 
(6)  Excessive number of incomplete 911 hang-up calls. 
(Code 1959, § 5-183; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4078, § 3)  
Sec. 62-125. - Abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  Whenever the chief of police, or his or her designee, determines that any pay telephone on private property constitutes a public nuisance, as defined in section 5-183 subsection (a) or (b), the chief of police, or his or her designee, may commence proceedings to abate the nuisance. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, abatement proceedings shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by article II of chapter 18. 
(b)  No proceeding to abate a public nuisance as defined in section 62-124(b) shall be commenced unless the chief of police, or his or her designee, first has made a reasonable effort to work with the pay telephone vendor or the owner of the property upon which the pay telephone is located to eliminate the conditions described in section 62-124(b) by voluntary measures such as: 
(1)  Blocking incoming calls; 
(2)  Adding lighting; 
(3)  Changing the telephone's location on the parcel; 
(4)  Making the telephone inoperative; 
(5)  Temporarily removing the telephone; 
(6)  Changing the type of enclosure of the telephone; 
(7)  Removing all or one of the telephones; 
(8)  Removing the telephone number and ringer from the telephone; 
(9)  Making the telephone inoperable for designated periods of time; or 
(10)  Moving the telephone inside the business. 
For purposes of this section, "reasonable effort" shall be fulfilled upon the chief of police, or his or her designee, sending a notice of violation to the pay telephone vendor referencing the violation and the expiration of a 45-day period from time of mailing such notice to allow pay telephone vendor to implement voluntary measures as described above. During said period, the pay telephone vendor may attempt to make voluntary measures, including those described above, in an effort to correct the nuisance or violation. If no measures have been taken within said period, or if the nuisance conditions and secondary effects still exist despite the implementation of any measures, then a public nuisance is confirmed and the phone may be abated as proscribed under this division. 
(Code 1959, § 5-184; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4078, § 3)  
Sec. 62-126. - Notice to pay telephone vendor. 
In addition to the abatement procedures defined in article II of chapter 18, any notices of violation and abatement shall also be sent to any vendor of the pay telephone, if known. 
(Code 1959, § 5-185; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-127. - Appeal. 
If the measures of section 62-125(b) are unsuccessful and abatement of the pay telephone as a public nuisance is ordered, such abatement may be appealed to the chief of police as provided in article II of chapter 18. 
(Code 1959, § 5-186; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-128. - Replacement prohibited. 
If the public nuisance to be abated is one defined in section 62-124(b), abatement shall consist of removal of the pay telephone that is declared a public nuisance, and no pay telephone shall be installed on the same parcel or on any contiguous parcel for a period of one year from the date of removal. 
(Code 1959, § 5-187; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-129. - List of abated locations. 
The chief of police shall maintain and make available, upon request, a list of locations where installation of pay telephones is prohibited pursuant to section 62-128. 
(Code 1959, § 5-188; Ord. No. 3899, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-130—62-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PAY TELEPHONES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 62-151. - Permit issuance authority. 
The director of public works is authorized to issue permits to pay telephone vendors for the installation and maintenance of pay telephones on the public sidewalks and public rights-of-way of the city. The number and location of such pay telephones and the design of the telephone booths shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works so as to best serve the public interest. 
(Code 1959, § 5-190; Ord. No. 3899, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-152. - Location determination standards. 
The director of public works, in determining the location of the pay telephones to be installed on public sidewalks or public rights-of-way, shall consider, among other things, the following factors: 
(1)  The need of the public for the telephones in the location sought; 
(2)  The obstruction of pedestrian or other traffic in the area; and 
(3)  The effect upon the public health or safety of the installation of the telephone at the location. 
(Code 1959, § 5-191; Ord. No. 3899, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-153. - Permit fees; license tax. 
(a)  At the time of application for the permit under this division, vendors shall pay a permit fee for each pay telephone. The permit fee shall be set by city council resolution. If the application is denied, the permit fee shall be refunded except for an amount set by resolution of the city council to cover administrative costs. 
(b)  Vendors of pay telephones shall pay an annual license tax as required by section 50-411(b). 
(Code 1959, § 5-192; Ord. No. 3899, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-154. - Denial of permit application. 
If an application or portion of an application for a permit required under this division is denied by the director of public works, written notification shall be sent to the applicant stating the reasons for denial, including any applicable factors set forth in section 62-152. 
(Code 1959, § 5-193; Ord. No. 3899, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-155. - Maintenance. 
Under this division the permittee shall maintain the pay telephones and any associated booths in good repair and in safe and sightly condition at the permittee's expense and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. All necessary electrical and telephone connections, cables, wires and associated appurtenances shall be installed underground in appropriate conduits and in accordance with applicable codes. However, upon application by the pay telephone vendor, the director of public works may authorize aboveground facilities to serve the pay telephones and any associated booths. 
(Code 1959, § 5-194; Ord. No. 3899, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-156. - Revocation of permit. 
The permit issued pursuant to this division shall be revocable on 30 days' prior written notice to the permittee from the director of public works, in which event the permittee shall, at his own expense, remove the pay telephone installed pursuant to the permit and shall restore the sidewalk or public right-of-way as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such installation. If the permittee fails to remove the pay telephone, the public works department is authorized to remove the telephone and recover costs for such removal. Reasons for revocation may include, among others, a finding that the telephone constitutes a public nuisance as defined in section 62-124(b). 
(Code 1959, § 5-195; Ord. No. 3899, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-157. - Appeal of denial of permit application or revocation of permit. 
If an application or any portion of the application for a permit required under this division is denied or if a permit is revoked pursuant to this division, within 30 days after written notice of the denial or revocation from the director of public works the applicant shall have the right to appeal. The following appeal procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The applicant shall make every effort to resolve the issue with the director of public works. 
(2)  If the conflict cannot be resolved by the director of public works, the applicant may submit written justification and other evidence to the city manager. 
(3)  The city manager shall review the stated reasons for denial by the director of public works and the justification for appeal submitted by the applicant. Within 45 days of receipt of the appeal, the city manager shall affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the denial. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 5-196; Ord. No. 3899, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-158. - Indemnification. 
The person issued a permit under this division shall defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all losses, claims or judgments for damages or injury to any person or property arising from the installation, maintenance or use of the pay telephones. 
(Code 1959, § 5-197; Ord. No. 3899, § 2 (part))  
Secs. 62-159—62-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL WATER UTILITY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal water systems, Government Code § 38730 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
After hours means the hours after 5:00 p.m. and before the start of City Hall business hours—Monday through Thursday, and any Friday, Saturday, Sunday and any day designated as a city holiday. 
Authorized agent means any representative of a real estate company, property management company, home owners' association or lending institution requesting water utility services from the public works department on behalf of the property owner of record, subject to submittal of supporting documentation as shall be required by the director, or designee of the public works department. 
Authorized tenant means any person, other than the property owner of record, requesting water/utility services from the public works department and presenting a valid rental, lease agreement, or affidavit, signed by applicant for water/utility services, and the property owner of record. 
Consumer means any person who is the recipient of water/utility services from the public works department. 
Department means the public works department. 
Director (or designee) means the director (or designee) of the public works department. 
Front footage means that footage measured along the side of a lot abutting a public street or easement wherein a water main is or may be installed from which service may be taken. 
Manager means the manager as assigned by the public works director. 
(Code 1959, § 34-1; Ord. No. 1359, § 400(b); Ord. No. 4188, § 1, 7-7-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-192. - Water fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a fund to be known as the water fund, and all receipts both operative and nonoperative shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited to the credit of such fund. 
(b)  Money in the water fund is hereby appropriated as follows: 
(1)  Monthly sums sufficient for the necessary and reasonable costs of maintenance and operation of the department and its works and facilities, including salaries of the department, and a pro rata share and reasonable and proper charges for services rendered or quarters furnished to the department by the city shall be apportioned from the revenues and paid from the water fund into the maintenance and operation fund. 
(2)  If water revenue bonds of the city are issued, sums for bond service shall be apportioned from the revenues and paid from the water fund into the bond service fund in accordance with the resolution issuing such revenue bonds. 
(3)  Until such revenue bonds are issued and thereafter if the Revenue Bond Law of 1941 is appropriately amended, monies remaining in the water fund shall be designated as surplus and may be invested in any authorized direct obligations of the United States, provided that the maturities shall not be later than five years from the date of investment; used for the payment of costs of replacements and extensions of or additions to and improvements of the waterworks system; used for the payment of the principal and interest of general obligation bonds of the city issued for waterworks purposes; used for any other waterworks purpose, including repayment by the department to the city of amounts spent by the city for works, rights or properties used by the department. 
(Code 1959, §§ 34-8, 34-9; Ord. No. 1359, §§ 406, 407)  
Sec. 62-193. - Right of entry. 
Upon presentation of official identification, any officer, inspector, foreman or authorized employee of the department, on official business, shall be allowed free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with city water. Any person who, as owner or occupant of any premises, refuses admittance to or hinders or prevents inspection by an authorized employee of the department may, after service of 24 hours' notice of intention, have all water cut off. 
(Code 1959, §§ 34-13, 34-14; Ord. No. 1359, §§ 481, 482)  
Sec. 62-194. - Unauthorized use of identification. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to possess, carry, wear or exhibit any badge or other official identification of the department, nor shall any person, whether or not possession is authorized, display, exhibit, or cause to be exhibited any badge or other official identification of the department at any time, place, or in any manner or for any purpose which is not authorized by the department. 
(Code 1959, § 34-48; Ord. No. 1359, § 495)  
Sec. 62-195. - Reclaimed water. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Class II water means that water purchased from either the Los Angeles County Sanitation District 21 Pomona Water Renovation Plant, meeting quality standards for discharge into the San Jose Creek, or the Inland Empire Utilities Agency, meeting quality standards for discharge into the Santa Ana River. 
Impaired water means city well water which is preferable in quality to class II water but which does not meet all the standards for potable and which can be supplied to class II water customers as a preferable replacement. 
(b)  Exceptions. All sections of this article shall apply to the delivery of reclaimed water by the utility services department except sections 62-291, 62-292, 62-293, 62-296, 62-321, 62-322 and 62-324. 
(c)  Rates. All class II water furnished by the utility services department shall be subject to the water rates as set by the city council by resolution. All impaired water furnished by the utility services department shall also be subject to the water rates as set by the city council by resolution. 
(d)  Usage regulated by the state. The use of reclaimed water is regulated by the state. All consumers of reclaimed water shall comply with such regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 34-60—34-63; Ord. No. 2638, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2712, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2748, § 4; Ord. No. 2975, § 3; Ord. No. 3133, § 4; Ord. No. 3293, § 4; water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 4; water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 13; Ord. No. 4075, § 1)  
Sec. 62-196. - Permit required of person supplying water into boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump or other device. 
Any person who supplies or feeds water directly into any stationary boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump, or any other power device shall first file a written application with the department and be issued a permit therefor. The issuance of such permit shall be conditioned upon a full and continued compliance with any and all safety measures or provisions the department may require. 
(Code 1959, § 34-30; Ord. No. 1359, § 440)  
Sec. 62-197. - Unauthorized supply to other than occupant. 
(a)  Water shall not be supplied to any person other than the occupants of the consumer's own premises, except as provided for in this section and section 62-250. However, if such consumer has made application with the utility services department and is issued a permit therefor, he may supply water to a holder of a contract for public improvement or provide a temporary and permissive service to another. 
(b)  Such permit shall be denied to any person who is indebted to the utility services department for any former water or damage charges or who has in fact, prior to such application, failed to comply with such provisions or provisions of any previous permit issued to him. 
(Code 1959, § 34-31; Ord. No. 1359, § 441)  
Sec. 62-198. - Use for sprinkling, wetting, construction or industrial purposes. 
The use of water for sprinkling, wetting, construction or industrial purposes may be restricted, if and when such use is contrary to the public safety or welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 34-34; Ord. No. 1359, § 444)  
Sec. 62-199. - Damage to mains and fittings. 
Every person shall give written notice to the manager that he may have ten days in which to remove or relocate any mains, fittings, meters or other water equipment that might be injured or that interferes with any street improvement above to be performed by such person. Any damage to such mains, fittings, meters or other water equipment resulting from failure to give such notice shall be charged to such person. 
(Code 1959, § 34-35; Ord. No. 1359, § 450)  
Sec. 62-200. - Backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  Any definitions or specifications for all backflow preventers and types of protection shall comply with CCR title 17, div. 1, ch. 5, subch. 1, grp. 4, arts. 1 and 2 (17 CCR 7583 et seq.). 
(b)  No water service connections to any premises shall be installed or maintained unless the water supply is protected as required by CCR title 17, div. 1, ch. 5, subch. 1, grp. 4, arts. 1 and 2 (17 CCR 7583 et seq.). 
(c)  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on a property owner or lessor of such premises, as determined by utility services department personnel. 
(d)  If an approved backflow prevention assembly is required for the safety of the water system, the utility services department manager shall give notice to the customer in writing. The customer shall install such approved assembly at the customer's own expense, within 30 days after receipt of the letter. Failure, refusal, or inability of the customer to install, have tested and maintain such assembly shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(e)  Customers' systems shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the utility services department to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this section, exist. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made annually. When the utility services department deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections and tests shall be required at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by a certified tester approved by the county health department. The customer shall notify the utility services department in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that an official representative may witness the tests if so desired. Tests results shall be sent to the city utility services department to be kept on file. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever such assemblies are found to be defective. The utility services department may also conduct its own inspections in accordance with CCR title 17. 
(g)  Tests of backflow prevention devices shall also be required immediately after installation, relocation, or repair. The service shall not be placed in service until it is functioning as required. Whenever an approved backflow assembly is moved or undergoes more than minimum maintenance, the utility services department shall be notified and the assembly tested and the test results sent to the city in accordance with this section. 
(h)  Refusal to eliminate a cross connection where high health hazards exist will result in discontinuance of water service until such time as the cross connection is remedied. 
(Code 1959, § 34-36; Ord. No. 2088, § 1; Ord. No. 3482, § 1)  
Sec. 62-201. - Bypass of meter. 
Any bypass or connection around the water meter between the service and the main shall be prohibited. All water used, except as provided in section 62-248, shall pass through the meter. 
(Code 1959, § 34-37; Ord. No. 1359, § 452)  
Sec. 62-202. - Connection to private source. 
Any and all connections shall be prohibited between any private water source and the water supply of the city; provided, however, subject to the approval of the state board of health, the city may maintain emergency connections with other public utilities supplying water. 
(Code 1959, § 34-38; Ord. No. 1359, § 453)  
Sec. 62-203. - Shutoff valves. 
All water shutoff valves are installed by and for the use of the department. Except in an emergency, the consumer shall not use or molest such shutoff valves. The consumer shall install, for his ordinary usage and at his own expense, a shutoff valve on the property side of the meter. 
(Code 1959, § 34-39; Ord. No. 1359, § 454)  
Sec. 62-204. - Title to meter. 
All water services and all water meters installed by the department shall, at all times, remain the property of the department. The expense of maintenance, repair and renewal of such meters due to the wear of normal service shall be borne by the department; provided, however, any expense occasioned by any act, careless or otherwise, on the part of the consumer or any member of his family or any person in his employ, shall be charged to such consumer. 
(Code 1959, § 34-40; Ord. No. 1359, § 455)  
Sec. 62-205. - Conservation devices. 
(a)  Any cooling or refrigeration system using water as a condensing medium shall be equipped with a water conservation device in accordance with accepted engineering practices, to discharge water from the condensing apparatus at the maximum practical temperature. 
(b)  On an evaporative cooler of 5,000 CFM capacity or larger, recirculating pumps will be required to provide for the recirculating of water. 
(c)  All precooling coils and water cooled condensing machines shall be equipped with pressure-actuated water control valves. 
(d)  No discharge of water from any cooling or refrigeration system shall be greater than six gallons per minute. 
(Code 1959, § 34-42; Ord. No. 1359, § 490(a))  
Sec. 62-206. - Drawing water from fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to draw, cause to be drawn, permit to be drawn, or allow to be drawn, for any purpose whatsoever, any water from any fire hydrants in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 34-43; Ord. No. 1359, § 491) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Theft, Penal Code § 484 et seq.  
Sec. 62-207. - Tampering with fire hydrant, fire hose or water main. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to open, tamper with, or to cause or suffer to be opened or tampered with any fire hydrant, faucet, fire hose, or water main within the city without first having obtained written permission to do so from either the manager of the utility services department or the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the employees of the utility services department or to the members of the fire department while acting in the course of their employment. 
(Code 1959, § 34-44; Ord. No. 840, § 2) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, Penal Code § 594.  
Sec. 62-208. - Tampering with meter. 
No person shall tamper with, remove, cause, permit, or allow to be tampered with or removed any water meter where it has been attached to any service without first having made application to the meter service clerk of the department and receiving a permit therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 34-45; Ord. No. 1359, § 492) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, Penal Code § 594.  
Sec. 62-209. - Unauthorized turning on of water. 
No person shall tap, open or connect to or cause, permit or allow to be turned on, in any way, any water after it has been turned off by the department. 
(Code 1959, § 34-46; Ord. No. 1359, § 493)  
Sec. 62-210. - Permit for tapping main. 
No person shall tap, open or connect to, cause, permit, or allow to be tapped, opened or connected to any water main or pipe without first having made application to the department and receiving a permit therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 34-47; Ord. No. 1359, § 494)  
Secs. 62-211—62-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS AND ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE 
 
Sec. 62-241. - Applications for connection and activation of water service. 
(a)  Connection. Before water shall be supplied to any premises, application by the owner or authorized agent of the property thereof shall be made in writing to the department for the proper service and stating the official building number and street to be served. Service connection will be made at the nearest distribution main by the department after applicable charges have been paid. 
(b)  Activation of water/utility service. Before water/utility services shall be supplied to any premises: 
(1)  A completed city application form shall be submitted to the department by the owner, authorized agent, or authorized tenant of the property thereof stating the street address, unit number to be served, if applicable, and the date for service to be activated. A copy of the application shall be kept on file by the department. 
(2)  Appropriate verifiable legal documentation that supports the status as owner, authorized agent, or authorized tenant shall be required. The department reserves the right to require an affidavit signed by the legal owner/authorized agent of the property to be filed with the department. A copy of such documentation shall be kept on file by the department. 
(3)  An applicant requesting service as an individual shall provide his or her driver's license, state-issued identification card or government issued passport/identification that shows applicant's full legal name, date of birth and address to verify identity of the applicant prior to the establishment of service in accordance with the city's identity theft prevention program. Social Security number may also be requested. A copy of such documentation shall be kept on file by the department. 
(4)  An applicant requesting service on behalf of a corporation, home owners' association, property management company, etc., shall provide sufficient documentation, as determined solely by the city, that authorizes the applicant to act as the agent on behalf of the property owner. A copy of such documentation shall be kept on file by the department. 
(5)  A charge, set by city council by resolution, shall be collected by the department to activate an account. This charge provides for turning water on or off Monday through Thursday between the start of city hall business hours and 5:00 p.m., exclusive of holidays. Requests for water/utility services to be turned on or off afterhours, will be subject to an additional charge, set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 34-21; Ord. No. 1359, § 430; Ord. No. 2748, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2975, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3133, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 6; Ord. No. 4188, § 2, 7-7-2014)  
Sec. 62-242. - Service installation charges. 
A charge for installing any water service or meter shall be an amount as set by the city council by resolution and must be paid to the department before the installation is made. Installation of services and/or meters three inches and larger shall be charged the actual cost of equipment, labor, materials, direct payroll costs and employee benefits, plus 30 percent for overhead expenses. However, the minimum charge for any service and meter installed outside the incorporated city limits shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 34-22; Ord. No. 1359, § 431; Ord. No. 1491, § 1; Ord. No. 2429, § 1; Ord. No. 2832, § 1; Ord. No. 2974, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3132, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 2-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 7; Ord. No. 4188, § 2, 7-7-2014)  
Sec. 62-243. - Advance payment required. 
The department shall require an applicant for water/utility service to make an advance payment as established by city council resolution, which is due and payable within 20 days from the billing date, related to water service, sewer (wastewater) service, solid waste service, and/or other city charges collected on the water/utility bill. The advance payment shall be applied only to the closing bill and shall not be credited against current service. Restoration of water service after an account is closed, due to nonpayment of services, shall require an advance payment to be made by the account holder in advance of re-establishing services. 
(Code 1959, § 34-23; Ord. No. 1359, § 432; Ord. No. 2738, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 8; Ord. No. 4188, § 2, 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 62-244. - Advance payment by nonresident consumer. 
The department is hereby authorized and directed to require an advance payment from all consumers outside the city limits to guarantee payment for all water used. The minimum advance payment shall be as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 34-24; Ord. No. 1359, § 433; Ord. No. 2748, § 2 (part); Ord. No 3293, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 9)  
Sec. 62-245. - Disconnection for nonpayment; fee. 
If any consumer shall fail to comply with all sections of this article or to pay any charge imposed in the time and manner provided, the manager shall turn off the water, and it shall not be turned on again until payment of the amount due is made, plus the fee established in section 62-299 to cover the cost of making a service call to turn the water off or on. 
(Code 1959, § 34-25; Ord. No. 1359, § 434; Ord. No. 2748, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-246. - Change of address. 
Water service shall not be given any consumer upon change of address until all delinquent water charges owed at a former place of residence or business shall be paid. Water shall not be turned on at a new location and, if done, will be turned off until full settlement of past charges at the former premises is made, and a charge set by resolution of the city council shall be made for turning on water and renewing service. 
(Code 1959, § 34-26; Ord. No. 1359, § 435)  
Sec. 62-247. - Permit for water stand. 
The utility services department is empowered to install or cause or permit to be installed such water stands as may be deemed necessary so that water may be drawn therefrom for spraying and for other legitimate purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to draw water from any such stand without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this section. Permits shall only be issued to applicants holding a valid business license in the city. A charge as set by resolution of the city council shall be made for such permit. The permit shall specify the approximate amount of water and the purpose for which it is to be used. The applicant shall make such additional deposit as the department may require. 
(Code 1959, § 34-27; Ord. No. 1359, § 436)  
Sec. 62-248. - Private fire protection. 
(a)  Wherever a service is installed for private fire protection, a charge shall be made for equipment, labor, material and engineering, plus 30 percent for overhead, and shall include, whenever a proportional meter shall be necessary, the cost of such meter and installing it. Such service shall be used only in case of fire. When it is found that a fire service has been used for any purpose other than in case of fire, the department shall charge the sum as set by the city council by resolution for each and every incident of unauthorized use. If unauthorized uses of a fire service persist, the utility services department shall notify the fire department and the occupant of the property served by the fire service in writing and shall within ten days discontinue the fire service until the charge of the sum as set by the city council by resolution for its violation has been paid to the utility services department and assurance given to the utility services department that no unauthorized use of the fire service will occur in the future. 
(b)  However, should it be necessary to use water through a fire line meter for the purpose of maintaining a private fire prevention system or for fire department purposes, the utility services department will authorize such use upon the receipt of a written notice stating the following: 
(1)  The date and time of use. 
(2)  Purpose. 
(3)  Estimated quantity of water to be used. 
(4)  Estimated maximum flow. 
(c)  The manager may restrict such nonemergency flows which may be detrimental to or tend to de-water the system. 
(Code 1959, § 34-28; Ord. No. 1359, § 437; Ord. No. 2974, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3132, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 2 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 10)  
Sec. 62-249. - Meter testing; fee; adjustment of charges. 
Upon the written request of and the deposit of an amount set by resolution of the city council by a consumer, the department shall test any water meter so specified. If such meter, upon testing, registers less than three percent over the correct value, the deposit shall be forfeited and all water bills shall be paid as presented. However, should the meter overregister by three percent or more, the deposit shall be returned, a proportional deduction shall be made in the current bill, and another meter shall be substituted therefor. The meter test fee shall be waived by the department if the consumer or his representative is present at the time of the test. 
(Code 1959, § 34-29; Ord. No. 1359, § 438; Ord. No. 1724, § 2; Ord. No. 2975, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 2 (part))  
Sec. 62-250. - Multiple service or single meter. 
Service of water shall not be made through a single meter and a common service to two or more parcels of property separately owned, unless there is no main contiguous to the property for which service may be had. If such consumer, for whom a meter was installed, shall give written guarantee of payment for all water used, each multiple service may be had subject to being discontinued 30 days after being served written notice by the manager on such consumer. Charges for water used through such multiple service shall be based on a bimonthly block rate equal to the bimonthly block rate for a single meter, provided in section 62-291 or 62-292, multiplied by the number of parcels under a separate ownership served (i.e., a meter serving two parcels under separate ownership would be charged two minimums, be allowed twice the consumption allowance under the minimum charge and be required to use twice the amount of water in each step of the rate structure before moving into the next step). 
(Code 1959, § 34-32; Ord. No. 1359, § 442)  
Sec. 62-251. - Waste by faulty plumbing. 
Any person who, as owner or occupant of any premises, fails, refuses or neglects to equip and maintain such premises with plumbing of such character and quality as to prevent the wasting of water shall, ten days after being served by the manager by written notice of such intention, have all water service discontinued pending such repairs. 
(Code 1959, § 34-33; Ord. No. 1359, § 443)  
Secs. 62-252—62-259. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONTINUITY OF UTILITY SERVICES PROGRAM—RENTAL PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 62-260. - Purpose. 
The continuity of utility services program (the "program") allows property owners (owners) or authorized agents of property owners (authorized agents) with a current rental business license issued by the city for said property, the ability to maintain uninterrupted water/utility services for rental properties should tenant vacancies occur. 
(Ord. No. 4188, § 3, 7-7-2014)  
Sec. 62-261. - Application agreement for owners/authorized agents wishing to participate in the continuity of utility services program. 
(a)  Owners/authorized agents wishing to participate in the program shall enter into an application/agreement and pay applicable program charges as established by city council resolution. 
(b)  A separate application/agreement shall be required for each rental business license that identifies properties to be included in the program. Each application/agreement must designate either option A or B, pursuant to sec. 62-264(a), which shall apply to all properties included in the application/agreement. A program master account shall be established for each approved application/agreement. 
(c)  Properties included in the program must maintain a current city rental business license. 
(d)  Appropriate verifiable legal documentation that supports the status as owner or authorized agent shall be required. The department reserves the right to require an affidavit signed by the legal owner/authorized agent of the property to be filed with the department. A copy of such documentation shall be kept on file by the department. 
(e)  A property owner requesting participation in the program as an individual shall provide his or her driver's license, state-issued identification card or government issued passport/identification that shows applicant's full legal name, date of birth and address to verify identity of the applicant prior to the establishment of service in accordance with the city's identity theft prevention program. Social Security number may also be requested. A copy of such documentation shall be kept on file by the department. 
(f)  An applicant requesting participation in the program on behalf of a corporation, home owners' association, property management company, etc., shall provide sufficient documentation, as determined solely by the city, that authorizes the applicant to act as the agent on behalf of the property owner. A copy of such documentation shall be kept on file by the department. 
(g)  Any request(s) for program modification to add properties to or remove properties from a program master account shall be submitted to the department in writing on a form provided by the city and signed by the owner/authorized agent on file with the department. Processing of such requests shall be subject to the applicable fee(s). 
(h)  Any request by participant for termination of a program master account established pursuant to an application/agreement shall be submitted in writing to the department at least ten days prior to the requested termination date. 
(Ord. No. 4188, § 3, 7-7-2014)  
Sec. 62-262. - Water/utility service provisions under the continuity of utility services program. 
(a)  Upon city's receipt of notification from a tenant to terminate service, the water/utility services account will automatically be transferred to the owner/authorized agent on the date specified by tenant and owner/authorized agent will become responsible for services billed. The city bears no responsibility to notify participants under this program upon transfer of services from tenant to owner/authorized agent. 
(b)  In order to have water/utility services transfer from owner/authorized agent to a new tenant, the owner/authorized agent is responsible for insuring that the new tenant submits an application for water/utility services. Services will be transferred to the new tenant's account upon receipt of a completed application with the effective date of transfer based on the start date listed in the application. 
(c)  Participating in the program does not prevent discontinuation of service due to nonpayment of water/utility bills. In the event of nonpayment or unauthorized water usage, or if the water meter is found to be tampered with, water/utility service to the property will be disconnected per section 62-299. 
(d)  An owner/authorized agent taking responsibility for payment of water/utility services under the program shall be responsible for all water/utility service billing incurred for all properties included in the program during tenant vacancies, except as provided under section 62-264(a)2. Water/utility service billings may include charges for water, sewer, solid waste, utility user's tax, GSF services, and/or other charges depending on the property, including applicable program charges. 
(e)  If any owner's/authorized agent's water/utility services for any property(ies) included under the program is scheduled for disconnection, the owner/authorized agent will be terminated from the program immediately and such owner/authorized agent will be ineligible for further participation in the program for a period of 12 months. After the requisite 12 month period has lapsed, such owner/authorized agent may reapply for participation in the program. 
(Ord. No. 4188, § 3, 7-7-2014)  
Sec. 62-263. - Continuity of utility services program charges. 
(a)  A program master account set-up charge shall apply to each application/agreement processed for participation in the program. A program master account set-up charge shall be set by city council resolution. 
(b)  Each transfer of water/utility service from a tenant account to an owner/authorized agent program master account will be subject to a program account transfer fee. A program account transfer fee shall be set by city council resolution. 
(c)  Properties may be added or removed from the program master account by requesting a program account modification. A program account modification fee shall apply for each property added or deleted from the program. A program account modification fee shall be set by city council resolution. 
(d)  Unless waived pursuant to subsection 62-263(e), owners/authorized agents agree to pay an advance payment, as set forth in section 62-243, each time a tenant(s) account closes and services are transferred to the owner/authorized agent. 
(e)  The city may waive the advance payment set forth in section 62-263(d) when it has been determined the owner/authorized agent has never had a city water/utility services account disconnected for non-payment and has met the following qualifications: 
(1)  Has had no more than one final notice issued for any city water/utility services account within the past 24 month period; and 
(2)  Has a current active city utility account for a period of five years with no history of scheduled disconnection, or, upon providing to the department a letter of credit worthiness from another utility agency, as approved by the city, for the past five years, up to the most recent billing period. 
(Ord. No. 4188, § 3, 7-7-2014)  
Sec. 62-264. - Accounts closed due to non-payment by tenant(s). 
(a)  Program participants shall select a single option (option A or B) on each application/agreement at the time of submittal. The option specified will dictate the manner in which a closed account, due to nonpayment of services by the tenant, shall be handled. The option specified shall apply to all properties included in such agreement regardless of whether the tenant still occupies the premises: 
(1)  Option A: The city shall continue to provide water/utility services at the property and bill the owner/authorized agent for the services until the current tenant re-establishes the account, or a new tenant submits an application for a new water/utility account; or 
(2)  Option B: The city shall not continue water/utility services. Under option B, the following shall apply: 
a.  A request to re-establish service shall be made within 60 days of account closure due to nonpayment. Such request shall be made in writing to the department on a form provided by the city. The request must state the service start date and be signed by owner/authorized agent on record with the department. 
b.  Re-establishment of such service shall be subject to charges set forth in section 62-241(b)5. 
c.  If a new tenant account is not established, or the owner/authorized agent does not transfer service and take over responsibility for payment of water/utility services within 60 days of the tenant's account being closed, the subject property shall be removed from the program. 
(Ord. No. 4188, § 3, 7-7-2014)  
Sec. 62-265. - Termination by city from the program. 
(a)  Any owner/authorized agent that fails to adhere to the provisions set forth in this division may be subject to termination from participation in the program. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to terminate any master program account, if it determines such account exceeds the intended scope of the program, as solely determined by the department. 
(c)  Termination from the program may result in assessment of any water/utility services and/or related fees for properties that were included under the program. 
(Ord. No. 4188, § 3, 7-7-2014)  
Secs. 62-266—62-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4188, § 3, adopted July 7, 2014, added a new Division 3 and renumbered former Division 3 as Division 4 as set out herein. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 62-271. - Annual updating of rates and fees. 
(a)  The fees and charges set forth in this article shall be updated annually on January 1 each year by an adjustment of all rates and fees as set forth in this section. 
(b)  The annual adjustment shall be made by multiplying each rate and fee included in this article by the Los Angeles - Riverside - Orange County Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers of the preceding July and by dividing the result of such multiplication by the same index of the July of the prior year, as reported by the CPI Detailed Report, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The result of such calculation shall be rounded to the next lower cent and added to the old rate to become the rate and the amount for the ensuing year. The new rates shall be effective on January 1. 
(c)  Additionally, on January 1 each year beginning January 1, 2000, the fees and charges set forth in this article shall be updated annually for the following expenses: 
(1)  Federal and state water quality requirements; 
(2)  Cost of purchased water adjustments; 
(3)  Groundwater basin replenishment assessments and other costs; and 
(4)  Other extraordinary operating expenses which exceed the Consumer Price Index adjustment. 
(Code 1959, § 34-70; Ord. No. 3293, § 5; Ord. No. 3882, § 14; Ord. No. 4075, § 2)  
Secs. 62-272—62-290. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Consumption Charges 
 
Sec. 62-291. - Within city. 
All water service furnished by the department for use within the city shall be subject to the bimonthly rates as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 34-15; Ord. No. 1359, § 410; Ord. No. 1789, § 1; Ord. No. 2748, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2833, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2975, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3133, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3547, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3548, § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 1)  
Sec. 62-292. - Outside city. 
All water service furnished by the department for use outside the city shall be subject to the bimonthly rates as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 34-16; Ord. No. 1359, § 411; Ord. No. 1789, § 1; Ord. No. 2748, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2833, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2975, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3133, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3547, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3548, § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 2)  
Sec. 62-293. - Private fire service. 
This section provides the funding for servicing and maintaining private fire service connections. The charge per diameter inch inside the city is one-half the availability service charge for all other users. The bimonthly rates for outside city limits are 1.25 times that charge for in-city private fire service rates. The bimonthly rates for private fire service protection shall be subject to the bimonthly rates as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 34-17; Ord. No. 1359, § 411A; Ord. No. 2748, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2975, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3133, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3167, § 1; Ord. No. 3293, § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 1(part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 3)  
Sec. 62-294. - Special zone charges for certain territory annexed to city. 
Territory annexed to the city pursuant to Resolution No. 68-182, known as Phillips Ranch Annexation, and also that territory in the city described as lots 2, 3, and 4 as shown on the record of survey filed in book 83, pages 62 and 63 of records of surveys in the office of the county recorder, except that land located south of the Pomona Freeway, as shown on exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall be subject to a special zone for water rate charges. Notwithstanding the other sections of this article, the following rates shall apply to all water delivered by the department within such territory: 
(1)  For each family unit for residential uses a fee set by resolution of the city council shall be charged in addition to the regular water rate established by this article generally within the city. 
(2)  For commercial and industrial uses, in addition to the regular water rate established by this article generally within the city, the special zone charges per month shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(3)  For fire service for building sprinklers in private systems, the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 34-17.1; Ord. No. 2285, § 1; Ord. No. 2982, § 1)  
Sec. 62-295. - Vacant premises. 
If premises become vacant, the regular minimum water rates shall be charged, and no refund or discount shall be made unless the water has been shut off by the department upon written request of the consumer or owner of the premises. 
(Code 1959, § 34-18; Ord. No. 1359, § 412)  
Sec. 62-296. - Meter failure. 
If a water meter fails to register during any period or is known to register inaccurately, the consumer shall be charged with an average daily consumption according to the season, as shown by the meter when in use and registering accurately. 
(Code 1959, § 34-19; Ord. No. 1359, § 413)  
Sec. 62-297. - Temporary service to contractors. 
Water service for contractors shall be subject to a surcharge equal to that levied upon the city by the metropolitan water district and/or other suppliers of imported water as a part of their water conservation plan as constituted or as modified. The rates for temporary service for contractors and the conservation surcharge are set by the city council by resolution. 
Temporary construction meters shall be used at all times during water consumption from hydrants, and shall be on site and available for readings during normal business hours. In the event that a meter is lost, stolen, damaged, or otherwise treated in a manner resulting in a loss of consumption data, the contractor shall be responsible for all applicable costs, up to the full replacement costs, as is determined by the City of Pomona's Utility Services Department. 
(Code 1959, § 34-20.1; Ord. No. 1359, § 415; Ord. No. 2833, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2975, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3133, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3587 § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 4; Ord. No. 4075, § 3)  
Sec. 62-298. - Adjustment of charges for indigent persons. 
The manager may, subject at all times to the review and approval of the city council, adjust and grant rebates from the water rates to indigent persons. If any dispute occurs as to a charge to a consumer, the manager may determine it; provided, however, that all persons affected thereby shall have the right to appeal such determination to the council, and the decision of the council in such respect shall be final and conclusive as to all parties. 
(Code 1959, § 34-20.2; Ord. No. 1359, § 416)  
Sec. 62-299. - Due date; disconnection fee and delinquency charge. 
All water bills shall be due and payable upon presentation and shall become delinquent 20 days thereafter. Further, all charges for labor furnished as well as all other service charges shall constitute a valid and subsisting claim in favor of the city and against the owner of the property or the person to whom such services are rendered. All accounts shall become due and payable within 20 days after presentation. If not paid on or before the expiration of 40 days after presentation, the department shall turn off the water and discontinue such service. If water is turned off, as provided in this section, it shall not be turned on again until all legitimate charges for service rendered at the point of service and which are delinquent have been fully paid. Included in these legitimate charges will be charges as set by the city council by resolution for processing and/or making a service call to turn the water off or on between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., exclusive of weekends and holidays. The charge for making a service call between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and on weekends and holidays is set by the city council by resolution. These charges apply even if the meter is not physically turned off. In addition to the remedy in this section, the city may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction for any amount due and payable, together with penalties, for the costs of such suits, and for such other and further relief as to the court may appear appropriate in the premises. 
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 4154, those city water customers who are "living within the City of Pomona lower income poverty rate" may apply for a one-percent reduction of the above-referenced delinquency charge. The water customer must apply for the reduction of the delinquency charge to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall then follow the criteria set forth in section 50-218 of this Code and, if the water customer's application meets such criteria, the city treasurer shall grant the one percent reduction of the delinquency charge. The foregoing shall only apply to city water customers. 
(Code 1959, § 34-20.3; Ord. No. 1359, § 417; Ord. No. 2748, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2975, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3133, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 1 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 5; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, 3-19-2012)  
Sec. 62-300. - Fire flow testing fee. 
Flow testing of water mains through fire hydrants shall be done at all times by or under the direct supervision of utility services department personnel. A fee for such tests, when not a part of the normal maintenance of the water system, shall be established by the manager of the utility services department to defray all costs of performing such tests, including but not limited to costs of water, labor and such specialized equipment deemed necessary for such tests. The fee shall be paid to the department prior to the authorization of such tests. 
(Code 1959, § 34-20.4; Ord. No. 3587, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-301—62-320. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Connection Charges 
 
Sec. 62-321. - New connection fees. 
Every applicant for a new connection to the potable water service operated by the City of Pomona, Utility Services Department, shall pay to the utility services department a connection fee for such new service as set by the city council by resolution. Such fee shall not be applicable as to any parcel where the applicant or their predecessor in interest previously paid such fee to the utility services department for such parcel. 
(Ord. No. 4075, § 4) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4075, § 4, adopted January 8, 2007, repealed the former § 62-321, and enacted a new § 62-321 as set out herein. The former § 62-321 pertained to existing mains and derived from Code 1959, § 34-49; Ord. No. 1359, § 460; Ord. No. 1491, § 2; Ord. No. 2423, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2748, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 2832, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2974, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3132, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 3 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 3 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 11.  
Sec. 62-322. - Main extension charges. 
(a)  An applicant applying for water service where no utility services department main four inches or larger exists shall, before such application is accepted, pay to the utility services department a water main installation charge as set forth by the city council by resolution. However, such service shall be given at the nearest distribution main unless water main installation charges for 75 percent of the front footage which may be served by the extension have been paid to the utility services department. If an applicant pays an amount in excess of his front-foot share, a refund agreement shall be entered into as set forth in section 62-325. 
(b)  An applicant applying for water service where, by reason of its topography or remoteness from the existing service area of the water distribution system, or where the estimated costs of the extension of the main necessary to serve the property is more than $2,000.00 may be required to deposit, before the application is accepted, the estimated amount of money necessary to defray the entire cost of the main extension. Upon receipt of this deposit the utility services department will proceed with the plans for the installation of the water main extension. If upon completion of the installation the actual cost is greater than the amount deposited, the applicant shall pay the difference to the utility services department. If, however, the actual cost is less than the amount deposited, the difference will be refunded by the department. The city shall then enter into a contract with the applicant for a refund of a portion of the money deposited as set forth in Section 62-325. 
(Code 1959, § 34-50; Ord. No. 1359, § 461; Ord. No. 1491, § 3; Ord. No. 3724, § 4; Ord. No. 2423, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2748, § 3 (part); Ord. 2832, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2974, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3132, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3293, § 3 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-13-1989; Ord. No. 3548, § 3 (part); water department memorandum dated 12-3-1991; Ord. No. 3882, § 12)  
Sec. 62-323. - Subdivision development. 
(a)  A developer applying for service to a subdivision development shall submit a tentative map or sketch of his proposed improvements. The utility services department will then prepare an estimate indicating the water facilities required, including service connections and their estimated cost. The estimate will include an amount for a cash deposit for the department's costs of inspection, disinfection, compaction tests and other work where required. Construction plans shall be prepared by a registered engineer and submitted to the utility services department for approval. The facilities shall be installed under the department's inspection, which will be provided only after a cash deposit is made and all other city permits and conditions have been fulfilled. The selected contractor shall be a qualified class A contractor. The utility services department will file a notice of completion after all work is completed. The notice of completion will not be filed until the utility services department manager is satisfied that the following conditions were met: 
(1)  Valve boxes are set flush with the finished pavement. 
(2)  Meter boxes are set to the finished grade. 
(3)  Bond requirements are completed. 
(4)  Required right-of-way is granted to the city. The developer shall have an engineer or title company submit the easement description for preparation of the easement document the by city. 
(5)  As-built plans are submitted. 
(b)  Prior to commencing work, the developer shall deposit in cash the amount of estimated utility services department charges and post a performance bond on a form approved by the utility services department for the balance. The amounts will be noted on the water main estimate. An assignment of an account in an approved bank or savings and loan association on an approved form can be accepted in lieu of the bond requirement. Twenty-five percent of the bond or the cash assignment shall remain in effect for one year after the notice of completion is filed to guarantee the water facilities against leaks, breaks, faulty materials or workmanship and against settlement of backfill and damage to surfacing. Only by such financial arrangements would the city sign a subdivision title sheet and provide letters stating financial requirements have been completed to provide water. 
(c)  All meters will be installed by the utility services department in accordance with the requirements of sections 62-241 through 62-245. 
(d)  If all or part of a subdivision development is adjacent to an existing water main, all connections to be installed to those lots adjacent to existing water mains shall be in accordance with the requirements of sections 62-321 and 62-322. All other lots shall be in accordance with this section. 
(e)  When, at the discretion of the utility services department, a water main size must be increased to greater than ten inches in diameter, the utility services department will reimburse the developer at the per-foot rate set by resolution of the city council. The utility services department will reimburse the developer, in cash, within three years after the notice of completion for oversized main requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 34-51.1; Ord. No. 2832, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3132, § 3 (part)) 
Cross reference— Subdivision and zoning, ch. 78.  
Sec. 62-324. - Extended areas. 
When there is an application for water service to be extended into an area which has in the past been served by a domestic water system other than that of the utility services department, the department will make a survey to determine the extent of the existing service and potential service; analyze and appraise the existing mains; and make a study of the production, transmission and distribution requirements to serve the applicant area to the standards established by the utility services department and its own service areas. The utility services department manager will analyze these studies and recommend to the city council what will be necessary to bring the applicant area to its standards. He will consider those portions of the existing system which can be used and allow in his report credit for them. Upon review of the manager's report, the council may then set forth the conditions upon which service may be extended into the affected area. 
(Code 1959, § 34-52; Ord. No. 1359, § 462)  
Sec. 62-325. - Refund contract. 
If an applicant is required by the utility services department to deposit an amount of money for water main extensions in excess of that required to cover the water main installation charges or connection charges for the applicant's property, the city will enter into a refund agreement with the applicant providing for the refund of that money which the utility services department may collect as water main connection charges from subsequent consumers connecting to the water main. The refund agreement is to be in effect for a period of ten years from the date the main is placed in service, after which time the city shall be released of any further obligations to make refunds to the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 34-53; Ord. No. 1359, § 463)  
Secs. 62-326—62-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4188, § 3, adopted July 7, 2014, added a new Division 4 and renumbered former Division 4 as Division 5 as set out herein.  Prior to the renumbering of Division 4 as Division 5, Ord. No. 4122, § 1, adopted June 15, 2009, repealed the former Div. 4, §§ 62-351—62-356, and enacted a new Div. 4 as set out herein. The former Div. 4 pertained to water conservation and derived from Code 1959, § 34-41—34-41.4; Ord. No. 1359, § 490; Ord. No. 3546, § 1 (part). 
 
Sec. 62-351. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the City of Pomona Water Conservation and Water Supply Shortage Program. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-352. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this division shall have the meaning defined in this section: 
Billing unit means the unit of water used to apply water rates for purposes of calculating water charges for a person's water usage and equals 100 cubic feet or 748 gallons of water. 
City means the City of Pomona. 
Landscape irrigation system means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand, or through an automated system. 
Large landscape areas means a lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or combination thereof, equal to more than one acre of irrigable land. 
Person means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water provided by the city. 
Potable water means water which is suitable for drinking. 
Recycled water means the reclamation and reuse of nonpotable water for beneficial use. 
Single pass cooling systems means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-353. - Application. 
(a)  The provisions of this division apply to any person, customer and property served by the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this division do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire, and other similar emergency services. 
(c)  The provisions of this division do not apply to the use of recycled water, with the exception of section 62-354(a). 
(d)  The provisions of this division do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops, or other vegetation intended for commercial sale. 
(e)  Where any provision of the Pomona City Code is in conflict with any provision of this division, the provision of this division shall take precedence. This includes, but is not limited to, chapter 18, article V (landscape maintenance) of this Code, and Section .600 (Exterior Property Maintenance) of the Pomona Zoning Ordinance. 
(f)  This division is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-354. - Permanent water conservation requirements. 
The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section will be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water. 
(a)  Limits on watering hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable or recycled water is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time on any day, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting, or repairing an irrigation system. 
(b)  Limit on watering duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device, that is not continuously attended, is limited to no more than 15 minutes watering per day per station. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour and weather based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a 70 percent efficiency standard. 
(c)  No excessive water flow or runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter, or ditch is prohibited. 
(d)  No washing down hard or paved surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device, or a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume high-pressure water broom. 
(e)  Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and in no event more than seven days of receiving notice from the city, is prohibited. The city, in its sole discretion, may discontinue service to consumers who willfully violate provisions of this subsection. 
(f)  Recirculating water required for water fountains and decorative water features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited, effective January 1, 2010. 
(g)  Limits on washing vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat, motor home or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a recirculating water system to capture or reuse water. 
(h)  Drinking water served upon request only. Eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to a restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, bar, club or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested. 
(i)  Commercial lodging establishments must provide option to not launder linen daily. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language. Contingent on available funding and materials as determined by the city in its sole discretion, the city will annually provide display materials to establishments for notice on these items. 
(j)  No installation of single pass cooling systems. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service. 
(k)  No installation of nonrecirculating water systems in new commercial car wash, new laundry systems, or other new water intensive operations as determined by the city. Installation of nonrecirculating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash, new commercial laundry systems, or new other water intensive operations as determined by the city. 
(l)  Restaurants required to use water conserving dish wash spray valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, are prohibited from using nonwater conserving dish wash spray valves. 
(m)  Commercial car wash systems. Effective January 1, 2011, all commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed operational recirculating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement from the city. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-355. - Level 1 water supply shortage. 
(a)  A level 1 water shortage may be declared by the city manager, or designee, if any combination of events or factors threaten the adequacy of foreseeable water supply to customers. Qualifying factors to be considered in making a water shortage declaration include, but are not limited to: time of year, local rainfall, Metropolitan Water District's/Three Valleys Municipal Water District's Water Supply Allocation Plans, State Water Project Allocations, Groundwater Conjunctive Use (Dry Year Yield) Program, Operating Safe Yield as determined by the respective Chino Basin or Six Basins Watermasters responsible for groundwater allocation in groundwater basins and any major operating emergencies, or natural disasters that cause damage to the water supply or water distribution system. Prior to making a public announcement of a level 1 water shortage, the city manager, or designee, shall document the basis for the water shortage declaration and communicate this information to the city council. A level 1 declaration will require a consumer demand reduction of up to ten percent to make more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions. 
(b)  In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in section 62-354, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared level 1 water supply shortage: 
(1)  Limits on watering days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water during the months of April through October is limited to three days per week on a schedule established and posted/noticed by the city. (By way of example - Odd addresses on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday; even addresses on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday.) During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and noticed by the city. (By way of example - Odd addresses on Tuesday, even addresses on Thursday.) This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. 
(2)  Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 72 hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
(3)  Other prohibited uses. The city may implement other prohibitions on water uses as determined by the city, upon reasonable notice to customers. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-356. - Level 2 water supply shortage. 
(a)  A level 2 water supply shortage exists when the city determines, in its sole discretion, that due to such factors as outlined in section 62-355(a), a water supply shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction of 11 percent to 30 percent is necessary to make more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the city of a level 2 water supply shortage pursuant to section 62-358(a), the city will implement the mandatory level 2 conservation measures identified in this section. 
(b)  In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in section 62-354, the following additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared level 2 water supply shortage: 
(1)  Limits on watering days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water during the months of April through October is limited to two days per week on a schedule established and posted/noticed by the city. (By way of example - Odd addresses on Monday and Thursday, even addresses on Tuesday and Friday). During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted/noticed by the city. (By way of example - Odd addresses on Tuesday, even addresses on Thursday). This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. 
(2)  Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 48 hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
(3)  Limits on filling ornamental lakes or ponds. Filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a supply shortage level under this division. 
(4)  Limits on washing vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus motorcycle, boat, motor home or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, by high pressure/low volume wash systems, or at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a recirculating water system to capture or reuse water. 
(5)  Limits on filling residential swimming pools and spas. Refilling of more than one foot per week, and initial filling of residential swimming pools or outdoor spas with potable water is prohibited, except upon written authorization from the city manager or designee. 
(6)  Other prohibited uses. The city may implement other prohibitions on water uses as determined by the city, upon reasonable notice to customers. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-357. - Level 3 water supply emergency shortage. 
(a)  A level 3 water supply emergency shortage exists when the city declares a water shortage emergency due to such factors as outlined in section 62-355(a) and notifies its residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand of more than 30 percent is necessary to make more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the city of a level 3 water supply emergency shortage pursuant to section 62-358(b), the city will implement the mandatory level 3 conservation measures identified in this section. 
(b)  In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in section 62-354, the following water conservation requirements apply upon the city's declaration of a level 3 water supply emergency shortage: 
(1)  No watering or irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction does not apply to the following categories of use unless the city has determined that recycled water is available and may be lawfully applied to the use: 
a.  Maintenance of vegetation excluding turf, but including trees and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or a very low-flow drip type irrigation system when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour subject to the hour restrictions in section 62-354(a); 
b.  Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection; 
c.  Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control; 
d.  Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well being of rare animals; 
e.  Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, school grounds, cemeteries, and golf course greens, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week according to the schedule established in section 62-356(b)(1) and time restrictions in section 62-354(a) and (b)(1); 
(2)  Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 24 hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
(3)  New potable water service. Pursuant to Section 356 of the California Water Code, the city, dependant on an analysis of water supply, may decide not to (a) provide new potable water service; (b) provide new temporary meters or permanent meters, and (c) issue any statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as, will serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability), except under the following circumstances: 
a.  A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or 
b.  The project is necessary to protect the public's health, safety, and welfare; or 
c.  The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the city. 
This provision does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less, or as determined by city manager or designee. 
(4)  Discontinue service. Pursuant to Section 356 of the California Water Code, the city, in its sole discretion, may discontinue service to consumers who willfully violate provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-358. - Declaration and notification of water supply shortage. 
(a)  Declaration and notification of levels 1 and 2 water supply shortage. The existence of level 1 or level 2 water supply shortage conditions may be declared by resolution of the city adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in accordance with state law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to level 1 or level 2 conditions will take effect on the 10th day after the date the shortage level is declared. Within seven days following the declaration of the shortage level, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices. If the city establishes a water allocation, it must provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service. A water allocation will be effective on the 5th day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice. 
(b)  Declaration and notification of level 3 water supply shortage. The existence of a level 3 water supply emergency shortage may be declared by resolution in accordance with the procedures specified in Sections 351 and 352 of the Water Code. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to the level 3 conditions will take effect on the 10th day after the date the shortage level is declared. Within seven days following the declaration of the shortage level, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for the publication of official notices. If the city establishes a water allocation, it will provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service. A water allocation will be effective on the 5th day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice. 
(c)  Declaration and notification that the water supply shortage situation has ended. The City of Pomona may declare an end to water supply shortage levels 1, 2 and 3, as well as any water watch voluntary compliance, upon recommendation by the city manager, or designee, and resolution by the city council at any regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-359. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Commercial car wash systems. Effective on January 1, 2011, all commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed operational recirculating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement from the city. 
(b)  Large landscape areas; rain sensors. Large landscape areas, such as parks, cemeteries, golf courses, school grounds, and playing fields, that use landscape irrigation systems to water or irrigate, may be required to use landscape irrigation systems with rain sensors that automatically shut off such systems during periods of rain or irrigation timers which automatically use information such as evapotranspiration sensors to set an efficient water use schedule. 
(c)  Construction purposes. Recycled or nonpotable water must be used for construction purposes when available. 
(d)  No new annexations. Upon the declaration of a level 3 water supply shortage condition, the city will suspend consideration of annexations to its service area. This subsection does not apply to boundary corrections and annexations that will not result in any increased use of water. 
(e)  Limits on building permits. Based on the availability of the water supply, the city will administratively limit, or withhold the issuance of building permits, which require new or expanded water service, except to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(f)  Water recycling required if alternative available. The use of potable water, other than recycled water, is prohibited for specified uses after the city has provided to the customer an analysis showing that recycled water is a cost-effective alternative to potable water for such uses and the customer has had a reasonable time, as determined by the city manager, to make the conversion to recycled water. 
(g)  Water recycling; new service. Prior to the connection of any new water service, an evaluation must be done by the city to determine whether recycled water exists to supply all or some of the water needed and recycled water must be utilized to the extent feasible. 
(h)  Customer water conservation reports. The city may, by written request, require all commercial, residential and industrial customers using 25,000 or more billing units per year to submit a water conservation plan and to submit quarterly progress reports on such plan. The conservation plan must include recommendations for increased water savings, including increased water recycling based on feasibility, and the reports must include progress to date on implementation of such recommendations. 
(i)  Water conserving plumbing standards. 
(1)  Retrofits upon sale or transfer: It is strongly encouraged that structures sold or transferred meet current city and plumbing codes for water-conserving plumbing fixtures. 
(2)  Change in service: Upon the establishment of new water service or a change in water service from one person to another nonfamily member, the customer will be encouraged to retrofit plumbing fixtures with water-conserving plumbing fixtures. 
(j)  Reporting line. The city will establish a water waste reporting line for residents to report violations of this division. 
(k)  State model landscape ordinance. The city will utilize the department of water resources state model landscaping ordinance as a reference in the development of future revisions. 
(l)  Restrictions and rates. The city council may, in its sole discretion, adopt a resolution to impose additional restrictions or prohibitions on the use of water to achieve reductions, or make additional adjustments to the water rates, based on the city's increased costs to provide water to its customers. 
(m)  Voluntary compliance. The city manager, or designee, may recommend, and upon resolution of the city council, declare a water watch condition when there is a reasonable probability that there will be a water supply shortage and that a consumer demand reduction of up to ten percent is required in order to ensure sufficient supplies will be available to meet anticipated demands. Upon such declaration, the city manager, or designee, shall take action to implement the conservation practices outlined in a level 1 water supply shortage, on a voluntary basis. 
(n)  Emergency implementation. Pursuant to Water Code Section 351, should a failure in the water system occur causing an immediate emergency, the city manager, or designee, may declare a need to immediately enact the mandatory requirements of any of the levels designated herein. The required measures of the designated shortage level will be effective immediately and will be communicated to the public. The emergency implementation will be ratified by resolution of the city council at its next meeting. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-360. - Hardship waiver. 
(a)  Undue and disproportionate hardship. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this division would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water users, then the person may apply for a waiver pursuant to the requirements as provided in this section. 
(b)  Written finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user's property. 
(1)  Application: Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee in an amount set by city council resolution. 
(2)  Supporting documentation: The application must be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other information, including a written statement of the applicant. 
(3)  Required findings for waiver: An application for a waiver will be denied unless the city finds, based on the information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the city or its agent, all of the following: 
a.  That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses; 
b.  That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this division would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to residents and businesses generally; 
c.  That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the city to effectuate the purpose of this division and will not be detrimental to the public interest; and 
d.  That the condition or situation of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature. 
(4)  Approval authority: The city manager or designee must act upon any completed application no later than ten business days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to the subject property during the period of the mandatory water supply shortage condition. The decision of the city manager, or designee, shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 62-361. - Penalties and violations. 
(a)  Any violation of this division may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or as an infraction, at the discretion of the city, pursuant to article X of this Code. Pursuant to section 1-7 of this Code, a misdemeanor is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days, or by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by both. 
(b)  The city manager and respective departments shall have the authority to administer and enforce this division. 
(c)  Pursuant to section 1-7(d) of this Code, penalties for failure to comply with any provisions of the ordinance are as follows: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision within one year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. 
a.  Water flow restrictor: In addition to any fines, the city may install a water flow restrictor device of approximately one gallon per minute capacity for services up to one and one-half inch size and comparatively sized restrictors for larger services after written notice of intent to install a flow restrictor for a minimum of 48 hours. 
b.  Termination of service: In addition to any fines and the installation of a water flow restrictor, the city may disconnect and/or terminate a customer's water service. 
(d)  A person or entity that violates this division is responsible for payment of the city's charges for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the city's schedule of charges then in effect. The charge for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device must be paid to the city before the device is removed. Nonpayment will be subject to the same remedies as nonpayment of basic water rates. 
(e)  Pursuant to section 1-7(f) of this Code, each day that a violation of this ordinance occurs is a separate offense. 
(f)  Notice and hearing: 
(1)  The city will issue a notice of violation by mail or personal delivery at least ten days before taking enforcement action. Such notice must describe the violation and the date by which corrective action must be taken. A customer may appeal the notice of violation by filing a written notice of appeal, pursuant to section 2-1188 et seq. of this Code. 
(2)  Pending receipt of a written appeal or pending a hearing pursuant to an appeal, the city may take appropriate steps to prevent the unauthorized use of water as appropriate to the nature and extent of the violations and the current declared water level condition. 
(Ord. No. 4122, § 1, 6-15-2009)  
Secs. 62-362—62-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal sewer systems, Government Code § 38900 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-391. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Domestic refers to single- and multiple-residential units, stores, offices, schools, places of public assemblage, garages, service stations and other commercial establishments. 
Sewage includes the following: 
(1)  Sewage, garbage, feculent matter, offal, refuse and filth. 
(2)  Any animal, mineral or vegetable matter or substance that is offensive, injurious or dangerous to health. 
Sewer includes the following: 
(1)  Main trunk or outfall, interceptor and lateral sewers. 
(2)  Catchbasins, flush tanks, manholes, reception basins and all other appurtenances thereto that may constitute a sewer system. 
(Code 1959, § 27-1; Ord. No. 910, §§ 320, 321 and 322) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-392. - Connections with trunk and outfall lines. 
Connection of lateral lines to a main trunk or outfall sewer shall be made at points and in the manner determined by the director of public works/city engineer and subject to such terms and conditions as the city council may prescribe. 
(Code 1959, § 27-3; Ord. No. 910, § 324)  
Sec. 62-393. - Size of lateral lines; house connections. 
(a)  To obtain good depth and velocity of flow, but of sufficient size to prevent undue stoppage, eight inches shall be the minimum diameter for all lateral sewer lines. 
(b)  To prevent the introduction, accidental or otherwise, of articles of an injurious nature, all house connections shall be restricted to a minimum inside diameter of four inches. 
(Code 1959, § 27-4; Ord. No. 910, § 325)  
Sec. 62-394. - Grades. 
In order to prevent, so far as possible, the formation of deposits, the minimum grade for sanitary sewers shall be such as to provide a velocity of not less than two feet per second when the sewer is flowing full or half full, in order that during periods of low flow an actual velocity of 1½ feet per second may prevail. 
(Code 1959, § 27-5; Ord. No. 910, § 326)  
Sec. 62-395. - Manholes generally. 
(a)  All sewer manholes shall be constructed according to designs and specifications approved by and on file with the director of public works/city engineer. 
(b)  Manholes shall be placed at all sewer junctions, at every change of grade or alignment, and at distances not greater than 400 feet on sewers of constant diameter and having a straight line gradient and alignment; provided, however, a manhole shall be made available for sampling and measurement of flow of industrial wastes before their discharge into a sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1959, § 27-6; Ord. No. 910, § 327)  
Sec. 62-396. - Dumping in manholes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump anything in a manhole unless the person has been issued, by the director of public works/city engineer, a permit to dump in the manhole, which permit permits the dumping and states what is permitted to be dumped. The permit shall expire on January 1 of each year; however, each permit shall be subject to recall at any time by the director of public works/city engineer in order to change the manhole in which dumping is permitted. The director of public works/city engineer shall provide an application form for the permit and shall provide such information as shall be necessary to protect the city sewer system. It is declared that any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 27-7; Ord. No. 1224)  
Sec. 62-397. - Construction of sewers generally. 
(a)  Any sewer built in the city shall be constructed in compliance with the provisions of specifications approved by the director of public works/city engineer and the provisions of any other city ordinance applicable thereto. 
(b)  As a requirement of a lot split, subparcel, parcel map, subdivision, or building permit, the director of public works/city engineer may require a main sewer and sewer laterals to be constructed to serve each possible lot that can be created from each parcel created by the lot split, subparcel, parcel map, or subdivision or parcel built upon, under the zoning district in which the parcel is located at the time of the approval of the lot split, subparcel, parcel map, or subdivision or the issuance of the building permit. 
(Code 1959, § 27-8; Ord. No. 910, § 329; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-398. - Sewer construction permit, connection permit and inspection fees. 
(a)  Any person or his duly authorized representative who makes, causes, permits, or allows to be made any connection to a sanitary sewer shall first apply for and be issued a permit by the director of public works/city engineer. Such permit shall be for a single sewer connection. 
(b)  Any person or his duly authorized representative who makes, causes, permits, or allows to have a sewer line constructed or who desires to make any connection to a sanitary sewer shall first apply for and be issued a permit therefor by the director of public works/city engineer. If any of the work to be done is located within a street travelway, the permit will be issued only to a contractor licensed to perform this type of work. 
(c)  There shall be a permit issued for every sewer built or connection made, and a sum equal to three percent of the estimated cost of the sewer, as computed by the director of public works/city engineer, shall be charged to cover the cost of inspection. A minimum charge for inspection services shall be as determined by resolution. If a sewer is built for any other governmental agency and no city inspection is required, the inspection fee may be waived. 
(d)  If there is no record of a property being connected to the city's sanitary sewer system, the city may, at the written request of the property owner, perform a dye test to certify the property being connected to an existing sanitary sewer. Such dye test will be performed by the city upon payment of a fee as determined by resolution. 
(e)  After payment of the prescribed fees and deposits in the manner provided, the director of public works/city engineer may issue a permit to construct a domestic sanitary sewer or to construct a sewer connection. Such permit shall be issued in quadruplicate; one copy shall be filed by the director of public works/city engineer, one copy shall be delivered by the permittee to the office of the plumbing inspector, one shall be sent to the sewer inspector, and the original shall be retained by the permittee. However, all work done pursuant to each permit shall be in compliance with the provisions of all other ordinances and sections of this Code that may be applicable thereto. 
(f)  Any person who makes, causes, permits, or allows to be made any domestic connection to a sanitary sewer without fist having applied for and been issued a permit therefor by the director of public works/city engineer is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(g)  Any person who makes, causes, permits, or allows to be made any domestic connection to a sanitary sewer and fails, refuses or neglects to apply for and be issued a permit therefor by the director of public works/city engineer shall be assessed an additional 100 percent of the fixed fees and deposits for such connection, which penalty shall be added thereto and shall be collected with the fees and deposits. 
(Code 1959, §§ 27-9—27-13; Ord. No. 910, §§ 340—344; Ord. No. 1539, § 4; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2872, § 1; Ord. No. 2969, § 1; Ord. No. 3354, § 1)  
Sec. 62-399. - Connection charges and deposits. 
(a)  A connection charge is levied so as to provide from the private property served by the sewer lines a contribution to the cost, maintenance, and upkeep of the line for the benefit that will be received by the private property connecting to the sewer line, which is determined by the council to be equal to the charge levied by this section. 
(b)  If the real property to be connected has an existing city or sanitation district sewer running adjacent to its front or rear lot lines and the boundary lines thereof are substantially parallel, the connection fee shall be based upon distances measured parallel to the lot line nearest to and parallel with the sewer line; but where the boundary lines are not substantially parallel, the connection fee shall be based upon the average width of such lot or parcel of land as determined by the director of public works/city engineer. However, the connection fee shall cover only that portion of the property which is within 150 feet from the street front of the property, and the remainder of the property shall be charged a connection fee based upon acreage. A corner lot shall be charged for its addressed street front width if the sewer line is in the side yard street. Lots which have access to a street by a narrow strip or easement shall be charged on the portion of the lot that can be developed. 
(c)  The director of public works shall update and charge appropriate fees as approved by the city council by resolution. 
(d)  The director of public works/city engineer shall not permit a private sewer connection to the sewer lines without there being paid to the city treasurer the sum determined in this section, which sum shall be deposited in the sewer construction fund. 
(e)  The amount of any sewer connection fee shall be deemed a debt owing to the city, and any person who connects to a street sewer without having paid the connection fee in full or any portion thereof as provided in this section shall be liable to any action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of such fee. The conviction and punishment of any person for connecting to a street sewer without obtaining a permit to do so shall not relieve such person from paying the connection fee due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any connection fee prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the sections of this article. All remedies prescribed under this subsection shall be cumulative, and the use of any one or more remedies shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(f)  The director of public works/city engineer shall require a sum to be deposited with the city treasurer that will cover the cost of replacing the surface of any street, alley, or sidewalk that may be damaged or destroyed by the construction of the sewer line or private connection. 
(g)  The property owner shall also be responsible for maintaining the house connections up to and including the connection to the sewer line. 
(Code 1959, §§ 27-14—27-16; Ord. No. 910, § 341; Ord. No. 1292, § 1; Ord. No. 1539, §§ 1, 2, 5; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 2969, § 2; Ord. No. 3354, § 2)  
Sec. 62-400. - Sewer service charge. 
(a)  Effective at the beginning of the first billing period on/or subsequent to the first day of July 1, 2003, and continuing thereafter until changed by resolution of the city council, there is hereby imposed a service charge for sewer use comprised of a fixed charge and a volumetric charge. 
(1)  The "fixed charge" shall be a set fee established by resolution of the city council and adjusted as set forth in subpart (b) and (c) below. 
(2)  The "volume charge" shall be computed by multiplying the volumetric charge rate, as established by resolution and adjusted by paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) below, by each 100 cubic feet (hcf) of water consumed ("volumetric data"), regardless of whether the sewage be generated from residential, commercial or industrial land uses, except that single family residential use shall be on a "winter-months basis" as defined below. Volumetric data for residential, commercial and industrial sewer users shall be based upon records of water consumption available to the City of Pomona for each sewer customer location. Such data shall be compiled by the city utilizing water consumption records for each sewer user location, regardless of water provider or duration of service to such sewer user. 
i)  For City of Pomona single-family residential water customers, each July 1, the "winter months' basis" for each such user shall be calculated, where such basis is defined as an average of two complete months data within the period of December of the previous year through the following March. The city may utilize historical data of prior users at such location for such computation if insufficient data exists for said at such location until appropriate data is established. 
ii)  For all other City of Pomona water customers, volumetric data shall be computed on a bi-monthly basis. Where insufficient data initially exists, the city may utilize historical data at such users location for such computation without regard to the duration of use by said customer at said location until appropriate data is established. 
iii)  For all City of Pomona water customers, where volumetric data is not available, due to a loss of data, or other occurrence, the city shall use the lesser of the average for all similarly situated customers in the city or the 12-month average for the prior user as such location. This process would apply to a new or incoming user until a 12-month review period or winter-months basis (as applicable) has been determined. Such calculation shall be used until the appropriate data is established for normalized calculation. 
iv)  For City of Pomona sewer users who receive water service from a provider other than the City of Pomona ("Non-Pomona water customer"), where volumetric data is not available to the City of Pomona, aggregated data available from the water service provider will be used to establish an average user volumetric data consumption amount ("aggregated average"). For residential customers, the aggregated average will be computed to establish an aggregated winter months' basis each July 1 for the Non-City of Pomona water service area in which that address is situated. For all other customers, the aggregated average will be computed to establish an aggregated average based on industrial and commercial users respectively each July 1 by averaging the previous 12 months data for each such use in each non-City of Pomona water service area in which that address is sited. 
v)  Nothing in this section shall prevent any Non-Pomona water customer from providing or authorizing release of water records to the City of Pomona for computation of more accurate volumetric water data ("released records"). Released records shall be used to provide volumetric data to calculate adjusted volume sewer charges in accordance with procedures for calculating city provided water customers. Such adjusted volume sewer charges will become effective the billing period following release of such data. A Non-Pomona water customer's released records shall be removed from any calculation of any aggregated average for the following computation period. Any City of Pomona sewer user authorizing release of water records from a non-city water provider to the City of Pomona shall agree that such authority to release will remain effective for a period of no less than five years and continue in effect until written notice is received by both the water service provider and the city rescinding such authorization by said user. In the event a Non-Pomona water customer rescinds the city's access to released records, volume sewer charges for volume sewer charges for such Non-Pomona water customer shall be calculated by the method described in subpart iv) above. 
(3)  The sewer service charge shall be invoiced and collected bi-monthly in the same manner as the water service charges are billed within the city or in such manner as the city council shall determine. For partial payment of utility billing, the utility services director reserves the right to credit any monies remitted for payment of sewer service charges. The city council reserves the right to adjust the sewer service charges for actual discharge and metered usage or other special circumstances. Nothing in section 62-400(a) shall cause any written agreement between a City of Pomona water and/or sewer customer and the City of Pomona relating to sewer service charges existing and in force at the time of adoption of such section to be abrogated. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, the fees and charges set forth in this section shall be automatically updated annually on January 1 each year, beginning January 1, 2004, by an adjustment of all rates and fees contained in this section as follows: The annual adjustment shall be made by multiplying each rate and fee included in the fee resolution by the Los Angeles-Long Beach Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers of the preceding July and by dividing the result of such multiplication by the same index of the July of the prior year, as reported by the CPI Detailed Report, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The result of the calculations shall be rounded to the next lower cent and added to the old rate to become the rate and the amount for the ensuing year. The new rates shall be effective on January 1 without further approval by the city council. 
(c)  Additionally, on January 1 of each year beginning January 1, 2004, the fees and charges set forth in this section shall be updated annually for the following expenses: 
(1)  Federal and state water quality requirements; 
(2)  Cost of purchased water adjustments; 
(3)  Groundwater basin replenishment assessments and other costs; and 
(4)  Other extraordinary operating expenses which exceed the Consumer Price Index adjustment. 
(Code 1959, § 27-8.5; Ord. No. 3867, § 1; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 1-27-2003; Ord. No. 4075, § 5)  
Sec. 62-401. - Compliance with other sewage discharge restrictions and requirements. 
All persons shall comply with all sewage discharge restrictions and other requirements of the county sanitation district and the United States, the state and the city.  
Secs. 62-402—62-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE OUTSIDE OF CITY  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 62-421. - Compliance for industrial waste. 
Industrial liquid waste pretreatment facilities or industrial sewage treatment plants and all appurtenances thereto shall conform with all sections of this article and those of the California Plumbing Code as well as any regulations of the appropriate state or local agency that may be applicable thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 27-52; Ord. No. 910, § 356)  
Sec. 62-422. - Additions to facilities; permit. 
If an existing industrial liquid waste pretreatment facility or industrial sewage treatment plant is added to or altered because of a change of use, a permit shall be secured in accordance with this article before commencing work thereon. The completed work shall be accepted only when the entire plant shall meet all of the requirements for new facilities as provided in this article, except that existing facilities, used and undisturbed, may not be rejected because they are not new. 
(Code 1959, § 27-53; Ord. No. 910, § 357)  
Sec. 62-423. - Maintenance and operation of facilities. 
All industrial liquid waste pretreatment facilities or industrial sewage disposal plants and all appurtenances thereto, existing or constructed, shall be maintained and operated by the owner of the property affected in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices and safeguards for the operation thereof shall be maintained in good working order. This section shall not be construed as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance of any device or safeguards on existing facilities unless authorized in writing by the director of public works/city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 27-54; Ord. No. 910, § 358)  
Sec. 62-424. - Fees. 
(a)  The council prescribes a fee set by resolution as a charge for services and facilities furnished by the city outside its territorial limits in connection with its sewer system. 
(b)  The charge shall be paid annually and be the sum set by resolution of the city council per year for each connection to the city sewer system on all connections of private property owners made outside of the territorial city limits. 
(c)  The money collected from charges imposed by this division shall be used for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, and maintenance and operation of sewage facilities. 
(Code 1959, §§ 27-17, 27-18; Ord. No. 1537, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2163, § 1; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-425. - Prescribed contracts for service. 
Before any connection is made to a city sewer facility outside the territorial city limits by a private property owner, the property owner shall execute the following contract, and the contract shall be acknowledged and recorded: 
The undersigned, being the owner of the following described real property, agrees to pay to the City of Pomona the prescribed fees, tolls, rates, rentals, or other charges for services and facilities furnished by the City of Pomona in connection with its sewer system as prescribed by ordinance of the City of Pomona as now adopted, or as hereafter may be adopted by the Council of the City of Pomona. The undersigned agrees that the City of Pomona can sever, without notice, the sewer connection if the prescribed fees, tolls, rates, rentals or other charges are not paid as prescribed by ordinance of the council of the City of Pomona. It is understood and agreed that the City of Pomona has the power to discontinue the furnishing of sewage facilities to the following described real property at any time when done by ordinance of the council of the City of Pomona adopted by a three-fifths vote of the council. The real property being served by the City of Pomona with sewer facilities under this agreement is described as follows: 
(Description) 
Dated this _______ day of ________, ___. 
	/s/   
      Owner 
 	 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA ) 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES) 
On ________, ___, before me, the undersigned, a Notary Public, in and for said County and State, personally appeared ___________ known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within instrument and acknowledged that _______ he executed the same. 
	/s/   
      Notary Public in and for said County and State 
 	 
WITNESS MY HAND & OFFICIAL SEAL: 
___________ 
(Code 1959, § 27-19; Ord. No. 1537, § 3; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-426—62-440. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Collection of Charges 
 
Sec. 62-441. - Filing of report of charges. 
(a)  The charges prescribed in this division for each forthcoming fiscal year shall be collected on the tax roll in the same manner and by the same persons and at the same time, together with and not separately from its general taxes. The director of public works/city engineer is directed to prepare a written report and file it with the clerk on or before June 30 of each year. The report shall contain a description of each parcel of real property receiving such service and facilities and the amount of the charge for each parcel for the year, computed in conformity with the charges prescribed in this division. 
(b)  The real property may be described by reference to maps prepared in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code § 327 and on file in the office of the county assessor or by reference to plats or maps on file in the office of the clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 27-20; Ord. No. 1537, § 4)  
Sec. 62-442. - Notice of filing of report of charges required. 
(a)  The clerk shall cause notice of the filing of the report pursuant to section 62-441 and of a time and place of hearing thereon to be published pursuant to Government Code § 6066 prior to the date set for the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published within the city. 
(b)  Before the city may have such charges collected on the tax roll, the clerk shall cause a notice in writing of the filing of the report proposing to have such charges for the forthcoming fiscal year collected on the tax roll and of the time and place of hearing thereon, to be mailed to each person to whom any parcel of real property described in the report is assessed in the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the report is prepared at the address shown on the assessment roll or as known to the clerk. If the council adopts the report, the requirements for notice in writing to the persons to whom parcels of real property are assessed shall not apply to hearings on reports prepared in subsequent fiscal years, but notice by publication as provided in this section shall be adequate. 
(Code 1959, § 27-21; Ord. No. 1537, § 5)  
Sec. 62-443. - Hearing on report. 
(a)  At the time stated in the notice given pursuant to section 62-442, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report referred to in the notice and may continue the hearing from time to time. If the council finds that protest is made by the owners of a majority of separate parcels of property described in the report, the report shall not be adopted, and the charges shall be collected separately from the tax roll and shall not constitute a lien against any parcel of land. 
(b)  Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any charge or overrule any or all objections and shall make its determination upon each charge as described in the report, which determination shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 27-22; Ord. No. 1537, §§ 6, 7)  
Sec. 62-444. - Filing copy of final report with county tax collector. 
On or before August 10 of each year following the final determination of the city council pursuant to this subdivision, the clerk shall file with the county tax collector a copy of the report with a statement endorsed thereon over his signature that it has been finally adopted by the council. The county tax collector shall enter the amount of the charges against the respective lots or parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. If the property is not described on the roll, the county tax collector may enter the description thereon, together with the amounts of the charges, as shown on the report. 
(Code 1959, § 27-23; Ord. No. 1937, § 8; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-445. - Method of collecting charges. 
The amount of the charges imposed under this division shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same persons as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city and shall be delinquent at the same time and thereafter be subject to the same delinquency penalties. 
(Code 1959, § 27-24; Ord. No. 1537, § 11)  
Sec. 62-446. - Inclusion of charges in tax bill. 
The tax collector shall include the amount of the charges on bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1959, § 27-25; Ord. No. 1537, § 10)  
Sec. 62-447. - Lien. 
The amount of the charges imposed pursuant to this division shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which the charges have been imposed as of 12:00 noon on the first Monday in March immediately preceding the date of levy. 
(Code 1959, § 27-26; Ord. No. 1537, § 9)  
Sec. 62-448. - Applicability of other laws. 
All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of general taxes of the city, including but not limited to those pertaining to the matters of delinquency, correction, cancellation, refund and redemption, are applicable to the charges imposed pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1959, § 27-27; Ord. No. 1537, § 12)  
Secs. 62-449—62-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SAND AND GREASE TRAPS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 62-471. - Grease interceptors required for packing plants and certain other establishments. 
In order to prevent clogging of waste lines with grease and to prevent large quantities of grease from reaching the disposal plant, grease interceptors shall be installed in all packing plants and in any other establishment that may be a source of food fats and greases. 
(Code 1959, § 27-28; Ord. No. 910, § 335; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-472. - Installation of grease interceptors. 
All grease interceptors shall be installed as near as possible to fixtures discharging greasy waste and in such a manner that the top shall be easily accessible for cleaning. The discharge pipe shall be properly vented to prevent siphonage of the interceptor contents and in compliance with the California Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1959, § 27-29; Ord. No. 910, § 335)  
Sec. 62-473. - Capacity of grease interceptors. 
Every grease interceptor shall have a minimum rate of flow capacity adapted to the fixture to which it may be connected and an accumulated grease capacity large enough that its average efficiency will not drop below 90 percent at the end of a normal cleaning period. 
(Code 1959, § 27-30; Ord. No. 910, § 335)  
Sec. 62-474. - Cleaning of grease interceptors. 
All grease interceptors shall be inspected at regular intervals by the plumbing inspector and cleaned by the owner or operator at least once each week and more often if necessary to maintain the required efficiency of grease removal. 
(Code 1959, § 27-31; Ord. No. 910, § 335)  
Sec. 62-475. - Sand traps required for certain establishments. 
In all establishments equipped with wash racks, floor drains, or wash tanks for cleaning machined parts or other material, there shall be installed sand boxes of an approved type and having such a capacity that the flow-through velocity shall be not greater than one foot per second, for the interception of mud, sludge or grease. 
(Code 1959, § 27-32; Ord. No. 910, § 336)  
Sec. 62-476. - Installation of sand traps. 
All sand boxes required under this division shall conform to and be installed in accordance with the California Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1959, § 27-33; Ord. No. 910, § 336)  
Sec. 62-477. - Cleaning of sand traps. 
All sand boxes required under this division shall be inspected at regular intervals by the plumbing inspector and cleaned by the owner or operator at least once each week and more often if necessary to maintain the required efficiency of grease, mud or sludge removal. 
(Code 1959, § 27-34; Ord. No. 910, § 336)  
Secs. 62-478—62-500. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 62-501. - Acceptance under special permit. 
Should there exist the available sewage treatment capacity, industrial wastes that are acceptable as to analysis and population equivalent but in excess of the proportional amount for a certain industry, may be accepted for disposal under a special permit whereunder the industry shall agree to bear the entire cost of such excess disposal. If such disposal facilities should become overloaded, the director of public works/city engineer may, with the approval of the state agency having jurisdiction, upon 90 days' notice of intention, terminate any such special permit. 
(Code 1959, § 27-35; Ord. No. 910, § 350)  
Sec. 62-502. - Proportional use of city sewers. 
Any industry which lies within or partly within the city for which sewerage is available and whose wastes have been determined to cause no damage to the system or unjustifiable expense to other users shall have a right to a proportional use of any available capacity of such sewerage and treatment plant maintained by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 27-46; Ord. No. 910, § 351)  
Sec. 62-503. - Proportional use defined. 
Proportional use, as used in this division, is the amount per capita of domestic sewage, normal as to volume, suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand which shall be equated to the basis of $1,000.00 of assessed valuation and shall constitute one unit of industrial waste. Any industry whose wastes are in compliance with this division and for which there exist available sewerage and disposal capacity may discharge to the sewers as many such units of waste as there are whole units of $1,000.00 each in such industry's assessed valuation as lies wholly within the city or in the assessed valua- tion of such part thereof as may lie within the city limits. 
(Code 1959, § 27-47; Ord. No. 910, § 351) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-504. - Approval of disposal requirements prerequisite to issuance of building permit. 
(a)  Every person applying for a building permit for construction of a new industrial building or structure or for an addition or alteration to an existing building or structure shall secure a signed statement for the director of public works/city engineer as to requirements for disposal of industrial liquid wastes, industrial sewage, and other waste materials from such building or structure. The person for whom such building or structure is to be constructed shall furnish the director of public works/city engineer such plans, information, data, statements or affidavits as the director of public works/city engineer may require for determination of the nature and quantity of the wastes involved and the facilities to be provided for the disposal thereof. 
(b)  Upon completion of his examination of the data submitted, the director of public works/city engineer shall promptly issue a statement made in accordance with one of the following conditions, which shall be incorporated in the approved plans and made a part of the building permit: 
(1)  Disposal of all industrial wastes, industrial sewage or other waste materials shall be made by connection to the public sewer in accordance with this division, and plans for the facilities required shall be submitted to and approved by the director of public works/city engineer and a permit issued before construction of such waste disposal facilities is started. 
(2)  Connection to the public sewer is not feasible; the applicant has certified that the wastes involved consist only of domestic sewage, uncontaminated cooling water, or other innocuous materials; and disposal shall be made into septic tanks, cesspools or other similar facilities to be approved by the county health officer and constructed in accordance with the California Plumbing Code. 
(3)  Connection to the public sewer is not feasible; the proposed use of the building or structure will produce wastes containing impurities which cannot be reduced to safe or reasonable limits by any known processes; disposal of such wastes in the manner proposed may create a menace to the public health or safety, create a public nuisance, pollute underground water supplies, or cause serious damage to public or private property; and no permit for disposal of such wastes can be issued under this division. 
(Code 1959, § 27-50; Ord. No. 910, § 355)  
Secs. 62-505—62-520. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Connection Permit 
 
Sec. 62-521. - Required. 
(a)  Any person who makes, causes, permits, or allows to be made any connection to a sanitary sewer for the disposal of any industrial waste shall first file an application with the director of public works/city engineer in the manner provided in this subdivision and be issued a permit therefor. Such permit shall be for a single industrial sanitary sewer connection. 
(b)  Any person who makes, causes, permits, or allows to be made any industrial connection to a sanitary sewer without first having filed an application with the director of public works/city engineer and being issued a permit therefor is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who makes, causes, permits, or allows to be made any industrial connection to a sanitary sewer and who fails, refuses or neglects to apply for and be issued a permit therefor by the director of public works/city engineer shall be assessed an additional 100 percent of the fixed fee for such permit, which penalty shall be added thereto and shall be collected with the fee. 
(Code 1959, §§ 27-36, 27-42, 27-43; Ord. No. 910, §§ 360, 366, 367)  
Sec. 62-522. - Application contents. 
Every person or his duly authorized representative applying for a permit to make a connection to a sanitary sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall file with the director of public works/city engineer an application in duplicate, signed and setting forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and official status of the authorized representative, if any. 
(3)  The character and analysis of waste proposed to be discharged. 
(4)  The volume and rate, periodic or otherwise, of discharge. 
(5)  The location of the point of discharge. 
(6)  A scale drawing or print of the plant layout showing in outline all equipment producing industrial wastes, buildings, and railroad sidings or spurs, if any. Such drawing or print shall be attached to and be a part of each copy of the application as filed. 
(7)  The applicant agrees to provide at his expense any manhole necessary for adequate sampling and measurement as referred to in section 62-395 should such sampling and measurement be deemed necessary by the director of public works/city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 27-37; Ord. No. 910, § 361)  
Sec. 62-523. - Pretreatment plans. 
(a)  If pretreatment is required to make the waste acceptable, the applicant for a permit to dispose of industrial liquid waste or industrial sewage shall be accompanied by four copies of suitable plans showing the method of collection and pretreatment proposed to be used. A permit shall not be issued until such plans or required modification thereof have been checked and approved by the director of public works/city engineer and any other affected governmental agency. 
(b)  Whenever, in the opinion of the director of public works/city engineer, special field investigation is required or when plans for construction of any industrial sewer or industrial waste pretreatment facilities must be checked and approved, the applicant shall deposit a sum estimated by the director of public works/city engineer to cover the cost of checking the plans and based on the following schedule: 
(1)  For sewage treatment plants or industrial liquid waste pretreatment plants or other facilities, the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council times the estimated number of manhours required for checking the plans and making field examinations. 
(2)  An amount equal to ten percent of the amounts in subsection (b)(1) of this section to cover indirect costs. 
(3)  In no case shall the fee be less than the amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1959, §§ 27-38, 27-39; Ord. No. 910, §§ 362, 363; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-524. - Fees. 
The fixed fee, payable in advance, for a permit to discharge any industrial waste into a sanitary sewer shall be as follows: 
(1)  For each permit for an industrial connection to a sanitary sewer, the sum as computed in section 62-399(a) through (c). 
(2)  For each special permit to discharge into a sanitary sewer any industrial waste exceeding in volume the allowed proportional amount, per section 62-503, the sum it will cost the city to expand its facilities to the nearest industrial outfall line. 
(Code 1959, § 27-40; Ord. No. 910, § 364; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-525. - Action on application. 
If, after due investigation, the director of public works/city engineer determines that the proposed wastes will be in compliance of all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, he shall so inform the applicant and furnish him a statement of the amount of charges to be levied for treating such wastes. 
(Code 1959, § 27-41; Ord. No. 910, § 365; Ord. No. 2322, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-526. - Issuance. 
The prescribed fees and deposits having been deposited in the manner provided in this subdivision, the director of public works/city engineer may issue a permit, provided that sewerage and disposal capacity are available and it has been determined that the wastes conform to the provisions of all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations and that the volume of waste that is in excess of the allowed proportional amount will not cause overloading of the disposal plant. 
(Code 1959, § 27-44; Ord. No. 910, § 368)  
Sec. 62-527. - Transferability. 
Permits issued under this subdivision are not transferable from one location to another, and discharge of wastes shall be made strictly in accordance with all provisions contained in the permit, at the location specifically designated therein. 
(Code 1959, § 27-45; Ord. No. 910, § 369)  
Secs. 62-528—62-545. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Pretreatment 
 
Sec. 62-546. - Requirements. 
The discharge of industrial wastes into a sanitary sewer shall be governed as follows: 
(1)  All wastes, however harmless, shall be reduced to a minimum in volume and strength, and fluctuations of temperature and flow shall be evened out by adequate storage before discharge. 
(2)  All wastes, when necessary, shall be pretreated by screening, sedimentation, neutralization, or other improved methods to produce a quality and character of waste that shall conform to section 62-504. 
(3)  Pretreatment of industrial wastes shall be at the source and at the expense of the agency producing such waste. 
(Code 1959, § 27-51; Ord. No. 910, § 354)  
Secs. 62-547—62-580. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SOLID WASTE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Waste management generally, Public Resources Code § 40000 et seq.; California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act, Public Resources Code § 14500 et seq.; littering, Penal Code § 374 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-581. - Definitions. 
Unless apparent from the context of a word or phrase, certain words not specifically set forth by this article shall have the meaning ascribed by Public Resources Code div. 30, pt. 1, ch. 2 (Public Resources Code § 40100 et seq.). The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
AB 939 means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code § 40000 et seq.) and implementing regulations of the state integrated waste management board (CIWMB). 
Bin and container mean those containers, whether residential, multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional, provided for temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste from all premises located within the city. Bins include, but are not limited to, solid waste containers with capacity of at least 1½ cubic yards, compactor devices and roll-off service containers. 
Bulky goods means any discarded household furniture, furnishings or appliances, including white goods; automobile parts, including tires; rock or brick in reusable form; carpets; mattresses; large branches; trunks; stumps or limbs of trees in bundles exceeding 18 inches in diameter or four feet in length; and other items of such size or weight or which preclude or may potentially complicate the handling of such material during the normal course of collection, processing or disposal of such stated material. 
CERCLA means the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 USC 9607(e). 
Commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily establishment means all premises in the city, other than residential establishments, whereby solid waste may be generated or allowed to accumulate. For the purpose of this article, the term "multifamily" refers to all residential establishments consisting of five or more units on any specified residentially zoned parcel in accordance with this Code. 
Commercial, industrial, institutional, multifamily solid waste services means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, or processing of solid waste or recyclable solid waste or green waste for commercial, industrial, or institutional or multifamily users customers, patrons, or residents. 
Compost means any product resulting from the controlled biochemical decomposition of organic wastes that are source separated from the municipal solid waste stream. Compost includes vegetable, yard, and wood wastes, which have not or are not deemed to contain hazardous material or contaminated in any way. 
Customer means and includes any person and/or member of any multifamily residential dwelling, commercial, industrial, or institutional establishment who receives the benefit of solid waste services provided by the franchisee or the city which are subject to this article. The term "customer" is also inferred to mean any person who may receive a billing statement or invoice from an authorized solid waste enterprise or franchisee for the payment of services rendered by such solid waste enterprise or franchisee. 
Customer-owned container means any container owned by the customer, other than a mechanized container, which shall have a capacity of no greater than 33 gallons and shall weigh no more than 40 pounds when filled or partially filled. 
Franchise means the right of a person to make arrangements for the collection and transportation of solid waste and recyclable material to landfills, transformation facilities, material recovery facilities or other licensed solid waste management facilities and/or the ability to extricate recyclable material from all solid waste, including recyclable solid waste and green waste, or composting material. Any franchise is subject to all of the sections set forth in this Code and/or any right held by any other solid waste enterprise which may hold rights pursuant to the Public Resources Code. 
Franchise fee means the amount payable by the franchisee to the city in accordance with the provisions established by resolution or an executed franchise agreement in consideration of the rights and privileges conferred by the franchisee under an executed franchise agreement authorized by the city council. 
Franchisee means any solid waste enterprise duly authorized under the terms and conditions of this Code to provide solid waste collection services within the city, whether such services comprise residential, commercial, industrial or institutional solid waste. 
Green waste means leaves, grass clippings, brush and branches generated from landscapes or gardens, separated from other solid waste. Green waste includes holiday trees placed out for collection by persons residing or conducting business within the city limits, but does not include tree stumps or branches or shrubbery exceeding four inches in diameter or four feet in length or weighing in excess of 40 pounds nor shall it include palm fronds and succulents. 
Hazardous waste means any waste or combination of wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious or irreversible illness or incapacity or any substance which poses a substantial hazardous threat to human health or the environment. Materials or mixture of wastes which have been defined as "hazardous substances" or "hazardous wastes" pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 USC 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 USC 96-1 et seq., as either may be amended from time to time, or any substance which may be defined by the state integrated waste management board. Should a discrepancy arise between two or more entities having jurisdiction in this matter as to the definition set forth, the definition having the more encompassing meaning of the term "hazardous waste" shall prevail. 
Material recovery facility (MRF) means any facility for which the separation of commingled recyclable materials into various components is conducted, either manually or by mechanized processes, or which extracts recyclable material from refuse for the purpose of returning that material to the economic mainstream. 
Mechanized container means any container provided to a qualified residential customer by the city for which the contents thereof are capable of being emptied by mechanical means. 
Nonseparated solid waste means that solid waste or recyclable material which has not been source separated by the customer into individual components (i.e., paper, metals, glass, plastics, inert solids and other solids). 
Person means an individual, corporation, property owner, occupant, tenant or any other entity or enterprise. 
Processing stations and facilities means those facilities utilized to receive solid wastes; to temporarily store, separate, convert, or otherwise process the materials in the solid waste; or to transfer the solid waste directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport, and those facilities utilized for transformation. 
Recyclable material means any material or commodity which is no longer useful or wanted and has the potential of being reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through processing and/or remanufacture or which is sold for compensation, traded, or given away, but which has not been discarded into the nonseparated waste stream. 
Recyclable solid waste means any recyclable material, which has been source separated before being discarded into any solid waste stream. Recyclable solid waste is a part of any waste stream which can be reused, recycled, or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture. 
Recycle means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code § 40201. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Public Resources Code § 40180. 
Recycling bin and recycling container mean any container or bin utilized for the temporary accumulation and collection of source separated recyclable solid wastes. This also includes commercial bins or any other containers designated for the collection and temporary accumulation of recyclable solid wastes. 
Residential establishment means and includes every lot in the city upon which is situated four dwelling units or less, including planned development projects, and any other parcel which has been improved with a so-called duplex or triplex residential dwelling unit designated and used as living quarters by human beings. Residential establishments do not include hotels, motels, lodge halls, clubs, tourist camps, trailer camps, churches, business and industrial establishments, or any lot containing more than four dwelling units or upon which commercial or industrial occupation is conducted. 
Roll-off service means those commercial bins or containers supplied by a solid waste enterprise for the temporary accumulation of solid waste resulting from temporary activities on any premises, such as the demolition or construction of a building. 
Scavenging means the unauthorized removal of recyclable material or any other commodity designated by the city to have recyclable properties or value by any person, individual, business, or solid waste entity other than those authorized by the city or established in accordance with this Code. 
Self-haul means the collection, transportation and disposal of residential solid waste generated by a customer's own residential establishment by such customer who is not engaged in the business of residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional solid waste collection services. 
Solid waste means all types of putrescible, offensive and nonputrescible solid and semisolid and liquid waste, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, animal carcasses, bulky goods, construction and demolition wastes; abandoned vehicles and parts thereof; discarded home and industrial appliances; dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not to be deemed to contain hazardous material or substances; manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid waste; green waste and recyclable solid waste; or any other material as defined by Public Resources Code § 40191, the state integrated waste management board, or any other entity having jurisdiction. 
Solid waste enterprise means any individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste handling or recycling services. 
Special waste means any item or element of solid waste identified in 22 CCR § 66740 or any other waste which has been classified as special waste by resolution of the city council. 
SRRE means the source reduction and recycling element, including the household hazardous waste element (HHWE), as adopted and amended by the city in conformance with AB 939. 
Transfer facilities means those facilities utilized to receive solid wastes, to temporarily store or separate the materials in the solid waste, or to transfer the solid waste directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport, and those facilities utilized for transformation 
Vehicle means any truck, trailer, or other conveyance or equipment used to collect, haul or transport solid waste, hazardous waste, recyclable material, or recyclable solid waste. 
Waste stream means any solid waste or other material which has been entered into a process whereby its ultimate disposition results in depositing it into a certified landfill or other lawfully permitted facility. 
(Code 1959, § 12-2; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-582. - Purpose. 
It is understood the collection, disposal, and/or diversion of solid waste and recyclable material generated is a matter which requires regulation by the city in such a manner as set forth in this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. Unless otherwise specified by reference, the sections set forth in this article shall be applicable to all solid waste franchises. 
(Code 1959, § 12-1; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-583. - Powers and duties of director of utility services. 
(a)  The director of utility services shall be in charge of the collection of refuse and may refuse to collect refuse when not placed in containers or in the manner provided for by this article. Whenever refuse is not collected, the director of utility services shall attach to the container or materials a tag upon which he shall indicate the reason for the refusal. 
(b)  The director of utility services shall be empowered to issue rules and regulations for the proper functioning of refuse collection, mandatory separation of recyclables, and mandatory separation of green waste materials from garbage and rubbish in the city in order to carry out the intent of this article. He shall fix the schedules in which collections of refuse shall be made and the districts within the city to which such collection schedules apply. 
(Code 1959, § 12-3; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-584. - Unlawful accumulations. 
No person owning or occupying any premises within the city shall keep or accumulate any solid waste or recyclable material which is putrid or offensive, a fire hazard or a health menace. No person owning, leasing, acting as an agent for or occupying any premises in the city shall fail, refuse, or neglect to keep such lot or parcel of land or any building situated thereon in a clean, wholesome, and sanitary condition; and no such person shall permit any accumulation of manure, garbage, offal, solid waste, stagnant water or filthy or offensive matter of any kind to be or remain upon such premises. 
(Code 1959, § 12-4; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-585. - Unlawful collection. 
No person, except the lawful solid waste enterprises, shall gather, collect, or transport solid waste or recyclable material within the city and exact charges for such services. 
(Code 1959, § 12-71; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-586. - Franchise required to collect. 
No person or solid waste enterprise, other than the city, shall engage in the collection, carrying, conveyance or transportation of any solid waste or recyclable material from or at any location within the city limits without the expressed written consent of the city council by means of a franchise granted by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-5; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part)) 
Charter reference— Franchises, § 1301 et seq.  
Sec. 62-587. - Hazardous waste inspection reports. 
As part of any new, renewed, or amended contract, franchise, or license granted by the city, the city shall require all haulers of solid waste which operate within the city's incorporated area to implement and maintain a training program that will assist the solid waste enterprise's employees to identify and properly dispose of any hazardous waste that may come into their possession and further to require each solid waste enterprise to assist in the dissemination of such information to specified multifamily, commercial, industrial, and institutional sectors of the community. Each solid waste franchise shall reject any solid waste observed to be contaminated with hazardous substances. If such substances are observed each solid waste enterprise shall notify all agencies with jurisdiction, if appropriate, of any hazardous substance present and/or released into the environment. Should a solid waste enterprise encounter any solid waste which may be contaminated, the city shall use reasonable diligence to enforce all applicable laws and regulations pertaining to the disposal of hazardous waste that may be included in waste disposed. 
(Code 1959, § 12-36; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-588. - Hazardous waste diversion records. 
Every solid waste enterprise collecting, hauling, carrying, or transporting solid waste within the city's jurisdictional boundaries shall maintain records showing the types and quantities, if any, of hazardous waste found in solid waste which was inadvertently collected from solid waste service recipients within the city, but diverted from landfilling. 
(Code 1959, § 12-37; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-589. - Hazardous materials fund. 
Should the city determine that to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the community against the dangers or potential dangers of hazardous materials, the city reserves the right to establish a hazardous materials fund. Should the enactment of such a fund become imperative, upon the enactment of a resolution of the city council establishing such a fund, the city may at the discretion and approval of the city council establish the parameters and any potential associated charges. 
(Code 1959, § 12-38; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-590. - Unlawful deposit. 
(a)  It is unlawful to deposit solid waste within or upon another person's property or to use another person's container or bin for solid waste not attributable to the property upon which placement is based pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No person shall deposit refuse upon any public street, alley, vacant lot or upon any premises within the city, public or private. 
(Code 1959, §§ 12-6, 12-72; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Littering, Penal Code § 374 et seq.  
Sec. 62-591. - Transportation of refuse over streets and sidewalks. 
No person shall transport garbage, recyclables, scrap metal, leaves, trimmings, loose paper or any refuse over city streets, sidewalks, highways, alleys, parking areas and other areas open to the public unless such refuse is: 
(1)  Covered and secured to avoid spillage on the street, sidewalk, highway, alley, parking area or other area open to the public; or 
(2)  In a fully enclosed container. 
This section shall not apply to the transport of such items for a distance less than 100 feet to a motor vehicle or refuse container for transport. 
(Code 1959, § 12-14; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4098, § 1, 3-17-2008) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Litter from vehicles, Vehicle Code § 23111 et seq.  
Sec. 62-592. - Depositing or burial of solid waste. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit or bury or cause or permit to be deposited or buried, within the city, any solid waste upon any premises, public or private, unless empowered by state and local authorities to do so. 
(Code 1959, § 12-70; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-593. - Scavenging prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall rummage through, scavenge or remove any material from any trash receptacle, trash dumpster, or other solid waste or recyclable material container which: 
(1)  Is stored on residential use private property (four or fewer dwelling units) pending collection for disposal or recycling; 
(2)  Has been placed at the adjacent curb or side of any public street for residential or household trash collection for disposal or recycling; or 
(3)  For purposes of this chapter, the term scavenging shall include entering into, accessing, or otherwise invading any trash receptacle, trash dumpster or other solid waste or recycling material container, whether or not any material, item, or property is removed. 
Such prohibition shall not extend to the owner or tenant of such property or an authorized recycling agent or a solid waste enterprise operating pursuant to an agreement with the city. 
(b)  No person shall rummage through, scavenge or remove any material from any trash receptacle, trash dumpster, or other solid waste or recyclable material container which: 
(1)  Is stored on any private property improved with a multiple-family dwelling structure (five or more dwelling units), business use structure, commercial use structure, institutional use structure, or an industrial use structure pending collection for disposal or recycling; or 
(2)  Has been placed on private property or public street or right-of-way for trash collection, disposal or recycling. 
Such prohibition shall not extend to the owner or tenant of such property or an authorized recycling agent or a solid waste enterprise validly operating in the city pursuant to this Code. 
(c)  No person shall rummage through, scavenge or remove any oversized item or material placed for special collection on any public property or on private property adjacent to the curb or side of any public street for collection for disposal or recycling by city personnel or any agent of the city for collection. 
(d)  No person shall rummage through, scavenge or remove any material from any trash receptacle, trash dumpster, or other solid waste or recyclable material container intended for public use, regardless of location. Such prohibition shall not extend to city employees acting within their employment duties or an agent of the city acting within their agency. 
(e)  Nothing in this section, or its application to any person or circumstance, is intended to extend or afford any expectation of privacy to any material placed in any receptacle, trash dumpster, or other waste or recyclable material container. 
(f)  No person shall have in his or her possession any shopping cart or other similar device which contains any materials which have been removed from a trash or recyclable receptacle in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 12-73; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4098, § 2, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 62-594. - Scattering on abutting public rights-of-way. 
It is unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow solid waste and debris to be scattered or accumulate upon the public right-of-way abutting his property. 
(Code 1959, § 12-74; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-595. - Commingling of materials; weight determinations. 
To meet the requirements of the established disposal reporting requirements, commingling of solid waste materials collected within the city with solid waste collected from outside of city is prohibited. To assist the solid waste enterprise to comply with this section as well as other sections of this article and to protect the load integrity requirements established under this section, the city shall allow for the provision of utilizing public and/or private scales for the weight determination of partial refuse loads collected solely within the city limits. For the purpose of this section, onboard vehicle scales shall be considered as an acceptable alternative for the load integrity requirements of this section, provided that such vehicle scales possess the ability to be calibrated. Onboard scales meeting the requirements of this section shall be annually calibrated to meet the manufacturer's specifications. The city reserves the right to inspect a solid waste enterprise's calibration procedures and records upon reasonable advanced notice. The city further reserves the right to inspect or cause the inspection and verification of such onboard scales and all applicable calibration standards and measures associated with such. 
(Code 1959, § 12-76; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-596—62-620. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION VEHICLES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Litter from vehicles, Vehicle Code § 23111 et seq.; solid waste collection vehicles generally, Vehicle Code §§ 27000, 5201. 
 
Sec. 62-621. - Transportation generally. 
All solid waste shall be transported by means of vehicles equipped with watertight bodies fitted with close-fitting metal covers to prevent any leakage, spillage or offensive order to emit from the contents thereof. Should any solid waste be dropped or spilled in collecting, transferring, or transporting, it shall be immediately cleaned up. Sufficient equipment to contain or clean any of the contents which may have been allowed to escape the inner body of the vehicle shall be carried on each vehicle used to transport solid waste at all times for such purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 12-61; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-622. - Standards. 
Collection vehicles used by solid waste enterprises within the city shall comply with the requirements of this division and shall conform to the highest industry standards. The city reserves the right to inspect or cause the inspection of any vehicles. 
(Code 1959, § 12-57; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-623. - Vehicle inspections. 
Biannual inspections as required by Health and Safety Code div. 26, pt. 5, ch. 5 (Health and Safety Code § 44000 et seq.) shall be required for all collection vehicles operating within the city limits for the purpose of executing the sections set forth in this article. Inspection certificates for each collection vehicle shall be filed with the city clerk. If a solid waste enterprise conducting business under the terms and conditions set forth is in full compliance with the "BIT Program," submittal of verified compliance records shall serve as sufficient compliance documentation under this section. 
(Code 1959, § 12-58; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-624. - Maintenance. 
All solid waste collection vehicles shall at all times be kept clean, in good repair and uniformly painted to the satisfaction of the city and shall comply with all measures and procedures promulgated by agencies having jurisdiction. Additionally all vehicles shall be cleaned on a regular basis. 
(Code 1959, § 12-59; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-625. - Leakage and spillage. 
Each solid waste collection vehicle shall be so constructed and utilized as to prevent any solid waste, oil, grease or other liquid from blowing, falling, or leaking out of the truck onto any public right-of-way or any residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional establishment property, whether or not the property has been established for public or private use. 
(Code 1959, § 12-60; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-626. - Identification. 
The solid waste enterprise's name and telephone number shall be printed or painted in legible letters, not less than four inches in height and four inches in width, and shall be prominently displayed on each side of the collection vehicle in a color sharply contrasting with the color of the vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 12-62; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-627. - Noise levels. 
The noise level generated by solid waste compaction vehicles utilizing compaction mechanisms shall not exceed a single-event noise level of 75 decibels (dBA) at a distance of 25 feet from the collection vehicle measured at an elevation of five feet above ground level or in accordance with article VII of chapter 18 which pertains to noise and vibration control. Each solid waste enterprise shall submit to the city, upon request, a certificate of vehicle noise level testing by an independent testing entity approved by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-63; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-628. - Audible warning device. 
Each vehicle used for the collection, hauling and disposal of solid waste shall be equipped with an audible warning device that is activated when the vehicle is backing up. 
(Code 1959, § 12-64; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-629. - Removal from service. 
Should the city at any time give notification in writing to the solid waste enterprise that any designated vehicle does not comply with the standards of this article, such vehicle shall forthwith be removed from service by the solid waste enterprise and not again so used until inspected and approved in writing by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-65; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-630. - Transfer of loads restricted. 
No solid waste enterprise shall transfer the load from one collection vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is necessary owing to mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 12-75; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-631—62-650. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Fees, Public Resources Code § 41900 et seq. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 62-651. - Scope. 
This division shall apply to residential collection of solid waste, recyclables and green waste.  
Sec. 62-652. - Disposal of hazardous materials prohibited. 
No person shall place or allow to be placed in any residential refuse container, trash bag or bundle any hazardous material or toxic substance. The presence of any hazardous material may cause the city to refuse to collect the refuse in the container, bag or bundle where the hazardous material is present. 
(Code 1959, § 12-16; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18.  
Secs. 62-653—62-670. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Rates and Charges 
 
Sec. 62-671. - Established. 
(a)  Fees for the collection of residential solid waste, recyclables, green waste; for rental of additional automated containers; and for the collection of recyclable materials shall be imposed by the city council by resolution and shall be applicable for the periods designated. 
(b)  No exemption from the residential refuse or recycling fee shall be granted unless the property has been acquired by a person and the person is renovating or rehabilitating the property. This exemption is from payment of the residential refuse and recycling fee only, and it is only given while the property is unoccupied and under renovation. Prior to receiving this exemption, the person shall have applied for and been issued a building permit for the renovations by the city. This exemption shall expire upon completion of the renovation, occupation of the property or expiration of 180 days from the date the building permit was issued, whichever occurs first. Within seven days following completion of the renovation or occupation of the property, the person shall advise the utility services department in writing, and the exemption shall become of no further effect. The person shall include in the notice the name of the occupant. Payment of the residential refuse and recycling fee shall be imposed retroactive to the date of completion or occupation of the property. 
(c)  The fee imposed for collection of refuse and recyclable materials shall be billed with the regular utility bills rendered by the utility services department where such service exists except as exempted in subsection (b) of this section. The fee imposed for rental of additional automated containers shall be billed by the customer service division of the utility services department. 
(d)  In places not served by the city water system, a separate bill shall be rendered bimonthly by the customer service division of the utility services department for refuse and recycling services rendered to premises in such areas. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, the fees and charges set forth in this section for the basic rate for residential collection and disposal of solid waste, recyclables and greenwaste shall be automatically updated annually on January 1 each year, beginning January 1, 2008, by an adjustment to the basic rate as follows: The annual adjustment shall be made by multiplying the rate and fee included in the fee resolution by the Los Angeles - Riverside - Orange County, CA Consumer Price Index (CPI) for All Urban Consumers of the preceding July and by dividing the result of such multiplication by the same price index of the July of the prior year, as reported by the CPI Detailed Report, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The result of the calculations shall be rounded to the next lower cent and added to the old rate to become the rate for the ensuing year. The new rate shall be effective on each January 1, thereafter, subject to compliance with all public noticing and hearing requirements established by applicable California state law. 
(Code 1959, § 12-7; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3914, § 1; Ord. No. 4093, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 62-672. - General sanitation fees. 
In addition to the refuse service fees, all owners or occupants of improved residential property within the city shall pay a general sanitation fee for street sweeping, street area weed abatement, neighborhood cleanup or such other service benefitting the property. This fee shall be determined by the city council by resolution and may be changed by the council by resolution to be applicable for the periods designated. Fees provided for by this section shall be collected in the same manner as fees made pursuant to section 62-671. 
(Code 1959, § 12-8; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-673. - Liability for payment. 
The person in whose name the water meter, either a water meter furnished by the city or a private meter, is registered at any premises shall be liable for and shall be billed for residential refuse collection service rendered to the premises, unless other arrangements are made by such person with the utility services director. 
(Code 1959, § 12-9; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-674. - Deposit to ensure prompt payment. 
When any person fails to remit payment within 45 days after the bill has been rendered for residential refuse service, the utility services director may require a deposit equal to four months' service fees in advance of any additional service. 
(Code 1959, § 12-10; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-675. - Sanitation enterprise fund. 
The director of finance shall establish and maintain a sanitation enterprise fund. 
(Code 1959, § 12-11; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-676. - Billing. 
The utility services director shall bill for residential refuse and recycling collection services and general sanitation fees. The department of utility services shall bill for rental of automated containers. 
(Code 1959, § 12-12; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-677. - Refunds. 
Any claims for refunds for amounts paid for residential refuse collection and general sanitation fees shall be presented in writing to the utility services director within 90 days after the payment stating reasons therefor. The decision of the director shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 12-13; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-678—62-700. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 62-701. - Applicability. 
This division applies to collection, disposal or diversion of solid waste or recyclable solid waste from multifamily residential, commercial, industrial or residential premises in the city.  
Sec. 62-702. - Responsibility for disposal. 
Each owner and/or each occupant of a commercial, multifamily, industrial, or institutional establishment shall be responsible for the disposal and/or diversion, where appropriate, of solid waste through the contractual services of a franchised solid waste enterprise that has been granted such by action of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-78; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-703. - Placement of containers. 
Under this division each container shall be placed consistent with zoning ordinance section .503-C and in a manner that is accessible to collection and does not constitute an obstruction to public areas, rights-of-way or cause or contribute to littering or a nuisance and does not conflict with an area specifically designated for collection by this article. Containers shall be constructed of metal with tight fitting lids constructed so as not to permit the contents to shift or pass through any opening therein, other than the lid of the container while depositing refuse into or collecting refuse from the container pursuant to section 62-812. Each container authorized and obtained pursuant to section 62-811 shall maintain the outside of each container, in legible letters and numerals not less than one inch in height, the name and telephone number of such business and shall at all times keep such containers in clean and sanitary conditions which conform to the highest industry standards. Each such bin shall be externally equipped with reflectorized devices within one foot of each end on all four sides of the container and shall also be equipped with reflectorized devices on the inside of each cover that that in the darkness drivers of approaching vehicles may readily see the full extent, bulk, and location of each container. 
(Code 1959, § 12-80; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4098, § 3, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 62-704. - Time and frequency of collections. 
Collection of solid waste, recyclable material, and green waste from commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily premises shall not be conducted between the hours of 7:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. in commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily zones adjacent to residential zones or any other zone with residential use. 
(Code 1959, § 12-77; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-705. - Removal of containers. 
A solid waste enterprise that has been notified by a commercial solid waste service recipient that commercial solid waste service is to be discontinued shall remove all of its commercial bins from the premises of the service recipient who is discontinuing service within one week following the receipt of notification that service is to be discontinued. Nothing contained within this section shall interfere with the lawfully executed agreement between a solid waste enterprise and its customers. 
(Code 1959, § 12-81; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-706—62-720. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Rates and Charges[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Fees, Public Resources Code § 41900 et seq. 
 
Sec. 62-721. - Establishment of maximum rates. 
Should the city council determine the granting of one or more franchises for solid waste removal shall be deemed necessary to protect the health, safety, and well-being of those persons and businesses located within the lawfully established borders of the city, the city council may establish by resolution the maximum rates to be charged for such collections. 
(Code 1959, § 12-79; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-722. - Billing and collection. 
Rates enacted under this subdivision or by resolution of the city council for the purpose of solid waste collection shall be billed and collected in advance of collection service and may be presented or mailed for periods of one month, two months, or three months in advance. Under no circumstance shall the billing period exceed 90 days or one quarter of the calendar year. Each owner/occupant shall be liable for the collection charge, whether or not collection services are utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 12-53; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-723. - Refund of payment. 
As the city under this article possesses no liability or responsibility for the billing, collection, or servicing of any commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily premises or establishment within the city, any refund associated with any multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional establishment shall be the sole responsibility of the solid waste enterprise operating under the lawful issuance of a franchise agreement to refund any solid waste collection fees or any portion thereof as established and paid in accordance with this subdivision. 
(Code 1959, § 12-54; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-724. - Transfer of delinquent debt to the city. 
(a)  The city council may, by resolution adopted by a majority of its members then present, authorize the transfer of debt from a solid waste franchise to the city, according to the following procedures and requirements: 
(1)  The city council shall fix a time, date and place for a public hearing on transferring debt, and for hearing any objections or protests thereto. 
(2)  The city council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the person responsible for the debt, and to the owners of property by which the debt was incurred, not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of persons responsible for the debt or the owners of the property by which the debt was incurred. 
(4)  Following the hearing, the city may, by resolution, authorize transfer of the debt, or of any portion thereof, provided that the following findings are made and are supported by the evidence: 
a.  The debt has been incurred by a solid waste franchise awarded pursuant to this article; 
b.  The debt arises from delinquent fees for solid waste service provided by the franchisee; 
c.  The debt has been invoiced, and satisfactory attempts to collect the debt have been made, by the franchisee not less than ninety days prior to public hearing on transfer to the city. Satisfactory attempts to collect debt include mailing invoices to the person responsible for the debt, or the owners of property by which the debt was incurred, no less than once every 30 days after providing the service, mailing collection letters for the debt to such person no less than 60 days after providing the service, and making at least one collection telephone call for the debt to such person no less than 75 days after providing the service; 
d.  The amount of debt, the time-period of solid waste service relating to the debt, the customer or person from whom the debt arises, the property by which the debt was incurred, and satisfactory attempts to collect the debt have been identified, substantiated, and verified by written documentation produced by franchisee; 
e.  Assumption of the debt by the city will further an articuable public purpose. 
(5)  Following the hearing, the city council may make such revisions or corrections to the amount of debt to be transferred, and the details relating thereto, as it deems just, which shall be identified in any resolution adopted by the city council. 
(6)  All findings related to transfer of debt pursuant to this section shall be identified in a resolution adopted by the city council and supported by the evidence. Such resolution shall indicate the respective parcels of property (as they appear on the current assessment roll) from which the debt arose. 
(b)  Any debt transferred to the city pursuant to this section may be collected and returned to the solid waste franchise pursuant to section 62-725. The city shall not make any reimbursement, refund, or compensation to any franchisee from which debt has been transferred, except as provided in section 62-725. 
(c)  Transfer of debt pursuant to this section shall be at the discretion of the city council and shall not establish any right on the part of a solid waste franchise or other person to transfer debt to the city or to receive reimbursement, refund, or compensation therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 3999, § 1(12-54.1), 1-12-2004)  
Sec. 62-725. - Collection of transferred debt; refund to franchisee. 
The city may collect any debt transferred pursuant to section 62-724 according to the following procedures: 
(1)  Any resolution to transfer debt shall serve as a special assessment against the property by which the debt was incurred, and shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such debt, plus administrative costs. 
(2)  The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. 
(3)  Upon the city's collection of debt, whether by lien foreclosure or assessment collection, or otherwise, the city shall refund to the solid waste franchise the collected funds, less city's administrative costs incurred in the collection. 
(Ord. No. 3999, § 1(12-54.2), 1-12-2004)  
Sec. 62-726. - Failure or refusal to pay solid waste franchise debt; infraction, misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person who has been properly billed by a solid waste franchisee for solid waste collection services provided pursuant to this article, and who intentionally or recklessly refuses to pay for such services, shall be guilty of an infraction for the first offense, and a misdemeanor for each subsequent offense. Each bill not so paid shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Each infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.00. Infraction violations under this section may be enforced by any city officer or employee duly authorized to enforce infraction violations, or by the city attorney or the county district attorney, or by any other department or office with appropriate authority and jurisdiction. 
(c)  Each misdemeanor shall be punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Misdemeanor violations under this section may be enforced by the city attorney, the city prosecutor or district attorney, or by any other department or office with appropriate legal authority and jurisdiction. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the application or enforcement of other laws relating to collection of debts, public nuisances, or of any other matter. 
(Ord. No. 3999, § 1(12-54.3), 1-12-2004)  
Secs. 62-727—62-740. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Franchises[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, § 1301 et seq. 
 
Sec. 62-741. - Required. 
No company shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, carrying, dumping or depositing any solid waste upon any property located within the city pursuant to this division without first having obtained a franchise agreement pursuant to authorization of the city council. However, this section shall not apply to any company representative in the employ of the city who may be assigned, either in the conduct of regular business or as may be assigned from time to time, in the collection, removal, disposal, or depositing of solid waste of or to any company with whom the city is contracting for the collection, removal, disposal, or dumping of such waste or any employee of such contractor during such time as the contract shall remain in force. Should the city council determine that such a franchise warrants issuance, such franchise shall be conditional upon the compliance with all of the requirements and regulations established with respect to collection, removal, disposal, or dumping of any solid waste. 
(Code 1959, § 12-56; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-742. - Awarding. 
The city council may award one or more franchises for the collection and disposal and/or diversion of solid waste or recyclable solid waste from all or any portion of the multifamily residential, commercial, industrial or institutional premises in the city. All franchises shall be granted in accordance with such terms and conditions as established by the city council and at its sole discretion. Each franchise awarded pursuant to the terms and conditions of this subdivision shall remain in effect for two years, provided the solid waste franchise remains in compliance with the requirements established within the context of this Code and its executed franchise agreement with the city. The effective dates for any franchise granted or extended after the two-year timeframe shall be at the sole discretion of the city council and/or the provisions set forth in an executed franchise agreement. Should a solid waste franchisee, upon the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, possess an executed franchise agreement with the city, nothing contained within this section shall limit or otherwise alter the term of services provisions established in the executed franchise agreement. 
(Code 1959, § 12-21; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-743. - Nonassignability. 
No franchise granted pursuant to this subdivision shall be entitled to be assigned, transferred, conveyed, sublet, or to otherwise dispose of any right, liability or interest to another solid waste enterprise without first having obtained the written consent of the city council, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Code 1959, § 12-22; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-744. - Annual performance review of services. 
(a)  It shall be at the sole discretion of the city to conduct public hearings to determine: 
(1)  The quality of performance and service rendered by any franchise authorized to collect, transport, or dispose of solid waste; or 
(2)  Any and all diversion activity, quantity, and/or related services relative to the collection, transportation, transformation, or ultimate disposition of solid waste or recyclable material. 
(b)  Any franchisee who has been noticed of the review of its services shall have the right to participate in the public hearings, as well as provide testimony, which may refute any and all claims that may have been made. Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the city, at its discretion, may issue a report as to the adequacy of the performance and the quality of services provided by the stated franchise. Should the city direct the franchisee take measures to correct any operational deficiencies found, such deficiencies shall be corrected within 30 days from the date of notice or a period to be established by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-23; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-745. - Review of handling systems and services. 
It shall be at the sole discretion of the city to perform a review of solid waste handling services provided by the franchisee. The purpose of the stated review shall be to promote greater efficiency of services rendered by the franchisee. The city reserves the right to conduct a review of relevant technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the collection, recycling, composting, and disposal of any solid waste generated within the city limits. The city further reserves the right to examine the feasibility of new services resulting from a change in technology, processing, developments in the law, or other regulatory changes to either one or more of any existing service or any which may be proposed in the future. It shall be at the discretion of the city and the franchisee to include additional topics for consideration during the review of systems or services provided in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 12-24; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-746. - Requirements. 
(a)  Franchises granted pursuant to this subdivision shall be required at a minimum to provide compliance with the following: 
(1)  Each franchisee shall comply with this article and any and all other applicable sections of this Code; the Public Resources Code; or any other local, state, or federal code having jurisdiction. Additionally, each franchisee shall be required to maintain compliance with that jurisdictional information either contained and/or compiled in accordance with this article or any such compilation or accumulation of informational material. 
(2)  Each franchisee shall be required to cooperate with the city in solid waste generation studies or sitting elements, the preparation of waste stream audits, and the submission of information required by the city to meet the reporting requirements of AB 939 or other applicable legislation, as may be amended from time to time, and to implement measures consistent with the city's source reduction and recycling element (SRRE) and household hazardous waste element (HHWE) in order for the city to reach the mandated diversion and other goals as established by AB 939, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Each franchisee shall be required to pay a franchise fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(4)  Each franchise shall not be transferred, sold, sublet or assigned, nor shall any of the rights or privileges contained therein be leased, assigned, sold in whole or in part, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, either by act of the franchisee or otherwise, unless authorization for such transfer, sale, subletting or assignment is obtained and approved in writing from the city council. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, any person or solid waste enterprise may collect solid waste or recyclable material within the city limits without having first obtained a franchise if that person meets one of the following requirements: 
(1)  Has the right to continue providing services in accordance with and pursuant to Public Resources Code div. 30, pt. 8, ch. 6, art. 3 (Public Resources Code § 49520 et seq.) and complies with all other applicable provisions of law. 
(2)  Is an officer, employee or agent of the city acting or conducting services in the course of official duty. 
(3)  Is disposing of green waste or composting material in accordance with city-authorized, sponsored programs or other programs generally accepted by the appropriate jurisdictional agency as a bona fide green waste or composting program in the course of his regular business activities as authorized by the city so long as the person is the holder of a valid city business license or permit as a gardener, landscape contractor or tree trimmer/remover or other activity or enterprise who, in the course of regular business, may be required to provide for the distribution of such material. 
(Code 1959, § 12-25; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-747. - Timeframe to obtain franchise authorization. 
Any person or solid waste enterprise who is conducting business under an existing license or permit issued by the city pursuant to article VIII of chapter 50 shall be required by this section to obtain a franchise with the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-26; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-748. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Under this subdivision each franchisee shall maintain the following minimum insurance coverages: 
(1)  Workers' compensation insurance. As required by Labor Code § 1860, each franchisee shall secure payment of workers' compensation to his employees in accordance with Labor Code § 3700. Each franchisee shall supply to the city the certificate required by Labor Code § 1861. 
(2)  General liability insurance. Each franchisee shall procure and maintain public liability and property damage insurance with the following coverages and minimum coverage limits: 
a.  General aggregate, $5,000,000.00. 
b.  Products and completed operations aggregate, $5,000,000.00. 
c.  Per occurrence minimum limit, $1,000,000.00. 
d.  Personal injury and advertising injury, $1,000,000.00. 
e.  Fire damage, $50,000.00. 
f.  Medical expense for any one person, $5,000.00. 
(3)  Automobile liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. 
(b)  Each franchisee shall require its insurance carrier to issue an additional insured endorsement which names, as additional insureds, the city and its elected and appointed officials, directors, officers, agents, employees, representatives, volunteers, and contractors. 
(c)  The general liability and automobile liability policies required in this section are to contain or be endorsed to contain assurances that the insurance coverage shall be primary over any other valid and collectible insurance available to the city. Any insurance maintained by the city shall be in excess of the franchisee's insurance and shall not contribute with it. Coverage shall not be suspended, voided, or canceled except after 30 days' prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, given to the city. 
(d)  Insurance is to be placed with insurers, which are state-admitted (licensed) companies, approved by the state department of insurance and which have a current A.M. Best's rating of no less than A-VIII. 
(e)  Prior to commencing or conducting business within the city, the franchisee shall file with the city clerk original endorsements effecting the liability coverage required by this section. In addition, the city shall have the right of inspection of all insurance policies required. This subsection shall survive the expiration of the period during which collection services are provided. 
(Code 1959, § 12-27; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3889, § 1)  
Sec. 62-749. - Performance bond. 
The city may require all persons granted a franchise under this subdivision to obtain a performance bond. Such bond shall be supplied to the city and maintained on file and in effect by either a cashier's check or certified check or surety bond executed by a recognized company or on a time certificate of deposit in the amount to be established by resolution of the city council and in the favor of the city, guaranteeing that the franchisee will fulfill all of the applicable sections set forth in this Code for the entire time for which services are to be provided. 
(Code 1959, § 12-28; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-750. - Indemnification of city. 
Each franchisee under this subdivision shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and agents from and against any and all losses, fines, penalties, claims, damages, liabilities or judgments, including attorney's fees, arising out of or resulting in any way from the franchisee's conduct of business in the city or with respects to any operations or actions relating in any way to the city's granting of the franchise, unless such a claim against the city is due to the sole and total negligence or willful misconduct of the city or its elected officials, officers, agents, employees or volunteers. For the purpose of this section the term "agents" shall not be inclusive of any franchise, franchisee, or solid waste enterprise acting on behalf of the city by way of franchise, contract or other authorization for the collection and disposal of solid waste and/or recyclable material within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-29; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-751. - CERCLA indemnification. 
(a)  Each franchisee under this subdivision shall be required to obtain a letter of credit, in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council, and shall issue such documents to the city prior to the granting of a franchise agreement. Under the provisions established by this article and the executed franchise agreement, the franchisee's limit of liability shall be limited to the extent contained in the specified letter of credit and/or the indemnification fund established pursuant to this subdivision and the amount or proportion of the franchisee's individual waste stream. If a franchisee can establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that it has not ever deposited solid waste, recyclable solid waste, or other material at a particular solid waste landfill or solid waste facility, that franchisee's letter of credit and/or indemnification fund contribution shall not be used to defend or indemnify the city for any potential or actual liability arising from such landfill or solid waste facility. A franchisee shall establish its nonuse of a particular landfill or solid waste facility either through its own records or the records of the landfill or solid waste facility. 
(b)  Nothing contained within the context of this section or this article shall prevent, limit, or otherwise alter the city's alternatives to the extent allowable by law. Such letters shall be in the amount determined by resolution and shall be utilized for the purpose of indemnification of the city should any potential liabilities arise which may be associated CERCLA claims or other applicable associated costs to the city. Under the provisions established by this article, letters of credit provided pursuant to this section will be reduced and/or discontinued upon achieving the predetermined balances for the CERCLA defense fund as established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  It shall be at the discretion of the city to require each solid waste enterprise to pay into a CERCLA indemnification fund to assist in defending the city against CERCLA liability. If so directed, the funds exacted for CERCLA indemnification shall be set by resolution of the city council. Such funds shall be deposited into a CERCLA indemnification fund in accordance with section 62-760. The director of finance is authorized under this article to establish the appropriate accounting procedures in accordance with this article. Funds deposited into this special fund, together with any accrued interest thereon, shall be used and applied to protect and indemnify the city against any claims which may arise. Funds deposited under this section shall remain with the city during the entire period for which liabilities may be incurred. 
(Code 1959, § 12-30; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-752. - CERCLA defense records. 
Each franchisee under this subdivision shall maintain data retention and preservation systems which can establish where solid waste collected in the city was disposed with a copy or summary of the reports required by this article for 50 years after the term during which collection services are provided or to provide copies of such records to the city upon request. Should the franchisee decide not to retain such information at its primary place of business, it may, with approval from the city, place such information in the safe custody of a bona fide records firm approved by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-31; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-753. - AB 939 indemnification. 
Each franchisee under this subdivision shall exercise good faith efforts in meeting the requirements of city's source reduction and recycling element with respect to the solid waste it collects within the city, including but not limited to compliance with the requirements set forth in the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code § 40000 et seq.), any and all source reduction programs including recycling, composting, special waste, education and public information programs. Should a solid waste enterprise fail to sufficiently comply with the established good faith effort provisions of this section in meeting the requirements of AB 939, it shall be at the discretion of the city council, upon just and reasonable cause, to require each solid waste enterprise to protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless, under the provisions specified in this article, the city and its officers, agents, or employees against all fines or penalties imposed by the state integrated waste management board if: (i) the diversion, source reduction and recycling goals of AB 939 or other applicable legislation are not met by the city with respect to the solid waste enterprise's waste stream or (ii) the solid waste enterprise has delayed in providing information preventing the city from submitting reports required by AB 939 or other applicable legislation in a timely manner. The city shall require, as a condition to issuance of a franchise or business license, that the solid waste enterprise sign and deliver to the city an agreement, on a form approved by the city attorney, to effectuate the indemnification provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 12-32; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-754. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Under this subdivision each franchisee shall be required, at the discretion of the city, to submit monthly, quarterly, and annual reports containing information relative to collection and disposal tonnage of solid waste or recyclable material collected and/or disposed of within the city limits, customer participation rates, and other information as may be reasonably required by the city to determine the effectiveness of services provided, effectiveness of city- and/or hauler-sponsored programs, as well as current collection and disposal tonnages within the city. Such records shall be submitted in a format approved by the city with the affixed signature of a duly authorized signature company representative. Such reports shall be submitted to the city within the following timeframes: 
(1)  Draft reports shall be submitted to the city within 15 calendar days after the close of the established reporting period. 
(2)  Final reports with executed affixed signatures shall be submitted within 45 calendar days after the closing of the established reporting period. 
(b)  Each franchisee shall maintain all records relating to the services provided for in this article for the full term during which collection services are provided. The city shall have the right, upon reasonable advance notice, to inspect or audit records which may be relevant to operations within the city or relating to the imposition of any fees which may be imposed by the city. Such records shall be made available to the city at the solid waste enterprise's regular place of business. Should an inspection or audit of a franchisee result in the obtaining of proprietary information between the franchisee and the city, any exchange of information between the city and a franchisee shall be considered to be proprietary between the city and the individual franchisee and of the utmost confidential nature to the extent allowable by law. 
(Code 1959, § 12-33; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-755. - Customer service reports. 
In addition to reports required by other sections of this article, each franchisee shall be required to maintain a customer inquiry register of all complaints and/or inquiries made by any individual, group, business, or other entity, as may be relative to any and all operations, customer service, or performance-related issues by the individual franchisee. Each franchisee shall also submit to the city such other information or reports in such forms and at such times as the city may reasonably request or require. 
(Code 1959, § 12-34; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-756. - Source reduction and recycling plan (SRRP). 
Each solid waste franchisee shall be required to submit an annual source reduction and recycling plan SRRP that is exclusive to the city. The SRRP must include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Targeted materials, including special wastes for source reduction, recycling and composting; 
(2)  Hazardous waste exclusion plan; 
(3)  Diversion methods; 
(4)  Reporting methodology; 
(5)  Contingency plans; and 
(6)  Methods for the handling of white goods including CFC removal, PCB removal, and compliance with the requirements of Public Resources Code div. 30, pt. 3, ch. 3.5 (Public Resources Code § 42160 et seq.). 
(Code 1959, § 12-35; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-757. - Certification. 
Upon the granting of a franchise under this subdivision, the franchisee shall certify in writing to the city that it is currently in full compliance with all applicable sections contained within this Code. All reports required shall be signed under penalty of perjury, by a responsible corporate official, that the report is true and correct. 
(Code 1959, § 12-39; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-758. - Cooperation with city. 
Under this subdivision each franchisee shall cooperate with the city and or designated consultants in solid waste disposal characterization studies and waste stream audits and shall implement measures adequate to achieve the city's source reduction, recycling and waste stream diversion goals for the solid waste stream. Each franchisee, at its own expense, shall submit to the city information and reports necessary for the city to meet its reporting obligations imposed by AB 939 and/or other legislation and the regulations implementing AB 939 and/or other legislation. 
(Code 1959, § 12-44; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-759. - Compliance. 
Each franchisee under this subdivision shall comply at a minimum with this article as well as those sections set forth in other applicable chapters and sections of this Code or the Public Resources Code. Additionally, each franchisee shall be required to maintain compliance with that information which is either contained and/or compiled in accordance with this article or any such compilation or accumulation of informational material. 
(Code 1959, § 12-45; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-760. - Fees. 
(a)  Franchise fees. The solid waste franchisee shall be required to pay a franchise fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the council. Any and all such fees shall be paid at the conclusion of each quarter on or before the 25th of each month following the end of each quarter or in accordance with the provisions established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  AB 939 fee. The franchisee shall be required to pay an AB 939 fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. A special fund shall be established and known as the AB 939 cost recovery special fund. Funds deposited into this special fund shall be used and applied to pay for costs associated with the preparation, adoption, and implementation of the city SRRE. Any and all such fees shall be paid at the conclusion of each quarter on or before the last day of each month following the end of each quarter or in accordance with the provisions established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  CERCLA indemnification fund. If so established in accordance with section 62-751 which pertains to CERCLA indemnification, the franchisee shall be required to pay into a CERCLA indemnification fund an amount to be established by resolution of the city council. Funds deposited within this special fund shall be utilized in the prescribed manner set forth in this article. 
(d)  City cleanup fund. The franchisee shall pay such consideration as established by resolution of the city council or by a lawfully executed franchise agreement authorized by the city council, which the city may use for and apply to certain community public right-of-way cleanup activities as designated annually by the city council for city cleanup activities. The due date of such payment shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-46; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-761. - Licensing. 
Each franchisee exercising rights under this subdivision, in addition to obtaining a franchise from the city, shall possess a current city business license and shall display a current city-issued decal on the rear of each collection vehicle operating within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-47; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-762. - Revocation or suspension. 
Any franchise issued under this subdivision is subject to revocation or suspension for cause. Should a franchisee be found in noncompliance with any applicable section of this article, the franchisee shall be subject to immediate disciplinary action up to and including suspension or termination of the franchise. Should the utility services director determine that there is sufficient reason to authorize the suspension or revocation of a franchise, the director shall revoke or suspend the franchise by issuing a written order to the franchisee clearly stating the reasons for such suspension or revocation and the date on which such suspension or revocation shall become effective. 
(Code 1959, § 12-48; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-763. - Compliance verification. 
Unless the franchisee supplies sufficient verification as to the correction of the deficiency stated pursuant to section 62-762 to the city within 15 days of the written order, the franchise may be revoked or suspended by the city within 15 days after the mailing of such order. The order shall be mailed by certified mail to the solid waste enterprise. 
(Code 1959, § 12-49; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-764. - Timeframe after revocation. 
Should a franchise issued to a solid waste enterprise be revoked, such solid waste enterprise shall not be issued a franchise to collect solid waste within the city until such time as the solid waste enterprise is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the solid waste enterprise is able to fully comply with all of the sections of this article and the Public Resources Code. 
(Code 1959, § 12-50; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-765. - Rights for suspension or revocation. 
The rights of a solid waste enterprise pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked by the city pursuant to section 62-762. 
(Code 1959, § 12-51; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-766. - Appeal of revocation or suspension. 
Should any franchise be revoked or suspended in accordance with this subdivision or any other section set forth in this article or applicable legislation, the solid waste enterprise shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city manager. The request must be in the form of a written request made within 15 calendar days of the effective date of the suspension or revocation. Such requests must be filed directly with the city manager by way of certified mail or personal delivery. The decision of the city manager shall be appealable to the city council only if an appeal is filed with the city clerk within 15 days of the city manager's decision. Nothing contained within the context of this section shall prevent any person or solid waste enterprise from pursuing remedies to the extent allowable by law. 
(Code 1959, § 12-52; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-767—62-780. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Recycling[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Recycling, Public Resources Code § 41000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 62-781. - Recycling services required. 
Every solid waste franchise shall be required to offer recycling services to all multifamily, commercial, industrial and institutional establishments as well as other entities throughout the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-40; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-782. - Ownership of recyclable solid waste. 
Upon placement by the owner of recyclable solid waste at a designated recycling collection location or placement of recyclable solid waste in a container provided by an authorized recycling agent for the collection of recyclable solid waste, the recyclable solid waste shall become the property of the authorized recycling agent upon the transfer of such material into the vehicle operated by an authorized recycling agent or by operation of law. If a solid waste enterprise is authorized by franchise to provide services related to solid waste and recyclable material, sole ownership of stated materials shall remain with the authorized solid waste enterprise providing such service. At no time shall the city obtain any right of ownership or possession of any residential solid waste, green waste, or recyclable material which is placed out for collection by any customer for collection by an authorized residential enterprise operating under a franchise agreement. 
(Code 1959, § 12-41; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-783. - Educational materials related to recyclable materials and recycling programs. 
It shall be the responsibility of the solid waste franchisee to provide materials sufficient to educate its customers as to the recycling services provided by such franchisee as well as any materials which the city may require to meet necessary educational requirements as well as any information which may assist the city in meeting the requirements of AB 939 or other applicable legislation as may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1959, § 12-42; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-784. - Performance schedule. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions set forth in AB 939, as may be amended from time to time, each solid waste franchisee must put forth a good faith effort in complying with the following performance schedule to ensure that the city meets the mandated diversion requirements as established with respect to the franchisees operational waste stream within the city. Diversion percentages shall have a goal as provided in Public Resources Code § 42901. 
(b)  Should a franchisee encounter circumstances whereby a commercial, industrial, or institutional establishment is engaged in the process of recycling, either individually or as a group or with another franchised solid waste enterprise or recycling company, in lieu of the services provided by the franchisee, upon sufficient verification of such implemented programs, diversion rates for these programs may be credited towards the diversion performance of the franchisee. 
(c)  The city reserves the right under this section to establish diversion requirements at any time to ensure the city possesses the ability to comply with all applicable legislation. 
(Code 1959, § 12-43; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-785. - Mandatory commercial recycling. 
(a)  Purpose . Pursuant to Public Resources Code § 42649, the purpose of mandatory commercial recycling is to preserve local landfill space and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by diverting commercial solid waste to recycling efforts and to expand the opportunity for additional recycling services in Pomona. 
(b)  On and after July 1, 2012, a business shall take at least one of the following actions in order to reuse, recycle, compost, or otherwise divert commercial solid waste from disposal: 
(1)  Source separating recyclable and/or compostable materials from the solid waste they are discarding and either self-hauling, subscribing to a hauler, and/or otherwise arranging for the pickup of recyclable and/or compostable materials separately from the solid waste to divert them from disposal. 
(2)  Subscribing to a recycling service that may include mixed waste processing that yields diversion results comparable to source separation. 
(3)  To comply with this section, property owners of commercial or multifamily complexes may require tenants to source separate their recyclable materials. Tenants must source separate their recyclable materials if required to by property owners of commercial or multifamily complexes. 
(4)  Subscribing for the removal and transportation of solid waste to a waste-to-energy facility. Commercial solid waste franchisees must obtain written consent from the city manager or designee to establish this option. 
(c)  The commercial recycling program shall include education and outreach to businesses and public agencies. The city manager or designee shall determine the types of educational and outreach programs to insure that the program targets the components of the city's waste stream. 
(d)  The commercial recycling program shall include identification and monitoring of businesses to assess if they are complying with this section. If any businesses are not in compliance, the commercial solid waste franchisee shall notify those businesses that are out of compliance. 
(e)  The city manager or designee may determine the specific material types included in its commercial recycling program, which could include, but are not limited to, paper (including cardboard), plastics, glass, metals, organics, food waste, and non-hazardous construction and demolition. 
(f)  A business may be granted an exemption as deemed appropriate by the city manager or designee. Appropriate exemptions include, but are not limited to, zoning requirements, lack of sufficient space in multifamily complexes to provide additional recycling bins, lack of markets, non-generation of recyclable materials, or current implementation by a business of actions that result in recycling of a significant portion of its commercial waste. 
(g)  Costs for services imposed on commercial establishments pursuant to Public Resources Code § 42649, shall be established by commercial solid waste franchise haulers. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 4-2-2012)  
Secs. 62-786—62-810. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CONTAINERS 
 
Sec. 62-811. - Required. 
Every person occupying, leasing, owning, managing, or in possession of any multifamily, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment or premises within the city shall provide sufficient portable containers or trash bins for solid waste to accommodate the amount of solid waste generated by that particular establishment. The term "sufficient portable containers or trash bins" means the number of bins necessary to ensure that all solid waste will be stored in the bins and that the bins will not overflow assuming a regular collection schedule as defined by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-66; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-812. - Securing of lids. 
(a)  All solid waste containers or bins left outdoors, whether residential, industrial, institutional, multifamily, or commercial, shall be stored with the lid closed or otherwise securely fastened to reduce pests, unlawful disposal and/or scavenging and to exclude rain. The containers and lids shall be maintained so that no solid waste material placed therein shall be permitted to escape from the container until the container is being emptied into a refuse collection vehicle and/or by a person authorized to do so. 
(b)  Each container required under section 62-811 located in the downtown specific plan area or any bin utilized by any industrial, institutional, multifamily, work/live units or commercial establishment within the downtown specific plan area for refuse collection and disposal by a waste hauler shall be: 
(1)  Stored in a fully enclosed structure, constructed of masonry block or concrete and designed to be architecturally compatible with the buildings on the site, the only entry to which shall be by means of a self-closing door with a locking device integral to the self-closing door; or 
(2)  Equipped with an operational self-closing locking device integral to the container lid to prevent unlawful and unauthorized operation, disposal and scavenging for refuse and recyclables; or 
(3)  Securely fastened by a padlock or similar locking device to prevent unlawful and unauthorized operation, disposal and scavenging for refuse and recyclables. 
Each such padlock or locking device shall be under the exclusive control of the person placing materials therein, and shall remain locked at all times except during the time of placing materials therein or until the container is being emptied into a refuse collection vehicle and/or by a person authorized to do so. 
(c)  Nothing in subsection (b) is intended to preclude persons or businesses in the downtown specific plan area from installing trash compactors, or entering into agreements with other persons or businesses to install trash compactors in the downtown specific plan area. Subsection (b) shall not apply to properties in the downtown specific plan area with trash compactors, provided that the storage of the compactor and all trash shall be kept within a building or structure and that the type and amount of trash does not create a public nuisance. 
(d)  Any container subject to this section located within the downtown specific plan area shall clearly and visibly identify on the exterior of the container all addresses of all businesses and/or tenants which are served by the container in legible letters and numerals not less than one inch in height. 
(e)  Any person not in compliance with this section within 60 calendar days from notice of its enactment will be in violation of this section. 
(f)  Each person and/or business sharing a container(s) are subject to the provisions of this section. Each person and business using a container has the shared duty to insure that the container lid is secured and locked as required by this section. 
(Code 1959, § 12-67; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4098, § 4, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 62-813. - Placement on city streets. 
Solid waste containers or bins will not be stored upon city streets. When dumping operations are conducted on city streets, bins or containers will be allowed on the street, provided that such containers are located directly adjacent to the parkway curbing or the like, and shall remain in such a location for a maximum period of 24 hours during dumping operations. Bins or containers will not be allowed on city streets during posted street sweeping, parking, or other restricted periods. All containers shall meet the requirements as established in sections 62-811 and 62-812. 
(Code 1959, § 12-68; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3955, § 6, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 62-814. - Tampering. 
No person, other than the owner thereof or his agents or employees or an officer or employee of the city or solid waste enterprise, shall tamper or meddle with any container or the contents thereof or remove the contents of the container or remove the container from the location where the container shall have been placed by the owner thereof or his agent. 
(Code 1959, § 12-69; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-815. - Use of city bins. 
No person shall deposit any refuse in a city-owned or city-controlled refuse bin containers without the permission of the city. Such permission may be given by the posting of a notice on the bin setting forth the city rules and regulations concerning the use of the bin by the public. 
(Code 1959, § 12-15; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Secs. 62-816—62-840. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DISPOSAL FACILITIES, TRANSFER STATIONS AND SIMILAR FACILITIES[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— For reference to "Medical Waste Facilities," please see Chapter 62, Article VI, Division 8. 
 
Subdivision I. - Facilities 
 
Sec. 62-841. - Disposal. 
All solid waste collected within the city shall be disposed of at a site legally empowered to accept such material for disposal and/or diversion. 
(Code 1959, § 12-55; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-842. - Management facilities. 
No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management facility, including, but not limited to, a materials recovery facility, solid waste transfer or processing station, composting facility, a buyback or dropoff center, disposal facility, intermodal facility, or recycling center without first satisfying all city requirements for land use, environmental and other approvals as well as those governing provisions of the Public Resources Code as may be amended. 
(Code 1959, § 12-103; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-843. - Transfer or processing stations and recovery facilities. 
No person shall operate a transfer or processing station, landfill, materials recovery facility, intermodal facility, or any other facility covered under the provisions of the Public Resources Code §§ 40100—44017, 44150 and 44100 or any other applicable sections of the Public Resources Code relative to such operations, including those sections specified in Public Resources Code div. 31 (Public Resources Code § 50000 et seq.), from or at any location within the city, unless such person is authorized to do so by the granting of a franchise or contract by the city council or the city prior to the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1959, § 12-100; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 9-22-2008)  
Subdivision II. - Franchise Requirements 
 
Sec. 62-844. - Award of franchise; franchise required; time frame; nonassignability. 
The city council may award one or more franchises, for the operation of a transfer or processing station, materials recovery facility, or other facility covered under the provisions of the Public Resources Code. No company shall engage in the business of operating a transfer or processing station, landfill, materials recovery facility or any other facility covered under section 62-843 within the city pursuant to this division without first having obtained a franchise agreement pursuant to authorization of the city council. However, this division shall not apply to any such facility owned by the city and/or operated by the city. Should the city council determine that a franchise warrants issuance, such franchise shall be conditional upon the compliance with all of the requirements and regulations established with respect to collection, removal, disposal, or dumping of any solid waste. All franchises shall be granted in accordance with such terms and conditions as established by the city council and at its sole discretion. Each franchise awarded pursuant to the terms and conditions of this subdivision shall remain in effect for such period of time approved by the city council, provided the franchisee remains in compliance with the requirements established within the context of this Code and its executed franchise agreement with the city. The effective dates for any franchise granted or extended to an existing franchisee after the initial timeframe shall be at the sole discretion of the city council and/or the provisions set forth in an executed franchise agreement. Nothwithstanding anything in this article VI or division 6 as they now exist or as they may be amended in the future, any existing agreement or lease for a transfer station or similar facility approved by the city council on or before September, 2008, including any franchise pursuant to such agreement or lease, shall be governed only by the provisions of such agreement or lease, as previously approved by the city council, and as amended in future from time to time, not by the provisions of this article or division. No franchise granted pursuant to this subdivision shall be entitled to be assigned, transferred, conveyed, sublet, or to otherwise dispose of any right, liability or interest to another solid waste enterprise without first having obtained the written consent of the city council, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Code 1959, § 12-100; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-845. - Facility requirements and conditional use permit. 
All facilities subject to this article shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 12-102; Ord. No. 3884, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 62-846. - Definitions. 
Unless apparent from the context of a word or phrase, certain words not specifically set forth by this article shall have the meaning ascribed by Public Resources Code div. 30, pt. 1, ch. 2 (Public Resources Code § 40100 et seq.). The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
AB 939 means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code § 40000 et seq.) and implementing regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board (CIWMB). 
Applicable law means all laws, regulations, codes, rules, orders, judgments, decrees, permits, approvals, or other requirements of any governmental agency having jurisdiction over the processing or transfer of solid waste that are in force on the effective date and as they may be enacted, issued or amended during the term of the agreement. 
Bio-solids mean residual solids, semi-solids, or sludge from the treatment of water, wastewater, and other liquids. 
CERCLA means the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 USC 9607(e). 
CIWMB shall mean the California Integrated Waste Management Board. 
City means the City of Pomona, a Charter City, and all the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the city as presently existing or as such boundaries may be modified during the term of this agreement. 
City manager means the chief executive officer of the City of Pomona, or designee. 
Commercial waste collector means any person regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste handling or recycling services. 
Complaint log means the written record of complaints received by the operator regarding the facility and its operations. Each entry in the complaint log includes the date, time, name and contact information of the individual making the complaint, the nature of the complaint, how the issue was resolved, and the method used to avoid or mitigate the same type of complaint in the future. 
Compost or composting material means any product resulting from the controlled biochemical decomposition of organic wastes that are source separated from the municipal solid waste stream. Compost includes vegetable, yard, and wood wastes, which have not or are not deemed to contain hazardous material or contaminated in any way. 
Conditional use permit or CUP means the land use permit issued by the city to the operator pursuant to Section 590 of the Pomona Zoning Ordinance. 
Construction and demolition debris means discarded building materials from construction, deconstruction, remodeling, repair, cleanup, or demolition operations. These include, but are not limited to: asphalt, concrete, cement, brick, lumber, wallboard, roofing material, ceramic tile, metal, plastic pipe, and associated packaging. 
Consumer Price Index or CPI means the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange, County area (1982-1984 = 100) as published by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. Should said index be discontinued or otherwise not be available, the term "CPI" shall mean a reasonably comparable replacement cost of living index mutually agreed upon in writing by city and operator. 
Customer means commercial waste collectors, self-haulers or other persons that deliver material to the facility. 
Destination facility means the lawfully permitted site, facility, or location to which the operator transfers material received at the facility. 
Disposal site means the lawfully permitted place, location, tract of land, area, or premises in use, intended to be used, or which has been used, for the landfill disposal of solid wastes. 
Effective date means the date pursuant to the terms of a fully executed franchise on which the operator's rights and obligations begin. 
Facility means the operator's property, plant and equipment utilized as part of the management facility governed by this division. 
Franchise means the right given by the city council on a person to receive solid waste and recyclable material at a facility and for the transportation from such facility to landfills, transformation facilities, materials recovery facilities or other licensed solid waste management facilities. Any such franchise is subject to all of the sections set forth in this Code and all other applicable Laws. 
Franchisee means any solid waste enterprise duly authorized by a franchise to accept solid waste at a facility. 
Green waste means leaves, grass clippings, brush and branches generated from landscapes or gardens, separated from other solid waste. 
Hazardous waste means any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as "hazardous substances" or "hazardous wastes" pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 41 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., and all future amendments to either of them, or as defined by the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC), or the California Integrated Waste Management Board (CIWMB), or other regulatory agency. Hazardous waste shall also mean any waste or combination of wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious or irreversible illness or incapacity, or any substance which poses a substantial hazardous threat to human health or the environment, Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term "hazardous waste" shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition. 
Intermodal facility means a facility designed to maximize the efficiency of the transport of waste to distant landfills, by transferring rail-ready shipping containers containing solid waste from trucks to trains. 
Load checking program means the procedures the operator employs to screen incoming loads to prevent the acceptance of non-acceptable materials. 
Local enforcement agency means the local agency designated pursuant to Section 43200 et. seq. of the Public Resources Code, which is responsible for monitoring and enforcing regulations related to solid waste handling and disposal. As of the execution date of this agreement, the local enforcement agency is expected to be the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services. 
Log of special occurrences means the daily record of special occurrences encountered during operations. Special occurrences include but are not limited to: fires, injury and property damage, accidents, explosions, receipt or rejection of prohibited wastes, lack of sufficient number of personnel, flooding, earthquake damage and other unusual occurrences. Special occurrences also include visits by regulatory agencies. 
Materials recovery facility or MRF means a processing facility designed to remove recyclables and other valuable materials from the waste stream. After the materials have been separated, (e. g., cardboard, glass, or plastic separated from the waste stream), they are transported to market. 
Operator shall mean any person conducting a business covered by this division. 
Person means an individual, firm, limited liability company, association, joint venture, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other legal entity. 
Recyclable materials means materials separated or kept separate from the solid waste stream for the purpose of additional sorting or processing in order to return them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products. 
Recycle means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code § 40201. State law references: Similar provisions, Public Resources Code § 40180. 
Self-haul means the collection, transportation and disposal of residential solid waste generated by a customer's own residential establishment by such customer who is not engaged in the business of residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional solid waste collection services. 
Solid waste means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, vegetable solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. "Solid waste" does not include any of the following wastes: 
(a)  Hazardous waste. 
(b)  Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the Radiation Control Law (Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code). 
(c)  Medical waste regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act (Part 14 (commencing with Section 117600) of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code). Medical waste that has been autoclaved shall be considered solid waste. 
Solid waste facility permit means the permit issued to the operator by the local enforcement agency in concurrence with the CIWMB and pursuant to Section 44001 et. seq. of the Public Resources Code. 
Solid waste handling means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, or processing of solid wastes. 
Special waste means any item or element of solid waste identified in 22 CCR § 66740 or any other waste which has been classified as special waste by resolution of the city council. 
State minimum standards means CIWMB's minimum operating and design requirements for solid waste transfer and processing facilities as set forth in Title 14, Division 7, Article 3.2, Section 17405.0 of the California Code of Regulations, as amended from time to time. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan means the planning document prepared by operator pursuant to the Clean Water Act and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, and approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
Transfer means to transport material received at the facility to another location, or to allow material received at the facility to be picked up by third parties for transportation to other destination facilities. 
Transfer station means a facility that receives solid waste for the purpose of handling, and/or consolidating that waste prior to transferring the material to a disposal site or other destination facility. Such transfer station shall not engage in recycling activities to such a degree and scale to be considered a materials recovery facility. Any redirection of recyclable materials from the solid waste stream received by a processing or transfer station shall be incidental to the operation of the facility. 
Transfer station activity report means the monthly report of the daily amount and type of all materials received at the facility. 
Vehicle means any truck, trailer, or other conveyance or equipment used to collect, haul or transport solid waste, hazardous waste, recyclable material, or recyclable solid waste. 
Waste stream means any solid waste or other material which has been entered into a process whereby its ultimate disposition results in depositing it into a certified landfill or other lawfully permitted facility. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-847. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  The following materials may be accepted at the facility: Solid waste, recyclable materials, green waste, construction and demolition debris, and any other material specifically deemed acceptable by city. 
(b)  The following materials shall not be accepted at the facility: Hazardous waste, hazardous substances, radioactive waste, untreated medical waste, asbestos, bio-solids, manure, and any other material not specifically deemed acceptable by city. 
(c)  Operator shall use reasonable and good faith efforts to ensure that all solid waste is removed from the premises of the facility at the end of each business day, such business day is set by the franchise. No material received at the facility may be stored at the facility for longer than 48 hours after it has entered the facility. A negligible amount of trash and debris may remain after cleanup in the ordinary course of business which shall not constitute a violation of this section. Solid waste stored in containers or transportation vehicles may remain on the premises at the close of business but in no circumstance shall be allowed to remain beyond the end of the next business day, unless such containers are on rail cars which shall be taken from the facility by the end of the second business day thereafter. 
(d)  Operator may accept material generated in the city, or material generated in other jurisdictions, and from commercial waste collectors, from self-haulers, or from other persons. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-848. - Destination of materials. 
The operator shall cause residual solid waste to be transferred only to a lawfully permitted disposal site, transformation facility, or conversion facility. Operator shall transfer green waste only to a lawfully permitted composting facility, conversion facility, or other such facility lawfully permitted to accept such material. Operator may transfer recyclable materials to any vendor(s). 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-849. - Ownership of materials. 
The right to possession or ownership of any material received at the facility shall not be construed to belong to city. Operator, and not city, shall arrange to receive, store, process, and transfer the material received at the facility. If operator gains the right of possession or ownership of any material received from customers, it is by operation of law and agreement with its customers, and is not the result of the franchise. Any right to possession or ownership of any material received at the facility by operator which otherwise might belong to city in the absence of this agreement is hereby transferred to operator. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-850. - Maximum throughput. 
City shall limit the daily maximum tonnage of any combination of materials and/or vehicle loads per day. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-851. - Maintenance and rehabilitation. 
City shall impose a distance within which operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and rehabilitation of the driveways, sidewalks, and surface streets from each entrance to and exit from the facility. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-852. - Illegal dumping. 
Operator shall take reasonable measures to discourage illegal dumping in areas near the facility (e.g., posting signs, installing surveillance cameras, noting license numbers of vehicles declined access to the facility, etc.). Operator shall be responsible for keeping any public right of way or any vacant land within (site specific dimensions) the facility free from any illegally dumped material. Operator shall be responsible for cleaning up any such illegally dumped material within four hours of being advised to do so by city. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-853. - Tipping fees and revenue from sale of recyclables. 
Operator shall have the right to set tipping fees at its sole discretion, or otherwise arrange for compensation from its customers. Operator shall not itemize any amount to represent host fee per ton in its signage or on its invoices to customers. Operator shall have the right to any and all revenues from the sale of recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-854. - Covered loads. 
Operator shall provide a meaningful economic incentive to its customers to cover their loads to minimize the amount of material that is spilled or blown out of vehicles on their way to the facility. Such economic incentive shall be approved by the city. By way of example, operator shall charge an additional fee to vehicles that arrive at the facility with uncovered loads. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-855. - Hours of operation; holidays. 
As set by the city council at time of award of the franchise, the facility shall have minimum operating days and hours for the public and for the transfer of material. At time of award of the franchise, the city council shall set days which the facility shall be closed and no operations shall take place, including but not limited to the following holidays: New Years Day, Memorial Day, 4th of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-856. - Compliance with environmental laws. 
(a)  Operator shall operate the facility in a safe, clean, and environmentally sound manner. 
(b)  Operator shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations legally binding on operator and in effect during the term of this agreement, specifically including, but not limited to, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq., the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq., the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 ("AB 939"), State Minimum Standards, and all other applicable laws. 
(c)  Operator shall comply with all regional and local laws and regulations, including regulations promulgated or enforced by the County of Los Angeles, the Southern California Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), and the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). Operator shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Pomona City Code. 
(d)  Operator's compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations shall include, but not be limited to, compliance with the requirements of the following plans, permits, and documents prepared specifically for the facility: 
(1)  Environmental impact report. 
(2)  Transfer processing report. 
(3)  Solid waste facility permit. 
(4)  Conditional use permit. 
(5)  Storm water pollution prevention plan. 
(e)  Any differences among the requirements of these laws and regulations, or differences between these laws and regulations, and the requirements of this Code, then the more stringent requirement(s) with regard to the protection of public health and the environment shall prevail and govern the operator's obligation to perform. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-857. - Mitigation of operational conditions. 
The city council shall have the authority to set conditions of operation within the franchise agreement, conditional use permits, or other approvals, permits, or agreements to mitigate conditions caused by operations, including but not limited to, control of air quality, dust, litter, noise, vibration, odor, traffic, aesthetics, stormwater runoff, vector control, and such other issues related to such site. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-858. - Host fee. 
The city council shall set a host fee by resolution and may consider setting other fees to offset specific impacts of the facility. Such fees shall be based on a computation method as determined by the city council. The city council may establish an annual adjustment procedure for such fees. The city council shall establish the payment time and payment manner for such fees. The city may establish a level of tonnage from its municipal operations which a franchised facility shall accept without imposition of any gate fee or other charge against the city. The city council may establish in the franchise penalties for non-payment/delayed payment of host fees and non-compliance with the franchise agreement, including penalty amount, method, and type, including imposition of monetary penalties, and suspension and/or termination of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-859. - Record keeping. 
Operator shall maintain in its office complete and accurate records about the operations covered by the franchise agreement. The records to be kept shall be established in the franchise agreement as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-860. - Jurisdiction of origin. 
Operator shall inquire of the driver of each vehicle entering the facility as to the jurisdiction of origin of the material delivered to the facility, or shall make alternative arrangements for collection of such data from commercial waste collectors as approved by the city council in the franchise agreement or other such agreement authorizing operation of a facility within the city. Such information shall also be recorded for self-haul customers claiming to deliver solid waste generated in the City of Pomona by confirming the address from which the material originated by requiring a valid driver's license, recent utility bill, or some other form of evidence acceptable to the city. Operator shall allow commercial waste collectors to claim solid waste as originating in the city, only if they are franchised haulers that are lawfully providing waste collection service in the city. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-861. - Inspection of records. 
City and its authorized officers, employees, agents or contractors, shall at any reasonable time, and upon providing reasonable notice, have the right to review, inspect, and audit operator's records and enter operator's premises for the purposes of such review, inspection or audit. City shall be entitled to reimbursement for costs and expenses incurred related to an annual review, inspection or audit of host fees or any such other amount established by the city council through the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-862. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  City shall set the time, frequency, manner, specific report type and such other requirements for submittal by operator, including by way of example only, reports on transfer station activity, log of special occurrences, results of the load checking program, and complaint log. Operator shall furnish city with any additional reports as may reasonably be required that set forth all information required by city including but not limited to any activities related to the Facility approved under the division. These reports shall be prepared and submitted in the form specified by city. Operator shall bear the cost of such additional reporting. 
(b)  Operator shall submit to city, within five days of receipt, copies of all notices, warnings, correspondence, notices of violation, decisions, actions or judgments of any kind received from any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency or other government body which are adverse to the operator and relate to operator's operations conducted pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-863. - Notification. 
Operator shall immediately contact city by phone in the event of any incident requiring such notification specified by the city, including but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  The discovery of any hazardous waste at the facility that may pose an immediate threat to public health and safety. 
(b)  Operator receives a complaint of excessive or obnoxious odor. 
(c)  Operator receives a complaint of excessive noise or vibration. 
(d)  Operator receives a complaint of excessive dust. 
Any such notification shall not relieve operator from including such information in its log of special occurrences or complaint log. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-864. - Indemnification, insurance and performance bond. 
(a)  City shall specify the terms and conditions regarding operator's obligation to defend, indemnify and hold harmless city and related personnel for operator's operations under authority granted under this division. Such indemnity shall specifically require at a minimum indemnification for general operations and release of hazardous substances. 
(b)  Operator shall be required to show throughout the duration of any agreement authorizing operations through this division proof of worker's compensation, employer's liability, general liability insurance, automobile, and such other coverage required by the city. As required by applicable law, each franchisee shall secure payment of workers' compensation to its employees. Each franchisee shall supply to the city the certificate required by applicable law. 
(c)  City shall determine and shall set such scope, limits, amounts, deductibles, self-insured retention amounts, additional insured retention amounts, and other provisions as determined applicable within the franchise or agreement authorizing operations under this division. 
(1)  At a minimum or as such higher coverage requirements may otherwise be set by resolution of the city council, each franchisee shall procure and maintain public liability and property damage insurance with the following coverages and minimum coverage limits; 
a.  General aggregate, $5,000,000.00. 
b.  Products and completed operations aggregate, $5,000,000.00. 
c.  Per occurrence minimum limit, $1,000,000.00. 
d.  Personal injury and advertising injury, $1,000,000.00. 
e.  Fire damage, $50,000.00. 
f.  Medical expense for any one person, $5,000.00. 
(2)  At a minimum or as such higher coverage requirements may otherwise be set by resolution of the city council, each franchisee shall procure and maintain automobile liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. 
(d)  Each franchisee shall require its insurance carrier to issue an additional insured endorsement which names, as additional insureds, the city and its elected and appointed officials, directors, officers, agents, employees, representatives, volunteers, and contractors. 
(e)  All such insurers providing coverage shall be approved by the city. Operator shall establish an insurance policy repository to maintain copies of insurance policies required pursuant to this division and the operations agreement for 50 years after the expiration of the term of this agreement. Operator shall include all subcontractors as insureds under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each subcontractor. All insurance required under this division shall be in addition to, and not in lieu or limitation of, the indemnification provisions of this division or as otherwise required by law or other agreement. The city may require operator to provide a surety bond, insurance bond, or other bond in amount and form as determined at the sole and absolute discretion of the city at time of award of franchise or operation agreement. 
(f)  Each operator shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless, under the provisions specified in this article, the city and its officers, agents, or employees against all fines or penalties imposed by the CIWMB if: (i) the diversion, source reduction and recycling goals of AB 939 or other applicable legislation are not met by the city with respect to the waste stream passing through the facility or (ii) the operator has delayed in providing information preventing the city from submitting reports required by AB 939 or other applicable legislation in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-865. - Default and termination. 
City shall have the right to terminate any agreement issued under the division if operator fails to cure any default after being provided notice to correct, extinguishing all appeals under the agreement or franchise. City may terminate the agreement without the need to provide Operator an opportunity to cure, in the event operator practices, or attempts to practice, any fraud or deceit upon city, or practiced any fraud or deceit or made any misrepresentations. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-866. - Notice and response. 
(a)  If the city manager determines that operator is in default of the franchise, unless other provisions are specified, the city manager shall notify operator of such default ("notice of default"), specifying the default in reasonable detail. Delay in giving a notice of default shall not constitute a waiver of any default nor shall it change the time of default. The city manager, in any such notice, shall set a reasonable time within which operator is to cure the default and respond. Unless the circumstances require correction and response within a shorter period of time, operator shall correct the default to the satisfaction of the city manager, and respond to the city manager's notice within seven days from the date of the notice. Operator may request additional time to correct the default. The city manager may grant additional time at his or her sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-867. - Resolution and appeal. 
(a)  The city manager shall review any corrective actions or written responses from operator and decide the matter, or refer the matter to the city council for consideration pursuant to this section. If the city manager's decision is adverse to operator (an "adverse decision"), the city manager may order further corrective actions to cure any default, or invoke any other remedy. If the city manager determines that there has been a material breach and that termination is the appropriate remedy, the city manager may terminate the franchise or agreement. 
(b)  The city manager shall notify operator of the city manager's decision taken pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. In the event of an adverse decision, the city manager shall inform operator, in writing, of the specific facts found and evidence relied on, and the legal basis in the requirements of the franchise or other laws for the city manager's adverse decision. 
(c)  An adverse decision by the city manager shall be final and binding on operator unless operator files a "notice of appeal" with the city clerk (with copies to the city manager and city attorney) within seven days of receipt of the notification of the adverse decision by the city manager. In any "notice of appeal" to the city council, operator shall state all of its factual and legal contentions, citing requirements of the agreement or other laws to support its contentions. 
(d)  Within 21 days of the filing date of the notice of appeal, operator shall deliver to the city clerk three copies of all relevant affidavits, documents, photographs and videotapes that operator may choose to submit for consideration at such hearing. After operator has delivered all such relevant documents, etc., no new legal issues may be raised, or new evidence submitted, by operator at this or at any further point in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-868. - City council hearing. 
If a default or termination matter is referred by the city manager to the city council, or an adverse decision of the city manager is appealed to the city council by operator, the city council shall set the matter for a hearing and act on the matter. The city clerk shall give operator not less than 14 days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the city council shall consider the administrative record, including the following: 
(a)  A staff report by the city manager, summarizing the proceedings to date and outlining the city council's options; 
(b)  The city manager's written notice of default; 
(c)  Operator's response to the notice of default; 
(d)  The city manager's written notification to operator of an adverse decision; 
(e)  Operator's notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
At the hearing, operator's representatives and other interested persons shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to be heard. based on the above items, the city council shall determine by resolution whether the decision or order of the city manager should be upheld. A tie vote of the city council shall be regarded as upholding the decision of the city manager. If, based upon the administrative record, the city council determines that the performance of operator is in breach of any agreement term or any provision of any applicable law, the city council, in the exercise of its discretion, may order operator to take corrective actions to cure the breach or impose any other remedy including, but not limited to, termination of the agreement. Subject to judicial review, the resolution of the city council shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-869. - Timeframe after revocation. 
Should a franchise or other agreement issued to a solid waste enterprise under this division be revoked, such operator shall not be issued a franchise to conduct such operations within the city until such time as the solid waste enterprise is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the solid waste enterprise is able to fully comply with all of the sections of this article and the Public Resources Code. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
Sec. 62-870. - Licensing. 
Each operator exercising rights under this division, in addition to obtaining a franchise or other agreement from the city, shall possess a current city business license. 
(Ord. No. 4108, § 3, 9-22-2008)  
DIVISION 7. - DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 74. 
 
Sec. 62-871. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction means all building, landscaping, remodeling, addition, removal or destruction involving the use or disposal of designated recyclable and reusable materials as defined in this section. 
Contractor means any person holding or required to hold a contractor's license of any type under the laws of the state or who performs, whether as contractor, subcontractor or owner-builder, any construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the city. 
Demolition and construction wastes means: 
(1)  Discarded materials generally considered to be insoluble in water and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, metal, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project and from removal, installation or repair of any paved surface. 
(2)  Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any construction, paving, and/or landscape project. 
(3)  Nonconstruction and demolition wood waste. 
(4)  De minimis amounts of other nonhazardous wastes that are generated at construction or demolition projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry. 
(5)  Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste that causes it to be classified as other than construction and demolition waste. 
Designated recyclable and reusable materials means: 
(1)  Building materials, including all products generally used in construction, including but not limited to asphalt, concrete, rock, stone and brick. 
(2)  Wood materials, including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, chromated copper arsenate (CCA) pressure treated, contaminated or painted. 
(3)  Vegetative materials, including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for construction or other use. 
(4)  Metals, including all metal scrap such as but not limited to pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences. 
(5)  Roofing materials, including wood shingles as well as asphalt, stone and slate-based roofing material. 
(6)  Asphaltic or concrete materials used in paving of parking lots, roadways, and other structures. 
(7)  Salvageable materials, including all salvageable materials and structures, including but not limited to wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures, toilets, sinks, bathtubs and appliances. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.200), 6-2-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-872. - Deconstruction, salvage and recovery. 
Every structure planned for demolition shall be made available for deconstruction, salvage and recovery prior to demolition. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, the general contractor and all subcontractors to recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable designated recyclable and reusable materials prior to demolition. Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials from the deconstruction phase shall qualify to be counted in meeting the diversion requirements of this division. Recovered or salvaged materials may be given or sold on the premises or may be removed to reuse warehouse facilities for storage or sale. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.201), 6-2-2003)  
Sec. 62-873. - Diversion requirements. 
(a)  It is required that at least 50 percent of demolition and construction wastes generated be diverted from every demolition, remodeling and construction project by using recycling, reuse or other diversion programs. 
(b)  Separate calculations and reports will be required for the demolition and for the construction portion of projects involving both demolition and construction. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.202), 6-2-2003)  
Sec. 62-874. - Deposit required. 
(a)  As a condition precedent to issuance of a permit for any construction or demolition project that involves the generation of solid waste destined to be delivered to a landfill, the applicant shall post deposit in the form of cash, money order or cashier's check in an amount to be determined by the city but not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $15,000.00. 
(b)  The deposit or cash bond shall be returned, without interest, in total or in proportion, upon proof to the satisfaction of the building official that no less than the required percentage or proven proportion of those percentages of the tons of wastes generated by the demolition and/or construction project have been diverted from landfills and have been recycled or reused. If a lesser percentage of wastes than required is diverted, but not less than 25 percent, a proportionate share of the deposit will be returned. The deposit shall be forfeited entirely or to the extent that there is a failure to comply with the minimum diversion requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.203), 6-2-2003)  
Sec. 62-875. - Information required before release of deposit. 
Every applicant shall submit a properly completed recycling and reuse summary report, on a form as prescribed by the city manager, to the building official as a portion of the building or demolition permit process. The form shall contain an accurate compilation of the tonnage or other specified units of construction and/or demolition wastes diverted from landfill. Approval of the form as complete and accurate shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any certificate of occupancy or notice of project completion. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.204), 6-2-2003)  
Sec. 62-876. - Administrative fee. 
As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit for a building or a demolition project that involves the production of solid waste destined to be delivered to a landfill, the applicant shall pay to the city a cash fee sufficient to compensate the city for all expenses incurred in administering the permit. The amount of this fee shall be determined in accordance with the then-current resolution of the city council determining the fee. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.205), 6-2-2003)  
Sec. 62-877. - On-site practices. 
During the term of the demolition or construction project pursuant to this division, the contractor shall recycle or divert the required percentages of materials and keep records thereof in tonnage or in other measurements approved by the building official that can be converted to tonnage. The building official will monitor and evaluate each project to gauge the percentage of materials recycled, salvaged and disposed from the project. The required diversion of a minimum of the required percentages of the demolition and construction debris will be measured separately with respect to the demolition segment and the construction segment of a project where both demolition and construction are involved. To the maximum extent feasible on-site separation of scrap wood and clean green waste in a designated debris box shall be arranged, in order to permit chipping and mulching for soil enhancement or land cover purposes. In order to protect chipping and grinding machinery, metal and other materials which cannot be chipped or ground shall not be placed in such boxes. On-site separation shall be undertaken for wallboard to the extent feasible on new construction. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.206), 6-2-2003)  
Sec. 62-878. - Reporting. 
Within 60 days following the completion of the demolition project and, again, within 60 days following the completion of the construction project, the contractor shall, as a condition precedent to final inspection and to issuance of any certificate of occupancy, submit documentation to the building official that proves compliance with the requirements of section 62-875. The documentation shall consist of a final completed recycling and reuse summary report showing actual data of tonnage of materials recycled and diverted, supported by originals or certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors and/or landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether materials generated from the site have been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged or otherwise disposed. If a project involves both demolition and construction, the report and documentation for the demolition project must be submitted and approved by the building official before issuance of a building permit for the construction project. In the alternative, the contractor may submit a letter stating that no waste or recyclable materials were generated from the project, in which case this statement shall be subject to verification by the building official. Any deposit posted pursuant to section 62-874 shall be forfeited if the contractor does not meet the timely reporting requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.207), 6-2-2003)  
Sec. 62-879. - Violations. 
Each violation of this division shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3987, § 1(12.208), 6-2-2003)  
Secs. 62-880—62-899. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - MEDICAL WASTE FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 62-901. - Medical waste processing. 
All medical waste collected within the city shall be disposed of at a site legally empowered to accept such material for disposal and/or processing. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-902. - Medical waste facilities. 
No person shall construct or operate a medical waste facility, including, but not limited to, a facility that processes, treats, transfers, disposes or recycles medical waste without first satisfying all city requirements for land use, environmental and other approvals as well as those governing provisions of the Public Resources Code, California Code of Regulations, as may be amended, and all other codes applicable to medical waste facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-903. - Franchise required. 
No person shall operate a medical waste facility, unless such person is authorized to do so by the granting of a franchise by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-904. - Award of franchise; time frame; nonassignability. 
The city council may award one or more franchises for the operation of a medical waste facility. No company shall engage in the business of operating a medical waste facility, or any other facility covered under section 62-903 within the city pursuant to this division without first having obtained a franchise agreement pursuant to authorization of the city council. However, this section shall not apply to any such facility owned and operated by the city. Should the city council determine that a franchise warrants issuance, such franchise shall be conditional upon the compliance with all of the requirements and regulations established with respect to collection, removal, disposal, transfer, and processing of any medical waste. Processed medical waste shall be properly disposed of as solid waste. 
All franchises shall be granted in accordance with such terms and conditions as established by the city council and at its sole discretion. Each franchise awarded pursuant to the terms and conditions of this subdivision shall remain in effect for such period of time approved by the city council, provided the franchisee remains in compliance with the requirements established within the context of this Code and its executed franchise agreement with the city. The effective dates for any franchise granted or extended to an existing franchisee after the initial timeframe shall be at the sole discretion of the city council and/or the provisions set forth in an executed franchise agreement. Should a franchisee, upon the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, possess an executed franchise agreement or other contractual arrangement with the city for such operations related to this division, nothing contained within this section shall limit or otherwise alter the term of services provisions established in such executed franchise agreement or contract. No franchise granted pursuant to this subdivision shall be entitled to be assigned, transferred, conveyed, sublet, or to otherwise dispose of any right, liability or interest to another operator without first having obtained the written consent of the city council, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-905. - Facility requirements and conditional use permit. 
All facilities subject to this article shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-906. - Definitions. 
Unless apparent from the context of a word or phrase, certain words not specifically set forth by this article shall have the meaning ascribed by Public Resources Code div. 30, pt. 1, ch. 2 (Public Resources Code § 40100 et seq.). The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Activity report means the quarterly report of the monthly amount and type of all materials received at the facility. 
Applicable law means all laws, regulations, rules, orders, judgments, decrees, permits, approvals, or other requirements of any governmental agency having jurisdiction over the processing or transfer of medical and solid waste that are in force on the effective date and as they may be enacted, issued or amended during the term of the franchise agreement. 
Biohazardous waste means any of the following: 
(a)  Laboratory waste, including, but not limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  Human or animal specimen cultures from medical and pathology laboratories. 
(2)  Cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories. 
(3)  Wastes from the production of bacteria, viruses, spores, discarded live and attenuated vaccines used in human health care or research, discarded animal vaccines, including Brucellosis and Contagious Ecthyma, as identified by the department, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures. 
(b)  Human surgery specimens or tissues removed at surgery or autopsy, which are suspected by the attending physician and surgeon or dentist of being contaminated with infectious agents known to be contagious to humans. 
(c)  Animal parts, tissues, fluids, or carcasses suspected by the attending veterinarian of being contaminated with infectious agents known to be contagious to humans. 
(d)  Waste, which at the point of transport from the generator's site, at the point of disposal, or thereafter, contains recognizable fluid blood, fluid blood products, containers or equipment containing blood that is fluid, or blood from animals known to be infected with diseases which are highly communicable to humans. 
(e)  Waste containing discarded materials contaminated with excretion, exudate, or secretions from humans or animals that are required to be isolated by the infection control staff, the attending physician and surgeon, the attending veterinarian, or the local health officer, to protect others from highly communicable diseases or diseases of animals that are highly communicable to humans. 
(f)  (1)  Waste which is hazardous only because it is comprised of human surgery specimens or tissues which have been fixed in formaldehyde or other fixatives, or only because the waste is contaminated through contact with, or having previously contained, chemotherapeutic agents, including, but not limited to, gloves, disposable gowns, towels, and intravenous solution bags and attached tubing which are empty. A biohazardous waste which meets the conditions of this paragraph is not subject to Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 25100) of Division 20. 
(2)  For purposes of this subdivision, "chemotherapeutic agent" means an agent that kills or prevents the reproduction of malignant cells. 
(3)  For purposes of this subdivision, a container, or inner liner removed from a container, which previously contained a chemotherapeutic agent, is empty if the container or inner liner removed from the container has been emptied by the generator as much as possible, using methods commonly employed to remove waste or material from containers or liners, so that the following conditions are met: 
(A)  If the material which the container or inner liner held is pourable, no material can be poured or drained from the container or inner liner when held in any orientation, including, but not limited to, when tilted or inverted. 
(B)  If the material which the container or inner liner held is not pourable, no material or waste remains in the container or inner liner that can feasibly be removed by scraping. 
(g)  Waste that is hazardous only because it is comprised of pharmaceuticals, as defined in Section 117747. Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of Section 117690, medical waste includes biohazardous waste that meets the conditions of this subdivision. Biohazardous waste that meets the conditions of this subdivision is not subject to Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 25100) of Division 20. 
Bio-solids means residual solids, semi-solids, or sludge from the treatment of water, wastewater, and other liquids. 
California Department of Public Health or CDPH means the state agency overseeing the medical waste management program, responsible for administration of the Medical Waste Management Act. 
CalRecycle shall mean the California Department of Resources, Recycling, and Recovery (formerly known as the California Integrated Waste Management Board (CIWMB)). 
CERCLA means the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 USC 9607(e). 
City means the City of Pomona, a Charter City, and all the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the city as presently existing or as such boundaries may be modified during the term of this agreement. 
City manager means the Chief Executive Officer of the City of Pomona, or designee. 
Complaint log means the written record of complaints received by the operator regarding the facility and its operations. Each entry in the complaint log includes the date, time, name and contact information of the individual making the complaint, the nature of the complaint, how the issue was resolved, and the method used to avoid or mitigate the same type of complaint in the future. 
Conditional use permit or CUP means the land use permit issued by the city to the operator pursuant to Section .580 of the Pomona Zoning Ordinance. 
Consumer Price Index or CPI means the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange, County area (1982-1984 = 100) as published by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. Should said index be discontinued or otherwise not be available, the term "CPI" shall mean a reasonably comparable replacement cost of living index mutually agreed upon in writing by city and operator. 
Customer means medical waste generators or CDPH-certified haulers or other persons that deliver material to the facility. 
Destination facility means the lawfully permitted site, facility, or location to which the operator transfers material received at the facility. 
Disposal site means the lawfully permitted place, location, tract of land, area, or premises in use, intended to be used, or which has been used, for the landfill disposal of treated medical waste. 
Effective date means the date pursuant to the terms of a fully executed franchise on which the operator's rights and obligations begin. 
Facility means the operator's property, plant and equipment utilized as part of the processing facility governed by this division. 
Franchise means the right given by the city council on a person to receive medical waste and recyclable material at a facility and for the transportation from such facility to landfills, transformation facilities, or other licensed medical waste management facilities. Any such franchise is subject to all of the sections set forth in this Code and all other applicable laws. 
Franchisee means any medical waste enterprise duly authorized by a franchise to accept medical waste at a facility. 
Hazardous waste means any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as "hazardous substances" or "hazardous wastes" pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 41 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., and all future amendments to either of them, or as defined by the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC), or Calrecycle, or other regulatory agency. Hazardous waste shall also mean any waste or combination of wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious or irreversible illness or incapacity, or any substance which poses a substantial hazardous threat to human health or the environment. Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous, solid or medical waste, the term "hazardous waste" shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition. 
Load checking program means the procedures the operator employs to screen incoming loads to prevent the acceptance of nonacceptable materials. 
Local enforcement agency means the local agency designated pursuant to Section 43200 et. seq. of the Public Resources Code, which is responsible for monitoring and enforcing regulations related to medical waste handling and disposal. As of the execution date of this agreement, the local enforcement agency is expected to be the California Department of Public Health. 
Log of special occurrences means the daily record of special occurrences encountered during operations. Special occurrences include but are not limited to: fires, injury and property damage, accidents, explosions, receipt or rejection of prohibited wastes, lack of sufficient number of personnel, flooding, earthquake damage and other unusual occurrences. Special occurrences also include visits by regulatory agencies. 
Medical waste means waste which meets both of the following requirements: 
(a)  The waste is composed of waste which is generated or produced as a result of any of the following actions: 
(1)  Diagnosis, treatment, or immunization of human beings or animals. 
(2)  Research pertaining to the activities specified in subparagraph (A). 
(3)  The production or testing of biologicals. 
(4)  The accumulation of properly contained home-generated sharps waste that is brought by a patient, a member of the patient's family, or by a person authorized by the enforcement agency, to a point of consolidation approved by the enforcement agency pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 117904 or authorized pursuant to Section 118147. 
(5)  Removal of a regulated waste, as defined in Section 5193 of Title 8 of the California Code of Regulations, from a trauma scene by a trauma scene waste management practitioner. 
(b)  The waste is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Biohazardous waste ("red bag"), 
(2)  Sharps waste, 
(3)  Pharmaceutical waste, 
(4)  Pathological waste, or 
(5)  Trace chemotherapy waste. 
Medical Waste Management Act or MWMA means California Health and Safety Code Sections 117600-118360. 
Medical waste facility permit means the permit issued to the operator by the local enforcement agency in concurrence with the MWMA. 
Medical waste handling means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, or processing of medical wastes. 
Medical waste treatment facility means a facility with an offsite medical waste treatment facility from CDPH that treats medical waste by a method approved by the CDPH. 
Medical waste processing facility means a facility that receives medical waste for the purpose of processing, handling, and/or consolidating that waste prior to transferring the material to a disposal site or other destination facility. Such facility shall not engage in recycling activities to such a degree and scale to be considered a materials recovery facility. Any redirection of recyclable materials from the waste stream received by a processing facility shall be incidental to the operation of the facility. 
Operator shall mean any person conducting a business covered by this division. 
Person means an individual, firm, limited liability company, association, joint venture, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other legal entity. 
Solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, vegetable solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. "Solid waste" does not include any of the following wastes: 
(a)  Hazardous waste. 
(b)  Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the Radiation Control Law (Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code). 
(c)  Medical waste regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act (Part 14 (commencing with Section 117600) of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code). Medical waste that has been treated by a method approved in the Medical Waste Management Act shall be referred to as "treated medical waste". 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan means the planning document prepared by operator pursuant to the Clean Water Act and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, and approved by the regional water quality control board. 
Transfer means to transport material received at the facility to another location, or to allow material received at the facility to be picked up by third parties for transportation to other destination facilities. 
Vehicle means any truck, trailer, or other conveyance or equipment used to collect, haul or transport medical waste, solid waste, hazardous waste, recyclable material, or recyclable solid waste. 
Waste stream means any waste or other material which has been entered into a process whereby its ultimate disposition results in depositing it into a certified landfill or other lawfully permitted facility. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-907. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  The following materials may be accepted at the facility: Medical waste, and any other material specifically deemed acceptable by city. 
(b)  The following materials shall not be accepted at the facility: Solid waste, hazardous waste, hazardous substances, radioactive waste, asbestos, bio-solids, manure, and any other material not specifically deemed acceptable by city. Such prohibition shall not apply to waste received in de minimis amounts in connection with the collection of untreated medical waste. 
(c)  Operator shall abide by conditions contained within a conditional use permit or as applied under a permit issued under this division for the facility relating to periods for removal of any type of waste from the premises or storage of wastes on the premises. 
(d)  Operator may accept material generated in the city, or material generated in other jurisdictions, and from commercial waste collectors certified by the CDPH, from self-haulers, or from other persons. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-908. - Destination of materials. 
The operator shall cause solid waste created by the treatment, processing, or transferring of untreated medical waste at the facility to be transferred only to a lawfully permitted disposal site, transformation facility, or conversion facility. Alternatively, operator shall contract with a lawfully permitted commercial waste hauler to collect such solid waste from operator's facility. Operator may transfer recyclable materials to any vendor(s). 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-909. - Ownership of materials. 
The right to possession or ownership of any material received at the facility shall not be construed to belong to city. Operator, and not city, shall arrange to receive, store, process, and transfer the material received at the facility. If operator gains the right of possession or ownership of any material received from customers, it is by operation of law and agreement with its customers, and is not the result of the franchise. Any right to possession or ownership of any material received at the facility by operator which otherwise might belong to city in the absence of this agreement is hereby transferred to operator. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-910. - Maximum throughput. 
City shall limit the daily maximum tonnage of any combination of materials and/or vehicle loads per day. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-911. - Maintenance and rehabilitation. 
City may impose a distance within which operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and rehabilitation of the driveways, sidewalks, and surface streets from each entrance to and exit from the facility. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-913. - Fees and revenue from sale of recyclables. 
Operator shall have the right to set fees for processing and other services at its sole discretion, or otherwise arrange for compensation from its customers. Operator shall have the right to any and all revenues from the sale of recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-914. - Covered loads. 
Operator shall ensure that all loads received at the facility are carried in enclosed containers and transported to the facility in an enclosed vehicle (e.g., panel truck or van), consistent with the MWMA. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-915. - Hours of operation. 
As set by the city council at time of award of the franchise, or as specified in a conditional use permit for the facility, the facility shall have maximum operating days and hours 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-916. - Compliance with environmental laws. 
(a)  Operator shall operate the facility in a safe, clean, and environmentally sound manner. 
(b)  Operator shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations legally binding on operator and in effect during the term of this agreement, specifically including, but not limited to, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq., the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq., the California Medical Waste Management Act, California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 ("AB 939"), state minimum standards, and all other applicable laws. 
(c)  Operator shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including regulations promulgated or enforced by the County of Los Angeles, the Southern California Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), and the regional water quality control board (RWQCB). Operator shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Pomona City Code. 
(d)  Operator's compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations shall include, but not be limited to, compliance with the requirements of the following plans, permits, and documents prepared specifically for the facility: 
(1)  Environmental impact survey. 
(2)  Transfer processing report. 
(3)  Offsite medical waste treatment facility permit (CDPH) 
(4)  Conditional use permit. 
(5)  Storm water pollution prevention plan. (If applicable for such site). 
(e)  Any differences among the requirements of these laws and regulations, or differences between these laws and regulations, and the requirements of this Code, then the more stringent requirement(s) with regard to the protection of public health and the environment shall prevail and govern the operator's obligation to perform. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-917. - Mitigation of operational conditions. 
The city council shall have the authority to set conditions of operation within the franchise agreement, conditional use permits, or other approvals, permits, or agreements to mitigate conditions caused by operations, including but not limited to, control of air quality, dust, litter, noise, vibration, odor, traffic, aesthetics, stormwater runoff, vector control, and such other issues related to such site. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-918. - Host fee. 
The city council shall set a host or franchise fee by resolution and may consider setting other fees to offset specific impacts of the facility. Such fees shall be based on a computation method as determined by the city council. The city council may establish an annual adjustment procedure for such fees. The city council shall establish the payment time and payment manner for such fees. The city may establish a number of public sites for household medical waste (sharps container) collection, without imposition of any gate fee or other charge against the city. The city council may establish in the franchise penalties for nonpayment/delayed payment of host fees and noncompliance with the franchise agreement, including penalty amount, method, and type, including imposition of monetary penalties, and suspension and/or termination of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-919. - Record keeping. 
Operator shall maintain in its office complete and accurate records, as required by the MWMA about the operations covered by the franchise agreement. The records to be kept shall be established in the franchise agreement as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-920. - Jurisdiction of origin. 
Operator shall inquire of the driver of each vehicle entering the facility as to the jurisdiction of origin of the material delivered to the facility, or shall make alternative arrangements for collection of such data from medical waste collectors as approved by the city council in the franchise agreement. If operator accepts self-haul customers, such information shall also be recorded for self-haul customers claiming to deliver medical waste by confirming the address from which the material originated by requiring a valid driver's license, recent utility bill, or some other form of evidence acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-921. - Inspection of records. 
City and its authorized officers, employees, agents or contractors, shall at any reasonable time, and upon providing reasonable notice, have the right to review, inspect, and audit operator's records and enter operator's premises for the purposes of such review, inspection or audit. City shall be entitled to reimbursement for costs and expenses incurred related to an annual review, inspection or audit of host fees or any such other amount established by the city council through the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-922. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  City shall set the time, frequency, manner, specific report type and such other requirements for submittal by operator, including by way of example only, an activity report indicating the facility activity, log of special occurrences, results of the load checking program, and complaint log. Operator shall furnish city with any additional reports as may reasonably be required that set forth all information required by city including but not limited to any activities related to the facility approved under the division. These reports shall be prepared and submitted in the form specified by city. Operator shall bear the cost of such additional reporting. 
(b)  Operator shall submit to city, within five days of receipt, copies of all notices, warnings, correspondence, notices of violation, decisions, actions or judgments of any kind received from any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency or other government body which are adverse to the operator and relate to operator's operations conducted pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-923. - Notification. 
Operator shall immediately contact city by phone in the event of any incident requiring such notification specified by the city, including but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  The discovery of any spill or release of medical waste at the facility that may pose an immediate threat to public health and safety. 
(b)  A spill or release of medical waste of any kind outside of the building, whether on-site or in transit to the facility. 
(c)  Operator receives a complaint of excessive or obnoxious odor. 
(d)  Operator receives a complaint of excessive noise or vibration. 
(e)  Operator receives a complaint of excessive dust. 
Any such notification shall not relieve operator from including such information in its log of special occurrences or complaint log. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-924. - Indemnification, insurance and performance bond. 
(a)  City shall specify the terms and conditions regarding operator's obligation to defend, indemnify and hold harmless city and related personnel for operator's operations under authority granted under this division. Such indemnity shall specifically require at a minimum indemnification for general operations and release of hazardous substances. 
(b)  Operator shall be required to show throughout the duration of any agreement authorizing operations through this division proof of worker's compensation, employer's liability, general liability insurance, automobile, and such other coverage required by the city. As required by applicable law, each franchisee shall secure payment of workers' compensation to its employees. Each franchisee shall supply to the city the certificate required by applicable law. 
(c)  City shall determine and shall set such scope, limits, amounts, deductibles, self-insured retention amounts, additional insured retention amounts, and other provisions as determined applicable within the franchise or agreement authorizing operations under this division. 
(1)  At a minimum or as such higher coverage requirements may otherwise be set by resolution of the city council, each franchisee shall procure and maintain public liability and property damage insurance with the following coverages and minimum coverage limits; 
a.  General aggregate, 
$5,000,000.00. 
b.  Products and completed 

perations aggregate, $5,000,000.00. 
c.  Per occurrence minimum limit, $3,000,000.00. 
d.  Personal injury and advertising injury, $1,000,000.00. 
e.  Fire damage, $100,000.00. 
f.  Medical expense for any one person, $25,000.00. 
(2)  At a minimum or as such higher coverage requirements may otherwise be set by resolution of the city council, each franchisee shall procure and maintain automobile liability in the amount of $3,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. 
(d)  Each franchisee shall require its insurance carrier to issue an additional insured endorsement which names, as additional insureds, the city and its elected and appointed officials, directors, officers, agents, employees, representatives, volunteers, and contractors. 
(e)  All such insurers providing coverage shall be approved by the city. Operator shall establish an insurance policy repository to maintain copies of insurance policies required pursuant to this division and the operations agreement for 50 years after the expiration of the term of this agreement. Operator shall include all subcontractors as insureds under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each subcontractor. All insurance required under this division shall be in addition to, and not in lieu or limitation of, the indemnification provisions of this division or as otherwise required by law or other agreement. The city may require operator to provide a surety bond, insurance bond, or other bond in amount and form as determined at the sole and absolute discretion of the city at time of award of franchise or operation agreement. Such amount shall at a minimum cover all self-insured retentions and deductibles. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-925. - Default and termination. 
City shall have the right to terminate any agreement issued under the division if operator fails to cure any default after being provided notice to correct, extinguishing all appeals under the agreement or franchise. City may terminate the agreement without the need to provide operator an opportunity to cure, in the event operator practices, or attempts to practice, any fraud or deceit upon city, or practiced any fraud or deceit or made any misrepresentations. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-926. - Notice and response. 
(a)  If the city manager determines that operator is in default of the franchise, unless other provisions are specified, the city manager shall notify operator of such default ("notice of default"), specifying the default in reasonable detail. Delay in giving a notice of default shall not constitute a waiver of any default nor shall it change the time of default. The city manager, in any such notice, shall set a reasonable time within which operator is to cure the default and respond. Unless the circumstances require correction and response within a shorter period of time, operator shall correct the default to the satisfaction of the city manager, and respond to the city manager's notice within seven days from the date of the notice. Operator may request additional time to correct the default. The city manager may grant additional time at his or her sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-927. - Resolution and appeal. 
(a)  The city manager shall review any corrective actions or written responses from operator and decide the matter, or refer the matter to the city council for consideration pursuant to this section. If the city manager's decision is adverse to operator (an "adverse decision"), the city manager may order further corrective actions to cure any default, or invoke any other remedy. If the city manager determines that there has been a material breach and that termination is the appropriate remedy, the city manager may terminate the franchise or agreement. 
(b)  The city manager shall notify operator of the city manager's decision taken pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. In the event of an adverse decision, the city manager shall inform operator, in writing, of the specific facts found and evidence relied on, and the legal basis in the requirements of the franchise or other laws for the city manager's adverse decision. 
(c)  An adverse decision by the city manager shall be final and binding on operator unless operator files a "notice of appeal" with the city clerk (with copies to the city manager and city attorney) within seven days of receipt of the notification of the adverse decision by the city manager. In any "notice of appeal" to the city council, operator shall state all of its factual and legal contentions, citing requirements of the agreement or other laws to support its contentions. 
(d)  Within 21 days of the filing date of the notice of appeal, operator shall deliver to the city clerk three copies of all relevant affidavits, documents, photographs and videotapes that operator may choose to submit for consideration at such hearing. After operator has delivered all such relevant documents, etc., no new legal issues may be raised, or new evidence submitted, by operator at this or at any further point in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-928. - City council hearing. 
If a default or termination matter is referred by the city manager to the city council, or an adverse decision of the city manager is appealed to the city council by operator, the city council shall set the matter for a hearing and act on the matter. The city clerk shall give operator not less than 14 days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the city council shall consider the administrative record, including the following: 
(a)  A staff report by the city manager, summarizing the proceedings to date and outlining the city council's options; 
(b)  The city manager's written notice of default; 
(c)  Operator's response to the notice of default; 
(d)  The city manager's written notification to operator of an adverse decision; 
(e)  Operator's notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
At the hearing, operator's representatives and other interested persons shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Based on the above items, the city council shall determine by resolution whether the decision or order of the city manager should be upheld. A tie vote of the city council shall be regarded as upholding the decision of the city manager. If, based upon the administrative record, the city council determines that the performance of operator is in breach of any agreement term or any provision of any applicable law, the city council, in the exercise of its discretion, may order operator to take corrective actions to cure the breach or impose any other remedy including, but not limited to, termination of the agreement. Subject to judicial review, the resolution of the city council shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-929. - Timeframe after revocation. 
Should a franchise or other agreement issued to a medical waste enterprise under this division be revoked, such operator shall not be issued a franchise to conduct such operations within the city until such time as the medical waste enterprise is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the medical waste enterprise is able to fully comply with all of the sections of this article and the Public Resources Code. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Sec. 62-930. - Licensing. 
Each operator exercising rights under this division, in addition to obtaining a franchise or other agreement from the city, shall possess a current city business license. 
(Ord. No. 4134, § 2, 8-2-2010)  
Chapter 66 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4150, §§ 1, 2, adopted November 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 66, §§ 66-1—66-3, 66-36, 66-61—66-67, 66-91, 66-92, 66-126, 66-151—66-158, 66-191—66-193, 66-216—66-218, and enacted a new Ch. 66 as set out herein. The former Ch. 66 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for history. 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; tow service franchises, § 58-671 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local regulation of taxicabs, Government Code § 53075.5 et seq.; authority to regulate taxicabs and vehicles for hire, Vehicle Code § 21100(b). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to establish requirements and procedures for licensing taxicabs and vehicles for hire, including non-emergency medical transportation vehicles, providing passenger transportation services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-2. - Exclusions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the operation of any vehicle for hire when such vehicle is used for the limited purpose of delivering passengers to places in the city from some point outside the city or merely traveling through the city to reach a destination outside of the city. 
This chapter shall not allow for the licensing and/or permitting of an ambulance as a vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as set forth below: 
Ambulance means a motorized vehicle designed, equipped and maintained for the purpose of transporting sick, injured or incapacitated persons, which is equipped with lights and siren, and is licensed by the California Highway Patrol as an emergency vehicle. 
Chief of police means the Chief of the Police Department of the City of Pomona, or his or her designated representative. 
City means the City of Pomona, California. 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of Pomona, or his or her designated representative. 
Driver means every person in actual physical control of driving any vehicle for hire, either as an agent, employee or otherwise. 
Driver permit means an identification card issued by the chief of police to each applicant for whom a completed driver permit application has been approved by the city's business license division for the purpose of driving a vehicle for hire within the city. The term "driver permit" includes driver permits issued to taxicab drivers, unless specifically stated herein. 
License means a business license issued by the city manager permitting the operation of a vehicle for hire. 
Licensee means the operator and holder of a valid business license issued by the city manager permitting a vehicle for hire within the city. 
Limousine means every vehicle, the seating capacity of which has been specified by the manufacturer thereof to be seven persons, or more, but does not include a bus, taxicab or non-emergency medical van. 
Non-emergency medical transportation means the transportation for hire, except by taxicab, of any passengers who may be ill, incapacitated, infirm or convalescent to or from any office, facility or institution which regularly offers medical care or medical service. 
Non-emergency medical van means a vehicle that is used on a commercial enterprise basis to provide medical transportation to a passenger between his or her residence and a health care provider under non-emergency circumstances. A non-emergency medical van shall not include a vehicle that is used to transport patients from one acute care facility to another, who require continuous intravenous medication, medical monitoring or observation by a licensed physician, registered nurse, licensed vocational nurse, licensed paramedic, or licensed emergency medical technician. 
Operator means every person who operates any vehicle for hire business within the city. 
Operator permit means an identification card issued by the chief of police to each applicant for whom a completed operator permit application has been approved by the Pomona Police Department for the purpose of driving a vehicle for hire within the city. 
Permitee means every person who has been issued an operator permit. 
Person means and includes persons, firms, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, joint stock companies and any other form of business organization. 
Taxi stand means any public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city which has been designated by the city engineer as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs. 
Taxicab means a vehicle for hire engaged in carrying passengers not over a fixed route, regardless of whether such vehicle is operated for compensation fixed by a taximeter in accordance with the distance traveled or the time elapsed, or both, or by a flat rate schedule not over a fixed route and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary lines of the city. 
Taxicab driver permit means an identification card issued by the chief of police to each applicant for whom a completed taxicab driver permit application has been approved by the city's business license division for the purpose of driving a taxicab within the city. 
Taximeter means a mechanical instrument or device by which the fare charged to a passenger by a vehicle for hire is mechanically registered, calculated or indicated by means of figures in accordance with the distance traveled or the time elapsed or waiting time or both. 
Vehicle for hire means any motorized vehicle used for the transportation of passengers over the streets of the city and not over a defined route, regardless of whether such operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week or per month. For purposes of this chapter, vehicle for hire excludes ambulances. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Secs. 66-4—66-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATORS 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Vehicle for hire—business license required. 
No person, as defined in this chapter, shall operate, cause, permit or allow to be operated any vehicle for hire upon any streets or other public places in the city without having first obtained a business license from the business license division. Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-32. - Operator permit—Prerequisite to business license. 
No person shall operate a vehicle for hire upon any streets or other public places in the city without first having obtained an operator permit. No person shall be issued a business license to operate a vehicle for hire without first being issued an operator permit. Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-33. - Operator permit—Indemnification. 
It shall be a condition of an operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter that the permitee agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its city council, and each member thereof, and every officer, agent and employee of the city, from any and all liability or financial loss resulting from any suits, claims, losses, or actions brought by any person, and from all costs and expenses of litigation, including attorney's fees, by reason of injury to any person, including, but not limited to, officers and employees of the permitee, performed under and pursuant to this permit, and any and all activities, operations, and conditions in any manner connected therewith or pertaining thereto. Such indemnity shall include, but not be limited to, any and all liabilities, demands, claims, damages, losses, costs and expenses caused or alleged to have been caused by any negligent or other act of permitee or act of permitee's employees, agents or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-34. - Operator permit—Application. 
(a)  Each application for an operator permit shall be made on an application form provided by the city and submitted to the business license division. Each applicant shall submit two copies of the following along with two copies of the completed application: 
(1)  A copy of the applicant's current California Driver's License; 
(2)  A driving record printout issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles within 30 days prior to application submittal; 
(3)  Schedule of rates to be charged for service to be provided by such vehicle; 
a.  Taxicab operators shall include rate per mile, waiting rate and any other rate that may be charged. 
b.  Medical transportation Operators shall submit the maximum rates to be charged and the basis for such charges. 
(4)  If the applicant's business offices are not located in the city, a copy of the current business license issued by the city where the applicant's business offices are located; if the applicant's business offices are located in the city or the applicant otherwise has a location in the city, a copy of a zoning clearance issued by the city. 
(5)  Payment of the permit processing fee to cover the cost of fingerprinting, background investigation and permit issuance, as set by resolution of the city council; and 
(6)  Any additional information as may be deemed necessary by the business license division or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-35. - Operator permit—Issuance, denial, and revocation. 
(a)  Operator permits shall be issued by the business license division. 
(b)  All operator permit applications are subject to review and approval by the chief of police. 
(1)  Each and every applicant for an operator permit shall be fingerprinted and submit to a background investigation by the Pomona Police Department. 
(2)  In the event the applicant is a corporation, partnership or any business organization, other than a sole proprietorship, each officer of such corporation, partnership or business organization, shall be fingerprinted and submit to a background investigation by the Pomona Police Department. 
(c)  All operator permit applications are subject to review and approval by the business license division. 
(d)  Operator permits shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance, unless revoked or terminated prior to expiration date. 
(e)  Any convictions of the following statutes or codes shall be grounds for denial of an operator permit application, or revocation of the operator permit: 
(1)  Penal Code Sections 187, 191.5, 192, 193.7, 207, 209, 212.5, 215, 220, 261, 261.5, 262, 264.1, 266, 269, 273.6, 286, 288, 289, 422.6, or any other subsections thereof; 
(2)  Health and Safety Code Sections 11351, 11352, 11378, and 11379; 
(3)  Penal Code Sections 211 and 245, within five years from the date of the application; or 
(4)  Any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(f)  If any applicant has a conviction for any crime not listed above, the application will be further reviewed by the chief of police. 
(g)  Any applicant required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290 (sex offender registrant) shall be denied issuance of an operator permit. 
(h)  Any operator permit issued to any person required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290 (sex offender registrant) shall be automatically revoked and deemed invalid for all intent and purposes for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  Any application submitted for an operator permit, or an operator permit, may be denied, revoked or suspended if the applicant or permitee submitted an application that contains any fallacious statement. 
(j)  In reviewing any application or potential revocation of an existing permit, the city may consider any information available including but not limited to any pending or past charges against the applicant or any conduct involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-36. - Operator permit—Termination, renewal. 
Operator permits shall expire two years from the date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked. Renewal applications shall require the submittal of forms and fees as required in section 66-34. 
Any operator currently operating within the city at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall comply with the requirements of this article within six months of the adoption of this chapter or upon expiration of their current license, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-37. - Operator permit—Appeal of denial, revocation. 
Any person denied an operator permit shall be entitled to a hearing thereon as set forth in section 50-348 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-38. - Operator permit—Non-transferrable. 
(a)  No operator permit shall be transferable from one person to another. A change in ownership of a vehicle for hire business requires a new operator permit and vehicle business license. 
(b)  If the permitee is a corporation, partnership or business organization, any change in corporate officers or business owners shall require and be subject to: 
(1)  Submittal of an amended operator permit application; 
(2)  Fingerprinting and background investigation of each new officer or owner; 
(3)  Payment of applicable fees; and 
(4)  Approval by the chief of police and the business license division, under the same provisions as the original application. 
(c)  An amended operator permit shall have the same expiration date as the original operator permit. 
(d)  A change in business name (doing business as) for an operator permit shall require and be subject to: 
(1)  Submittal of an amended operator permit application; 
(2)  Submittal of vehicle registration and proof of insurance in the new business name; 
(3)  Payment of applicable fees; 
(4)  Approval by the chief of police and the business license division. 
(e)  The fee for the application to amend an operator permit and vehicle business license shall be set by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-39. - Business license—Application. 
(a)  A separate business license application shall be required for each vehicle providing service within the city. Each application for a business license shall be made upon forms provided by the city. 
(b)  The information contained in each application shall be verified under oath by the applicant and submitted to the business license division accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A copy of the applicant's current operator permit issued by the business license division; 
(2)  A copy of the current vehicle registration issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles; 
(3)  One set of color photos, at least 5? × 7? in size, of the front, both sides and the rear of the vehicle to be licensed; 
(4)  A vehicle inspection form signed by a certified automotive mechanic; 
(5)  Proof of insurance sufficient to comply with the requirements set forth in Division 7, Chapter 4 of the California Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code § 16500 et seq.); 
(6)  Such other information as may be required by the business license division; 
(7)  Payment of the application fee, as set by city council resolution, and the business license tax set forth in section 66-40. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-40. - Business license—Taxes. 
(a)  The following license tax shall be paid in advance for each vehicle for hire (as adopted by Ordinance No. 2776 and adjusted by CPI pursuant to Pomona City Code section 50-415): 
(1)  $25.50 quarterly or $102.00 annually, per vehicle capable of seating one to five passengers. 
(2)  $36.50 quarterly or $146.00 annually, per vehicle capable of seating six to seven passengers 
(3)  $41.50 quarterly or $166.00 annually, per vehicle capable of seating eight to 15 passengers 
(4)  $49.75 quarterly or $199.00 annually, per vehicle capable of seating over 15 passengers. 
(b)  The business license tax set forth in subsection (a), above, shall be adjusted in accordance with section 50-415 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-41. - Business license—Issuance, denial, revocation. 
An application submitted for a business license, or a business license issued pursuant to this chapter, may be denied, revoked or suspended by the business license division if the applicant or licensee has: 
(a)  Submitted an application that contains any fallacious statement; 
(b)  Failed to maintain proof of compliance with the insurance requirements set forth in Division 7, Chapter 4 of the California Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code § 16500 et seq.); or 
(c)  Violated any provisions set forth in this chapter or other provision of the Pomona City Code, or the laws of the United States or the State of California, the violation of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the applicant or licensee to offer public transportation. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-42. - Business license—Appeal of denial, revocation. 
Any person denied a business license for a vehicle for hire shall be entitled to a hearing thereon as set forth in section 50-348 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-43. - Business license—Renewals. 
(a)  Business licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be renewed according to the schedule set forth in section 50-345 (a) and (b) of this Code. 
(b)  Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials and fees as original applications. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-44. - Business license—Non-transferable. 
No business license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise conveyed, by operation of law or otherwise. The sale, transfer, assignment, mortgaging or otherwise conveying of any such business license shall be grounds for revocation of such license by the business license division. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Secs. 66-45—66-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVERS 
 
Sec. 66-61. - Driver permit—Required. 
No person shall drive a vehicle for hire, including but not limited to a taxicab, within the city without first obtaining a driver permit. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle for hire operator to permit the operation of any in-service passenger vehicle for hire by a person who has not complied with the terms of this division. 
As used in this division, the term "driver permit" includes driver permits issued to taxicab drivers, unless specifically stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-62. - Driver permit, taxicab driver permit—Prerequisites. 
(a)  No person shall be issued a driver permit who has not been fingerprinted and had a background investigation completed by the Pomona Police Department or another local agency within the previous twelve months, subject to review by the chief of police. 
(b)  No person shall be issued a driver permit who is not 18 years of age or older. Any person under the age of 18 years who operates a vehicle for hire for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  No person shall apply for or be issued a taxicab driver permit to drive a taxicab unless he or she has been offered employment as a driver of a taxicab by a taxicab operator with a current vehicle for hire operator permit and one or more currently licensed taxicabs. 
(d)  No person shall be issued a taxicab driver permit unless he or she has passed a drug test administered pursuant to a drug testing program meeting the requirements of California Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3). 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-63. - Driver permit—Application. 
(a)  Each application for a driver permit or taxicab driver permit shall be made on an application form provided by the city and submitted to the business license division. Each completed application shall be submitted with the following: 
(1)  Two (2) color passport photographs with the application. 
(2)  Copy of the applicant's current California Driver's License. 
(3)  Copy of DMV printout issued within the last 30 days. 
(4)  Copy of any state license as may be required for operating a passenger vehicle otherwise regulated by state or other law. 
(5)  Offer of employment letter from operator of one or more vehicles for hire currently licensed by the city. 
(6)  Proof of negative drug test within the past one (1) year pursuant to the requirements of California Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3). 
(7)  Any additional information as may be deemed necessary. 
(8)  Payment of the permit processing fee, fingerprinting fee, background investigation fee, as set by resolution of the city council. 
(9)  Payment of a $100.00 refundable taxicab driver permit deposit. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-64. - Driver permit—Issuance, denial, and revocation. 
(a)  All driver permits are issued by the business license division in its discretion. 
(b)  All driver permit applications are subject to review and approval by the chief of police. 
(1)  Each and every applicant for a driver permit and taxicab driver permit shall be fingerprinted and submit to a background investigation by the Pomona Police Department. 
(2)  In the event the applicant is a corporation, partnership or any business organization, other than a sole proprietorship, each officer of such corporation, partnership or business organization, shall be fingerprinted and submit to a background investigation by the Pomona Police Department. 
(c)  All driver permit applications are subject to review and approval by the business license division. 
(d)  Each driver permit and taxicab driver permit approved and issued by the business license division shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance, unless revoked or terminated prior to expiration date. 
(e)  Any convictions of the following statutes or codes shall be grounds for denial of a driver permit application, or revocation of the driver permit: 
(1)  Penal Code Sections 187, 191.5, 192, 193.7, 207, 209, 212.5, 215, 220, 261, 261.5, 262, 264.1, 266, 269, 273.6, 286, 288, 289, 422.6, or any other subsections thereof; 
(2)  Health and Safety Code Sections 11351, 11352, 11378, and 11379; 
(3)  Penal Code Sections 211 and 245 within five years from the date of the application; or 
(4)  Any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(f)  If an applicant has any conviction for any crime not listed above, the application will be further reviewed by the chief of police. 
(g)  Any applicant required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290 (sex offender registrant) shall be denied issuance of a taxicab driver permit. 
(h)  Any driver permit issued to any person required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290 (sex offender registrant) shall be automatically deemed invalid and revoked for all intent and purposes for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  Any application submitted for a driver permit, or a driver permit, may be denied, revoked or suspended if the applicant or permitee has: 
(1)  Submitted an application that contains any fallacious statement; 
(2)  Failed to maintain proof of compliance with the insurance requirements set forth in Division 7, Chapter 4 of the California Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code § 16500 et seq.); or 
(3)  Violated any provisions set forth in this chapter or other provision of the Pomona City Code, or the laws of the United States or the State of California, the violation of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the applicant or licensee to offer public transportation. 
(j)  In reviewing any application, the city may consider any information available including but not limited to any pending or past charges against the applicant or any conduct involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-65. - Driver permit—Termination, renewal. 
(a)  Each driver permit shall automatically terminate and become void upon termination of employment from the employer specified in the permit application and stated on the driver permit. 
(b)  A change of employer during the two-year term of a driver permit will require a new application and issuance of a new driver permit, prior to driving for a new employer. 
(c)  Applications for renewal of driver permits shall be submitted to the business license division no less than 30 days prior to the expiration date of the current permit, in accordance with the application requirements set forth in section 66-63. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-66. - Driver permit—Appeal of denial, revocation. 
Any person denied a driver permit shall be entitled to a hearing thereon as set forth in section 50-348 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-67. - Taxicab driver permit—Refundable deposits. 
(a)  Upon the termination of employment of a taxicab driver, the employer shall notify the business license division and return the taxicab driver permit. Upon receiving the returned taxicab driver permit and a written request for refund of the permit deposit, such refund shall be made for any permit(s) returned by the employer prior to the expiration date of the permit. 
(b)  Deposit refunds shall not be made for taxicab driver permits returned after the expiration date of the permit. 
(c)  A change of employer during the two-year term of the taxicab driver permit will require a new application and issuance of a new taxicab driver permit, prior to driving a taxicab for the new employer. The refundable permit deposit shall not be charged, provided the previously issued taxicab driver permit is submitted with the new application. 
(d)  Applicants submitting a taxicab driver permit renewal application shall not be required to pay the refundable permit deposit, provided the permitee is employed by the same taxicab business as when the previous taxicab driver permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-68. - Driver permit—Contents. 
Each driver permit issued by the business license division shall contain the following: 
(a)  Name of permitee. 
(b)  Name and phone number of permitee's employer. 
(c)  Photograph of permitee. 
(d)  Type of vehicle to be driven. 
(e)  "Issued by the City of Pomona". 
(f)  Signature of the chief of police. 
(g)  Permit Number. 
(h)  Date of issuance. 
(i)  Expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-69. - Driver permit—Display required. 
At any time a vehicle for hire is in service, the driver of such vehicle shall display in view of passengers, thereof, his or her original driver permit, issued by the business license division. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Secs. 66-70—66-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - VEHICLE OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 66-91. - General requirements. 
(a)  Each vehicle for hire shall have available at all times a copy of the city business license issued for that vehicle. 
(b)  Each vehicle shall have displayed in clear view of all passengers the driver of the vehicle's original city driver permit issued by the business license division. 
(c)  When applicable, in addition to a city driver's permit, the driver of a vehicle for hire shall have in their possession a valid chauffeur's license or other applicable license issued by the state department of motor vehicles. 
(d)  While driving a vehicle for hire, each driver must have in their possession their valid California Driver's License issued by the department of motor vehicles. 
(e)  Each vehicle for hire shall display valid California state license plates or show evidence that formal application has been made to the department of motor vehicles, prior to any vehicle being placed into service. 
(f)  Each taxicab for hire shall have affixed to the outside of each side of the vehicle a sign clearly identifying the licensed operator and the operator's telephone number. 
(g)  Each taxicab shall post the current rate schedule, which shall be on file with the city clerk, in clear view of all passengers. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-92. - Unauthorized parking. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator, driver or attendant of any vehicle for hire to cause or permit a vehicle for hire to be parked upon any street and highway located within the city any longer than necessary to load and unload passengers, except: 
(a)  While the vehicle for hire is engaged by a passenger; 
(b)  While the vehicle for hire is actually paid for; 
(c)  While the vehicle for hire has permission of a property owner or occupant or real property to stand or park a vehicle for hire on the street or highway adjacent to the property of the owner or occupant. 
Any vehicle for hire parked on city property in violation of this section may be towed away and stored by a police officer, person or private towing service designated by the chief of police under the direction of a police officer. The owner of any vehicle for hire so removed and stored may reclaim it, but such owner shall first pay the cost that is incurred in removing and storing such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-93. - Misrepresentation of identity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person soliciting patronage for any taxicab at any place in the city to misrepresent, by word, sign, hatband, insignia, badge, or by any other means, the true identity of the owner of the vehicle to be used. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-94. - Exclusive use by passenger. 
When any taxicab is engaged by any person, he/she shall have the exclusive right to the full use of the passenger compartment. It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of such vehicle to solicit or carry additional passengers therein without obtaining the consent of the person first engaging the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Secs. 66-95—66-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 66-121. - Rates generally. 
(a)  The rates submitted to the business license division with each vehicle license application shall be filed with the city clerk for public review. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle for hire to have rates posted that are not consistent with the rates on file with the city clerk. 
(c)  In no event shall rates charged to the public for services provided by a medical transportation van exceed the maximum rates allowed pursuant to County of Los Angeles Code sections 7.16.280—7.16.330. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every taxicab operator using any taximeter to, at all times, keep such meter accurate. Such meters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by any police officer or other authorized inspector. Upon the complaint of any person, any police officer or other authorized inspector shall investigate the taximeter. Upon the discovery of any inaccuracy of the taximeter, any vehicle equipped with such taximeter shall be removed from service until the taximeter has been correctly adjusted. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-122. - Change of rates. 
(a)  A revised rate schedule may be submitted with the application renewal of an operator permit. If an increase in rates is proposed, justification for such increase shall be required. 
(b)  Upon approval of the operator permit renewal, the rate schedule shall be filed with the city clerk for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-123. - Taxicab rate violations; non-payment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, as owner, operator or driver of any vehicle for hire operated over the city streets, to charge, collect, demand, receive or arrange for any compensation for the transportation service provided in this city other than the rates on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired any taxicab. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab, while carrying passengers, to: 
(1)  Display any flag, sign or signal denoting that such vehicle is not employed; 
(2)  Set into operation any taximeter at or during any time when such vehicle is not actually employed; or 
(3)  Fail to stop the operation of such taximeter at the termination of the service to any passenger. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab, upon receiving full payment of a fare indicated by the taximeter or otherwise collected, to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any passenger making such payment. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-124. - Cruising by taxicabs prohibited. 
The services of a taxicab shall be available only through arrangement by telephone or upon engagement at a taxistand or from the business location from which the vehicle is operated. It is unlawful for an operator or driver of any taxicab to cause a taxicab to be cruising in search of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-125. - Taxistands—Establishment, license. 
(a)  An operator of one or more licensed taxicabs may submit a written request to the city manager to obtain an exclusive taxi stand license. Such request would state the desired location the number of taxicabs that would utilize the desired location(s). 
(b)  The city manager in cooperation with the chief of police shall have the authority to deny granting an exclusive license when it is determined that the granting of such license would be detrimental to the public health and welfare. 
(c)  An exclusive taxistand license shall be subject to approval by the city council upon the recommendation of the city manager and the chief of police. 
(d)  Preference may be given to taxicab operators whose primary place of business is within the city. 
(e)  The duration of each taxi stand license, conditions to be imposed and the fee for each taxi stand license shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-126. - Unauthorized parking. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator or driver of any taxicab that is not authorized under an approved taxistand license to cause or permit such vehicle to occupy the designated taxi stand. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 66-127. - Use of licensed vehicles for hire; posting of licensed operators. 
It shall be unlawful for any medical facility to utilize any non-emergency medical transportation service not licensed to provide service within Pomona. All medical facilities that utilize non-emergency medical transportation services shall keep an up-to-date list of service providers who are licensed to pick up persons in Pomona. 
Non-emergency medical vans shall not be used when an individual requires transport from one acute care facility to another, or requires continuous intravenous medication, medical monitoring or observation by a licensed physician, registered nurse, licensed vocational nurse, licensed paramedic, or licensed emergency medical technician. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 11-7-2011)  
Chapter 68 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cannabis business tax, ch. 50, art. XI. 
 
Sec. 68-1. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the provisions of the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA") to accommodate the needs of medically-ill persons and provide access to cannabis for medicinal purposes as recommended by their health care provider(s), and to provide access to adult-use of cannabis for persons over the age of 21 as authorized by the Control, Tax & Regulate the Adult Use Cannabis Act ("AUMA" or "Proposition 64" passed by California voters in 2016), while imposing reasonable regulations on the use of land to protect the city's residents, neighborhoods, and businesses from disproportionately negative impacts. As such, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the cultivation, processing, manufacturing, testing, sale, delivery, distribution and transportation of medicinal and adult-use cannabis and cannabis products in a responsible manner to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Pomona and to enforce rules and regulations consistent with state law. 
It is the further purpose and intent of this chapter to require all commercial cannabis businesses operating in the city to obtain and renew annually a commercial cannabis permit to operate within Pomona and an annual City of Pomona Business License. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the possession, use, or provision of cannabis for purposes that violate state or federal law. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to any other permits, licenses and approvals which may be required to conduct business in the city, and are in addition to any permits, licenses and approval required under state, county, or other law. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-2. - Legal authority. 
Pursuant to Sections 5 and 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution, the provisions of MAUCRSA, any subsequent state legislation and regulations regarding same, the city is authorized to adopt ordinances that establish standards, requirements and regulations for the licensing and permitting of commercial medicinal and adult-use cannabis activity. Any standards, requirements, and regulations regarding health and safety, security, and worker protections established by the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions, shall be the minimum standards applicable in the city to all commercial cannabis activity. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-3. - Commercial cannabis businesses prohibited unless specifically authorized by this chapter. 
Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, commercial cultivation, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, sale, delivery, distribution or transportation (other than as provided under California Business & Professions Code Section 26090(e)), of cannabis or cannabis products is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-4. - Compliance with laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions that violate federal, state law or local law with respect to engaging in, or in the operation of, a commercial cannabis business. Nor shall this chapter be construed as amending existing prohibitions on smoking tobacco or cannabis in public buildings and parks. It shall be the responsibility of the permittees and responsible persons of a commercial cannabis business to ensure that a commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including for as long as applicable, all state cannabis laws, any subsequently enacted state law or regulatory, licensing, or certification standards or requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of a required license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-5. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth herein. Any reference to California statutes includes any regulations promulgated thereunder, and is deemed to include any successor or amended version of the referenced statute or regulatory provision. 
A-License is a license issued by the State of California under MAUCRSA for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults 21 years of age and over and who do not possess physician's recommendations. 
Applicant shall include any individual or entity applying for a permit under this chapter, and including any officer, director, partner, or other duly authorized representative applying on behalf of an entity. 
Business license is the license issued by the city's business license division after payment of the business tax as set forth in division 1 of article VIII of chapter 50 of the City of Pomona City Code. 
Bureau means the bureau of cannabis control within the department of consumer affairs, and shall have the same meaning as in Section 26001(e) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Cannabis means all parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. Cannabis also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. Cannabis does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, cannabis does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. Cannabis shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(f) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Cannabis accessories means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing cannabis, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the human body. Cannabis accessories shall also have the same meaning as in Section 11018.2 of the Health and Safety Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Cannabis concentrate means cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this chapter. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code. Cannabis accessories shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(h) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Cannabis products means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including but not limited to concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. Cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code. Cannabis products shall also have the same meaning as in Section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Canopy means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, inclusive of all vertical planes, whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. 
Caregiver or primary caregiver has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
City shall mean the City of Pomona, California. 
City manager shall mean the city manager of the city, including his or her designee. 
Code shall mean the City of Pomona City Code. 
Commercial cannabis activity includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as provided for in MAUCRSA. Commercial cannabis activity shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(k) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Commercial cannabis business means any business or operation which engages in medicinal or adult-use commercial cannabis activity. 
Commercial cannabis permit means the regulatory permit issued by the city to a commercial cannabis business, which is required before any commercial cannabis activity may be conducted in the city, pursuant to this chapter. 
Cultivation is any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. Cultivation shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(l) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. Whenever references to cultivation are made in this chapter, permitted or licensed cultivation shall only be indoors, as outdoor cultivation is expressly prohibited. 
Cultivation site means a location where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or a location where any combination of those activities occurs. Cultivation site shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(m) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. Whenever references to a cultivation site are made in this chapter, a permitted or licensed cultivation site shall only allow cultivation activities indoors, as outdoor cultivation is expressly prohibited. 
Customer is a natural person 21 years of age or older; or, a natural person 18 years of age or older who possesses a physician's recommendation, or a primary caregiver. Customer shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(n) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Day care center has the same meaning as in Section 1596.76 of the Health and Safety Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Delivery is the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer. Delivery shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(p) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Dispensing means any activity involving the retail sale of cannabis or cannabis products from a retailer. 
Distribution means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensees. Distribution shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(r) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Distributor means a person holding a valid commercial cannabis permit for distribution issued by the city and a valid state license for distribution, required by state law to engage in the business of purchasing cannabis from a licensed cultivator or cannabis products from a licensed manufacturer, for sale to a licensed retailer. 
Edible cannabis product means a cannabis product that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, and is not considered food. Edible cannabis product has the same meaning as Business and Professions Code Section 26001. 
Fire chief shall mean Los Angeles County Fire Department personnel acting as the city's fire chief, or his or her designee, or the city's fire chief. 
Law enforcement agency refers to the agency charged with enforcing the pertinent laws in the city. The law enforcement agency for the city shall be the Pomona Police Department. Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, whenever any provision of this Code makes reference to the law enforcement agency of the city, such shall be construed to mean, and deemed to constitute, that person holding the office of chief of police for the city and his or her authorized deputies or officers, performing law enforcement functions for the city. 
Law enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer of the city's law enforcement agency, or deputy of the Pomona Police Department, authorized to enforce the city's laws, including those contained in this chapter. 
License or state license means a license issued by the State of California, or one of its departments or divisions, under MAUCRSA, and any subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same, to lawfully engage in commercial cannabis activity. 
Licensee means any person holding a license issued by the State of California to conduct commercial cannabis business activities. 
Live plants means living cannabis flowers and plants including seeds, immature plants, and vegetative stage plants. 
Manager means any person(s) designated by the commercial cannabis business to act as the representative or agent of the commercial cannabis business in managing day-to-day operations with corresponding liabilities and responsibilities, or the person in apparent charge of the premises where the commercial cannabis business is located. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has the power to direct, supervise, or hire and dismiss employees, controls hours of operations, creates policy rules, or purchases supplies. 
M-license means a license issued by the State of California under MAUCRSA for commercial cannabis activity involving medicinal cannabis. 
Manufacture means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. Manufacture shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(ag) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Manufactured cannabis means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, extraction or other manufactured product intended for internal consumption through inhalation or oral ingestion or for topical application. 
Manufacturer means a licensee that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or re-labels its container. A manufacturer may also be a person that infuses cannabis in its products but does not perform its own extraction. Manufacturer shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(ah) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Manufacturing site means a location that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or re-labels its container, and is owned and operated by a person issued a valid commercial cannabis permit for manufacturing from the city and, a valid state license as required for manufacturing of cannabis products. 
Medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis product refers to cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215) or the Medical Marijuana Program Act of 2003, found at Sections 11362.5 and 11362.71 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a valid and current identification card issued by a California licensed physician's recommendation. 
Microbusiness means licensees who engage in at least three of the following commercial cannabis activities: indoor cultivation of less than 10,000 square feet, manufacturing (level 1, type 6), distribution, and retailer-storefront, as defined within this chapter. 
Operation means any act for which a license is required under the provisions of the Act, or any commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products. Operation shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(ak) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Owner means any of the following, or a group or combination of any of the following acting as a unit: 
(1)  A person with an aggregate ownership interest of ten percent or more in the person applying for a city commercial cannabis permit, whether a partner, shareholder, principal, member, or the like, unless the interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance. 
(2)  The chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity. 
(3)  A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit. 
(4)  An individual who will be participating in the direction, control, or management of the person applying for a city commercial cannabis permit. 
Patient or qualified patient means the same definition as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., as it may be amended, and which means a person who is entitled to the protections of California Health & Safety Code Section 11362.5. 
Permittee means any person to whom a current and valid city-issued commercial cannabis business permit has been issued. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit or entity, and the plural as well as the singular. 
Premises means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the applicant where the commercial cannabis business will be or is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only be occupied by one permittee. 
Purchaser means the customer who is engaged in a transaction with a permittee for purposes of obtaining cannabis or cannabis products. 
Regulations means those regulations prescribed and issued by the State of California, through its respective departments and divisions, pursuant to Section 26013 of the Business and Professions Code, including those regulations as found in the California Code of Regulations (including, Title 3, Division 8; Title 16, Division 42; and Title 17, Division 1), as same may be amended from time to time, to implement, interpret, administer and enforce the Act, and providing licensing and enforcement criteria for commercial cannabis activities and businesses. 
Responsible person means all owners and operators of a commercial cannabis business, including the permittee and all officers, directors, managers, or partners, and all persons with authority, including apparent authority, over the premises of the commercial cannabis business. 
Retailer-storefront is a storefront retailer of a commercial cannabis business facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale to customers at a fixed location, including an establishment that also offers delivery of cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale, and which are open to the public, and where the operator is authorized to operate in the city as a retailer, and holds a valid state license as required by state law to operate a retailer. 
Retailer-delivery only means a non-storefront, delivery only retailer as a commercial cannabis business facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale to customers, where the premises are non-storefront, are closed to the public, and sales are conducted exclusively by delivery, where a vehicle is used to convey the cannabis or cannabis products to the customer from a fixed location, and where the operator is authorized by the city to operate as a retailer, and holds a valid state license as required by state law to operate as a retailer. 
Sell, sale, retail sale, or to sell includes any transaction whereby, for any consideration or gross receipt, whether actual or intangible, title to cannabis or cannabis products are transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis products by a customer to the licensee from whom the cannabis or cannabis product was purchased. 
State law means all laws of the State of California, which includes, but are not limited to, all rules, regulations, and policies adopted by State of California agencies, departments, divisions, and regulatory entities, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Testing laboratory means a laboratory, facility, or entity in the state that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following: 
(1)  Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state. 
(2)  Licensed by the State of California. 
Testing laboratory shall also have the same meaning as in Section 26001(at) of the Business and Professions Code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Topical cannabis means a product intended for external application or absorption through the skin. A topical cannabis product is not considered a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Transport means the transfer of cannabis products from the permitted business location of one licensee to the permitted business location of another licensee, for the purposes of conducting commercial cannabis activity authorized by law and which may be amended or repealed by any subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same. 
Youth and recreation center means any public or private facility that is primarily used to host recreational or social activities for minors, including, but not limited to, private youth membership organizations or clubs, social service teenage club facilities, video arcades, or similar amusement park facilities. Parks with organized youth-oriented programs are also youth and recreation centers for the purposes of this chapter 68. Youth and recreation center shall also have the same meaning as in Section 11353.1 of the Health and Safety Code and Section 26001(av) of the Business and Professions Code, as each may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-6. - Commercial cannabis permit required to engage in commercial cannabis business. 
(a)  No person may engage in any commercial cannabis business or in any commercial cannabis activity within the city unless the person (1) has a valid commercial cannabis permit from the city, (2) has a valid State of California Seller's Permit, and (3) is in compliance with all applicable state and local laws and regulations pertaining to the commercial cannabis business and commercial cannabis activities, including the duty to obtain any required state licenses, business license obtained and all taxes paid and all other applicable laws including without limitation zoning and fire codes. 
(b)  The classification and type of commercial cannabis businesses allowed for by this chapter are the indoor cultivation, manufacturing, testing, distribution, retailer-storefront, a microbusiness of medicinal and adult-use cannabis and cannabis products, and the ancillary transportation and delivery of cannabis or cannabis products. 
(c)  In addition to all other applicable zoning regulations and the requirements of all required state and local permits, no commercial cannabis permit will be valid if the proposed commercial cannabis business is located within a 1,000-foot radius of a school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades one through 12, a day care center, or a youth and recreation center with primary youth and recreation center activities, which is in lawful existence at the time a successful application was submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-7. - Maximum number and type of commercial cannabis businesses authorized; application process. 
(a)  The city council, by resolution, shall determine the maximum number of commercial cannabis businesses by category that may be permitted to operate in the city. In its discretion, the city council may increase or decrease the maximum number of permits that may be issued in any category of commercial cannabis activity. This section is only intended to establish the procedure to set the maximum number of commercial cannabis businesses that may be issued permits to operate in the city under each category of commercial cannabis activities. Nothing in this chapter requires that the city authorize any or all of the commercial cannabis businesses that submit an application to the city. 
(b)  The process for issuing commercial cannabis permits to qualified cannabis businesses is meant to result in qualified businesses that will operate in accordance with state and local law, be successful, contribute positively to the community and local economy, and avoid secondary adverse impacts. Toward that objective, the application process includes these four phases: 
(1)  Phase one: Application submittal. This includes submitted complete information, obtaining a zoning clearance to verify the proposed location is permissible, completed Livescan and background check information (state and federal database), and processing fees. 
(2)  Phase two: Initial scoring of application. 
(3)  Phase three: Public presentation and comment meeting. 
(4)  Phase four: Final ranking and, if permits available, permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-8. - Initial commercial cannabis permit application and scoring. 
(a)  The city manager may establish additional submittal requirements for an application for a commercial cannabis permit. The following information shall be included in any application for a commercial cannabis permit: 
(1)  Name of applicant. 
(2)  Business trade name (if applicable) of the applicant. 
(3)  Identification of owner(s) (full name, primary phone number, social security number or individual taxpayer identification number, date and place of birth, email address, and mailing address for the primary owner submitting the application). 
(4)  For each person that is an "owner" of the applicant: 
a.  Percentage of interest held in the applicant entity by the owner; 
b.  Whether the owner has an ownership or financial interest, as defined in section 5003 of the Regulations, in any other commercial cannabis business licensed under the AUMA or MAUCRSA; 
c.  A copy of the owner's government-issued identification, acceptable forms are a document issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government that includes the name, date of birth, physical description, and picture of the owner, such as a driver's license; 
d.  A detailed description of the owner's criminal convictions, if applicable. A conviction for this purpose means a plea or guilty verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. Convictions dismissed under Penal Code section 1203.4 or equivalent non-California law must be disclosed. Convictions dismissed under Health & Safety Code section 11361.8 or equivalent non-California law must be disclosed. Juvenile adjudications and traffic infractions under $300.00 that did not involve alcohol, dangerous drugs, or controlled substances do not need to be included. For each conviction, provide: 
1.  The date of conviction; 
2.  Dates of incarceration, if applicable; 
3.  Dates of probation, if applicable; 
4.  Dates of parole, if applicable; 
5.  A detailed description of the offense for which the owner was convicted; and 
6.  A statement of rehabilitation for each conviction written by the owner that demonstrates the owner's fitness for consideration; 
e.  If applicable, a detailed description of a commercial cannabis license, revocation of a commercial cannabis license, or sanctions for unlicensed commercial cannabis activity by a licensing authority or local agency against the applicant or a business entity in which the applicant was an owner or officer within the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
f.  If applicable, a detailed description if the city issued the applicant a notice or citation for unlicensed commercial cannabis activity, or if the applicant was a defendant in a civil or criminal proceeding filed by the city or the people of the State of California, for allowing, causing, or permitting unlicensed commercial cannabis activities within the city's jurisdiction; 
g.  An attestation of each owner as follows: "Under penalty of perjury, I hereby declare that the information contained within and submitted with the application is complete, true, and accurate. I understand that a misrepresentation of fact or omission may be cause for rejection or denial of this application, or revocation of any Commercial Cannabis Permit or any permit, license or approval issued in reliance thereon." 
(5)  Primary contact. The contact information for the applicant's designated primary contact person, including the name, title, phone number, and email address of said individual. 
(6)  Nature of operations. Identification of whether the applicant seeks to operate a cannabis cultivation site, manufacturing site, testing laboratory, distribution site, microbusiness facility, or retailer; the specific state license category under which the applicant will seek to operate; and the number of employees anticipated. 
(7)  Qualifications and experience of applicants and owners. The application shall include information concerning any special business or professional qualifications or licenses of the applicants and owners, and the years of relevant and related experience, that would add to the number or quality of services that facility would provide, or otherwise demonstrates the applicants' and owners' capacity to operate a successful commercial cannabis facility in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(8)  Disclosure of lobbying activity. If applicant contracted, employed or in any manner paid or will pay any person for influencing or attempting to influence an elected official, appointed official or any employee of the city, shall fully disclose the name of individuals and organization(s) performing lobbying services. 
(9)  The physical address of the proposed location, as well as the Los Angeles County Assessor Parcel Number and property owner's consent. 
a.  Evidence of the applicant's right to use and occupy the property. If owned by applicant, a grant deed or a copy of title for the property. If not owned by applicant, a document from the landowner or the landowner's agent stating the applicant has the right to occupy the property and acknowledges that the applicant may use the property to potentially conduct a commercial cannabis business for which the applicant is applying, plus any lease agreement. 
b.  A complete and detailed diagram, such as a site plan, of the premises, as well as a map showing the premises' location within the city, which comply with the following: 
1.  Shows the boundaries of the property and the proposed premises to be utilized, showing all boundaries, dimensions, entrances and exits, interior partitions, walls, rooms, bathrooms, windows, doorways, and common or common shared entryways, and a brief statement of the principal activity to be conducted therein; 
2.  Map identifying any schools (K—12), day care, or youth and recreation center facilities and any commercial cannabis business located within 1,000 feet of the property lines of the proposed location. If the proposed location is not within 1,000 feet of any such uses, identify on the map the closest such use, and the distance in feet between that use and the property line of the proposed location; 
c.  Identifies all commercial cannabis activities that will take place in each area of the premises, and identification of limited access areas; 
d.  The location of all proposed security cameras with a number assigned to each for identification purposes; 
e.  The diagram shall be clear, legible, and to scale, and shall not include any highlighting, and the markings on the diagram shall be in blue-and-white print; and 
f.  If the proposed premises include only a portion of a property, the diagram must be labeled indicating which part of the property is the proposed premises and what the remainder will be used for. 
(10)  Description of operating procedures. Applications shall include a detailed description of the applicant's proposed operating procedures for each commercial cannabis activity, including an explanation for how the business will comply with the operating regulations of this Code and state law. The application must include copies of any applicable policies or manuals of the applicant and address each of the following, if applicable: 
a.  Transportation procedures. A description of the procedure for transporting cannabis and cannabis products, including whether or not the applicant will be transporting cannabis or cannabis products or contracting for transportation services. 
b.  Inventory procedures. 
1.  A description of the applicant's procedure for receiving shipments of inventory; 
2.  Where the applicant's inventory will be stored on the premises and how records of the inventory will be maintained; and 
3.  Procedure for performing inventory reconciliation and for ensuring that inventory records are accurate. 
c.  Non-laboratory quality control procedures. 
1.  Procedures for preventing the deterioration of cannabis or cannabis products held by the applicant; 
2.  Procedures for ensuring that cannabis and cannabis products are properly packaged and labeled; and 
3.  Procedure for ensuring that an independent licensed testing laboratory samples and analyzes cannabis and cannabis products held by the applicant. 
d.  Security procedures. All applicants shall propose sufficient security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized access or entrance into areas containing cannabis or cannabis products, and to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis or cannabis products at the commercial cannabis business. Proposed security procedures shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following: 
1.  Preventing individuals from remaining on the premises of the commercial cannabis business if they are not engaging in an activity directly related to the permitted operations of the commercial cannabis business. 
2.  Establishing limited access areas accessible only to authorized commercial cannabis business personnel. 
3.  How and where all cannabis and cannabis products will be stored in a secured and locked room, safe, or vault. How all cannabis and cannabis products, including live plants that will be cultivated, will be kept in a manner as to prevent diversion, theft, and loss. 
4.  Procedures for installing 24-hour security surveillance cameras (CCTV) of at least HD-quality to monitor all entrances and exits to and from the premises, all interior spaces within the commercial cannabis business which are open and accessible to the public, all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or currency, is being stored for any period of time on a regular basis and all interior spaces where diversion of cannabis could reasonably occur. Procedures for how the applicant will ensure that the security surveillance camera's footage is remotely accessible to law enforcement, and that it is compatible with the city's software and hardware. In addition, procedures on how remote and real-time, live access to the video footage from the cameras will be provided to law enforcement. Procedures for ensuring video recordings are maintained for a minimum of 60 calendar days, and procedures to make them available to law enforcement upon request. Procedures to ensure video shall be of sufficient quality for effective prosecution of any crime found to have occurred on the site of the commercial cannabis business. 
5.  A description of where sensors will be installed to detect entry and exit from all secure areas. 
6.  A description of procedures of installing panic buttons in the premises. 
7.  Description of having a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm system, with the required city alarm permit as required by this Pomona City Code section 14-391, et seq. 
8.  A description of the physical security features and improvements that will be installed on the exterior and within the interior of the building, in full compliance with all applicable Building and Safety and Fire Code requirements and any applicable zoning requirements. Use of wrought iron on any exterior door, window or opening is prohibited. 
9.  Procedures on establishing a plan to have security personnel on-site 24 hours a day, or alternative security as authorized by the law enforcement agency. Description or documentation showing that the proposed security personnel are licensed by the State of California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services personnel. Procedure to submit to the city and the city's law enforcement agency the names and contact information of security personnel, with copies of state-issued licenses and permits, government-issued identification form, and photographs of uniforms and badges. Acknowledgement from applicant indicating that it shall be responsible for providing this confirming information to law enforcement, with updating information within seven calendar days of a change in security personnel, agents, or representatives. 
10.  Procedures on how each applicant shall have the capability to remain secure during a power outage and ensure that all access doors are not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks are not released during a power outage. 
11.  Identification of a designated security representative/liaison to the city, who shall be reasonably available to meet with city staff, as well as law enforcement regarding any security related measures or operational issues. 
12.  A storage and transportation plan, describing in detail the procedures for safely and securely storing and transporting all cannabis, cannabis products, including the use of child-safe cannabis containers, and any currency. 
13.  An affirmative commitment that the applicant will cooperate with the city whenever the city manager, or his or her designee, makes a request, upon reasonable notice, to inspect or audit the effectiveness of any security plan or of any other requirement of this subsection. 
14.  A description and plan of how the applicant will notify law enforcement within 24 hours after discovering any of the following: 
i.  Significant discrepancies identified during inventory. The level of significance shall be determined by the regulations promulgated by law enforcement. 
ii.  Diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the commercial cannabis business or any agent or employee of the commercial cannabis business. 
iii.  The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis, registering qualifying patients, primary caregivers, or employees or agents of the commercial cannabis business. 
iv.  Any other breach of security. 
v.  Testing laboratories (only): For applicants seeking to operate a testing laboratory, describe operating procedures as required by the applicable state law and regulations, with references to the applicable state law or regulation requiring same. 
(11)  For applicants with five or more employees, the applicant shall attest that the applicant will enter into a labor peace agreement and will abide by the terms of the agreement, and the applicant shall provide a copy thereof to the city. For applicants that have not yet entered into a labor peace agreement, the applicant shall provide a notarized statement indicating that within 30-days of licensure the applicant will enter into and abide by the labor peace agreement. 
(12)  All applicants shall submit a workforce plan that includes at least the following provisions: 
a.  Commitment for 30 percent of employees to be local hires; this local hires requirement is satisfied when a business shows that it has either hired or made a good faith effort to hire bona fide residents of Pomona who have not established residency after application for employment with the permittee; 
b.  Commitment to offer apprenticeships and/or compensation for continuing education in the field; and 
c.  Pay a living wage to its employees. 
(13)  Collective bargaining agreement. If applicable, the applicant shall submit current collective bargaining agreement with labor organization that currently represents cannabis workers in the United States. 
(14)  Seller's permit. The applicant shall provide a valid seller's permit number issued by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, if applicable. If the applicant has not yet received a seller's permit, the applicant shall attest that the applicant is or will before commencing operations, apply for a seller's permit. 
(15)  Indemnification agreement. To the fullest extent permitted by local, state and federal law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a commercial cannabis permit or otherwise approving the operation of any commercial cannabis business. As a condition to the approval of any commercial cannabis permit, the applicant is to execute a separate indemnification agreement prepared by the city that fully indemnifies the city for all liabilities associated with the commercial cannabis permit, the commercial cannabis permittee's commercial cannabis activities, and any action taken by the cannabis permittee. The indemnification agreement shall include the defense of the city and reimbursement of all fees, costs and expenses incurred by the city related to any action arising from the agreement. 
(16)  Payment of application fee. Each applicant shall pay the applicable fee(s) pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Background check. Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which authorizes city authorities to access state and local summary criminal history information for employment, licensing, or certification purposes; and authorizes access to federal level criminal history information by transmitting fingerprint images and related information to the Department of Justice to be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, every applicant and responsible person of the commercial cannabis business must submit fingerprints and other information deemed necessary by the Pomona Police Department, or the city's law enforcement agency, for a background check. No person shall be issued a permit to operate a commercial cannabis business unless they have first cleared the background check, as determined by the city, Pomona Police Department, or the city's law enforcement agency as required by this section. A fee for the cost of the background investigation, which shall be the actual cost to the city to conduct the background investigation, as it deems necessary and appropriate, shall be paid at the time the application for a commercial cannabis permit is submitted. 
(c)  The city manager may adopt any procedure(s) to supplement the initial application process. The city manager is authorized to prepare the necessary applications, forms, adopt any necessary rules to the application, regulations and processes, and solicit applications. 
(d)  Any applicant whose 'ownership' includes a person with a past plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere for operating a non-licensed cannabis business shall be disqualified from receiving a commercial cannabis permit. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-9. - Application review, scoring, and selection process; permit issuance. 
(a)  Once the city determines that a complete and timely initial application has been submitted, the application will be subjected to review and initial scoring. A total of 1,000 points are available in the initial scoring (Phase Two). 
(b)  The initial review and scoring is done by the professionals assigned by the city manager. The applications will be evaluated on the following criteria: 
(1)  Business plan (350 points): 
a.  Operations and financial pro forma (100 points). 
b.  Qualifications of principals (100 points). 
c.  Environmental mitigation plan and benefits (100 points). 
d.  Public benefits (50 points). 
(2)  Safety and security plan (200 points). 
(3)  Neighborhood integration plan (200 points): Community contributions and involvement. 
(4)  Labor and employment plan (150 points): 
a.  Labor peace plan (100 points). 
b.  Collective bargaining agreement (25 points). 
c.  Living wage and benefits (25 points). 
(5)  Air quality plan (100 points). 
(c)  Applicants who score a minimum of 80 percent or 800 points in Phase Two are eligible to undergo the public presentation and comment process of Phase Three. 
(d)  Phase Three is a public meeting and interview. The city manager shall designate a commercial cannabis permit application evaluator, who shall not have participated in the initial review and scoring in Phase Two. The commercial cannabis permit application evaluator may be an independent contractor or a designated employee. The commercial cannabis permit application evaluator must file a Fair Political Practices Commission Form 700, commonly known as a statement of economic interests, upon assuming the role, exiting the role, and as otherwise required by law for designated filers. The commercial cannabis permit application evaluator shall convene a public meeting to receive public comment on each qualified application. The applicant shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to present its application at the public meeting and the public shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to comment on the application. At least ten days in advance of the meeting, written notice of the public meeting shall be sent to all property owners and occupants located within 1,000 feet of the proposed business location(s). 
(e)  The commercial cannabis permit application evaluator may conduct a site inspection as part of the review. 
(f)  Taking into account public comment, the applicant's presentation and responses to questions, all application materials, any amendments to the proposal offered by the applicant, and information collected from a site visit, the commercial cannabis permit application evaluator will determine the final rankings of the commercial cannabis permit applications. A total of 1,000 points are available in the final ranking (Phase Four). The applications will be evaluated on the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section. To be eligible for a commercial cannabis permit, applicant must score a minimum of 90 percent or 900 points. 
(g)  If after final rankings by the commercial cannabis permit application evaluator there is a tie in total points by two or more applicants, the city manager may designate a third party to hold an allotment by chance to complete the ranking system. 
(h)  After ranking is complete, the city manager will issue qualifying applicants commercial cannabis permits to the extent that there are permits available and in order of highest ranked applicants. 
(i)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the city reserves the right to reject any or all applications, at any time in the review process, if it determines it would be in the best interest of the city, taking into account the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(j)  The city manager may promulgate additional rules or policies to establish supplemental or more detailed scoring categories, with respective scoring points, under any one or all of the criteria listed hereinabove, prior to the commencement of the city accepting any applications. 
(k)  The city manager's decision as to the selection of the prevailing candidates shall be final. 
(l)  Being issued a notice of selection does not constitute a land use entitlement and does not satisfy the requirements of securing a technical permits for all construction and structural alterations, including building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical permits, undergoing and passing all building and fire intermittent and final inspections, and securing any other required permits, licenses, or reviews as may be necessary by the relevant departments or government agencies in charge of said permits. Nor does it guarantee that the plans submitted via the application process meet the standards or requirements in the Pomona Zoning Ordinance, or any building or fire codes, laws, rules or regulations, or any other permit requirement from other local or state departments or agencies. 
(m)  Applicants shall have no right to a commercial cannabis permit until a permit is actually issued, and then only for the duration of the permit's term. Each applicant assumes the risk that, at any time prior to the issuance of a permit, the city council may terminate or delay the program created under this chapter. 
(n)  If an application is denied at any phase, in the event that the city is receiving new applications, a new application may not be filed for one year from the date of the denial. 
(o)  Prior to operating a commercial cannabis business, each person awarded a commercial cannabis permit shall be required to pay a permit fee established by resolution of the city council, to cover the costs of administering the commercial cannabis permit program created in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-10. - Expiration of commercial cannabis permits. 
Each commercial cannabis permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year after the date of its issuance. Commercial cannabis permits may be renewed as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-11. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  The following are grounds for revocation of a commercial cannabis permit: 
(1)  Failure of a permittee to comply with any requirement imposed by the provisions of this Code, including but not limited to any rule, regulation, condition or standard adopted pursuant to this chapter, or any term or condition imposed on the commercial cannabis permit, or any provision of state law; 
(2)  Revocation of a state license held by a responsible person or permittee of a commercial cannabis permit issued by the city; 
(3)  If the permittee, its owner(s), manager(s) or a responsible person, within the past three years has been sentenced or had a judgment issued in a criminal or civil court proceeding, or has been sanctioned or fined for, enjoined from, or found guilty of or pled guilty or no contest to a charge for engaging in a commercial cannabis activity in the state without the necessary permits and approvals from the applicable state or local jurisdictions; 
(4)  Conviction within the past ten years of the permittee, its owner(s) or manager(s), or a responsible person, including a plea of guilty or no contest, to any the following offenses shall be grounds for revocation of a commercial cannabis permit issued by the city: 
a.  A violent felony, as specified in Section 667.5(c) of the Penal Code. 
b.  A serious felony, as specified in Section 1192.7(c) of the Penal Code. 
c.  A felony involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement. 
d.  A felony for hiring, employing, or using a minor in transporting, carrying, selling, giving away, preparing for sale, or peddling, any controlled substance to a minor; or selling, offering to sell, furnishing, offering to furnish, administering, or giving any controlled substance to a minor. 
e.  A felony for drug trafficking with enhancements pursuant to Section 11370.4 or 11379.8 of the Health and Safety Code. 
f.  A felony or misdemeanor involving the illegal possession for sale, sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance occurring after January 1, 2016. 
(b)  If the city manager determines that a ground for revocation of a commercial cannabis permit exists, the city manager shall serve written notice of revocation to the permittee or responsible person. The notice may be served on the recipient either personally or by certified first class mail to the address listed on the application. The notice must state the grounds for revocation, the effective date of the decision, and that the permittee has a right to an evidentiary appeal hearing to challenge the revocation decision. 
(c)  The permittee may appeal a revocation decision within 15 days of the date of the notice of revocation. To exercise the right to appeal, the permittee must file with the city clerk written basis for the appeal, including evidence relating to the grounds for revocation, and the applicable appeal fee. The appeal will be heard by the city council in accordance with section 68-14. If no timely appeal is filed, the city manager's decision will be final 15 days after the date on the notice of revocation. If a timely appeal is filed in accordance with this chapter, then the effective date of the notice is stayed until a decision is made after the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-12. - Renewal applications. 
(a)  An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis permit and renewal fee shall be filed with the city manager's office prior to, but not more than 120 days before, the expiration date of an active and current permit. 
(b)  The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by the city council to cover the costs of processing the renewal permit application, together with any costs incurred by the city to administer the program created under this chapter. 
(c)  Any permittee submitting a renewal application less than 60 calendar days before permit expiration may be required to pay a late renewal application fee, as established by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  To ensure on-going compliance with the initial screening criteria, the renewal application may be required to contain all the information required for new applications. 
(e)  An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis permit may be denied if any of the following exists: 
(1)  Any of the grounds for denial of an application or revocation of a permit. 
(2)  The commercial cannabis permit is suspended or revoked at the time of the renewal application submittal. 
(3)  The commercial cannabis business has not been in regular and continuous operation in the four months prior to the renewal application. 
(4)  The permittee fails or is unable to renew its State of California license. 
(5)  The permittee made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement or omission of fact in the renewal application. 
(f)  The city manager is authorized to make all decisions concerning the issuance of a renewal permit. In making the decision, the city manager is authorized to impose additional conditions to a renewal permit, if it is determined to promote compliance with state or local laws and regulations or otherwise to preserve the public health, safety or welfare. Appeals of the decision of the city manager shall be handled pursuant to the provisions of section 68-14 of this chapter. 
(g)  If a renewal application is denied, the permittee may file a new application pursuant to this chapter no sooner than one year from the date of the rejection and only if and when the city is receiving new applications. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-13. - Effect of state license suspension, revocation, or termination. 
(a)  Suspension of a license issued by the State of California, or by any of its departments or divisions, shall immediately suspend the ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate within the city, unless and until the State of California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or reissues the state license. 
(b)  Should the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke or terminate the license of a commercial cannabis business operating in the city, such revocation or termination shall also revoke or terminate the ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate within the city. 
(c)  Permittee shall notify the city manager in writing within five days of suspension or revocation of a license issued by the State of California, or by any of its departments or divisions. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-14. - Appeals. 
(a)  Notice of and time to appeal and effect of timely appeal. 
(1)  A permittee of a commercial cannabis business may appeal a decision of the city manager made pursuant to this chapter to suspend, revoke, condition, or not renew a permit. Appeals are made by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal within 15 calendar days from the date of service of the notice issued by the city manager of his or her decision. Date of service shall mean the date when a notice or written decision was personally delivered to the permittee or the date when the notice was sent by certified, first class mail. Unsuccessful applicants have no right of appeal. 
(2)  The notice of appeal shall be in writing and signed by the person making the appeal ("appellant"), or his or her legal representative, and shall contain the following: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the appellant. 
b.  Specify the decision, action, or a particular part thereof, made by the city manager that is the subject of the appeal. 
c.  Include a true and correct copy of the notice of decision issued by the city manager which is the subject of the appeal. 
d.  State with specificity the reasons and grounds for making the appeal, including, but not limited to, a statement of facts upon which the appeal is based in sufficient detail to enable the city council, or any appointed hearing officer, to understand the nature of the controversy, the basis of the appeal, and the relief requested. 
e.  All documents or other evidence pertinent to the appeal that the appellant requests the considered at the appeal hearing. 
f.  An appeal fee, as established by resolution of the city council. 
(3)  Failure to file a timely notice of appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal rendering the city manager's notice of revocation, nonrenewal, suspension or other action final and binding. If no appeal is timely filed in the event of a decision of nonrenewal, the commercial cannabis permit shall expire at the conclusion of the term of the permit. If no appeal is timely filed in the event of a decision of suspension or revocation, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon the expiration of the period for filing a written notice of appeal. 
(4)  In the event a written notice of appeal is timely filed, the nonrenewal, suspension, revocation, or other properly appealed action shall not become effective until a final decision has been rendered and issued by the city council, or appointed hearing officer or body. 
(b)  Review by city council; appeal hearing and proceedings. 
(1)  The city council or its appointed hearing officer or body will decide timely appeals. The appellant(s) listed on the written notice of appeal shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and location of the hearing at least ten calendar days before the date of the hearing. 
(2)  All requests by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than three business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The city council or its appointed hearing officer or body may continue a hearing for good cause or on its own motion. 
(3)  The city council shall preside over the hearing on appeal, or at the city council's discretion, the city council may appoint a hearing officer or body to conduct the hearing. 
(4)  At the date, time and location set forth in the notice of appeal hearing, the city council, or its appointed hearing officer or body, shall hear and consider the testimony and any documentary evidence properly submitted for consideration. 
(5)  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. However, rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are permitted by law, and irrelevant, collateral, undue, and repetitious testimony may be excluded. The city manager's decision will be upheld only if a preponderance of the evidence supports the nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation. 
(c)  Final decision. 
(1)  Following the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the city council, or its appointed hearing officer or body, shall determine if any ground exists for the nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a commercial cannabis permit or other action subject to appeal under this chapter. If the city council, or its appointed hearing officer or body, determines that no grounds for denial, nonrenewal, suspension, revocation, or other action exist, the city manager's notice of decision shall be deemed vacated. If the city council, or its appointed hearing officer or body, determines that one or more of the reasons or grounds enumerated in notice of decision exists, the city manager's decision may be affirmed or modified. 
(2)  The decision of the city council, or its appointed hearing officer or body, is the final administrative decision and subject to judicial review within the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-15. - Commercial cannabis permit—Nonassignable and nontransferable. 
(a)  A commercial cannabis permit issued under this chapter is valid only as to the permittee and approved location and is nontransferable to other persons, projects or locations. 
(b)  No commercial cannabis permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or entities. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void, except as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-16. - Change in location of commercial cannabis business. 
No permittee shall change the location of the commercial cannabis business specified in the commercial cannabis permit until any such change of location is approved by the city manager. The proposed location shall meet all the requirements under this Code, including but not limited to this chapter and the Pomona Zoning Ordinance. The proposed location shall be reviewed and evaluated using the same review criteria and procedure as used and relied on under the initial application process, including a public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-17. - Changes in ownership of commercial cannabis business. 
(a)  No permittee shall transfer ownership or control of a commercial cannabis business unless and until the proposed new owner submits all required application materials and pays all applicable fees, and the proposed new owner independently meets the requirements of this chapter such as to be entitled to the issuance of an original commercial cannabis permit. 
(b)  A substantial change in the ownership of a permittee business entity (changes that result in a change of 51 percent or more of the original ownership), must be approved by the city manager after completion of the application process under this chapter, including evaluation under any applicable review criteria used and relied upon during the original review and selection process. 
(c)  A permittee may change the form of business entity without applying for a new commercial cannabis permit provided that either: 
(1)  The ownership of the new business entity is the same as the original permit holder business entity; or 
(2)  If the original permittee is an unincorporated association, mutual or public benefit corporation, agricultural or consumer cooperative corporation and subsequently transitions to or forms a new business entity as allowed under the MAUCRSA, provided that the board of directors (or in the case of an unincorporated association, the individual(s) listed on the city permit application) of the original permittee entity are the same as the new business entity. 
(d)  Although a new commercial cannabis permit is not required in the two circumstances listed in this subsection (c), the permittee shall notify the city in writing of the change within ten calendar days of the change and obtain an amendment to the original Commercial Cannabis Permit. 
(e)  No permittees may avail themselves of the provisions of this section if the city manager, or his or her designee, has notified the permittee that the commercial cannabis permit has been or may be suspended, revoked, or not renewed. 
(f)  Failure to comply with this section is grounds for revocation of a commercial cannabis permit. 
(g)  Any attempt to transfer a commercial cannabis permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void and such a purported transfer is a ground for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-18. - Change in ownership when the permittee is a partnership or corporation. 
(a)  One or more proposed partners in a partnership granted a commercial cannabis permit may make application to the city manager, together with the fee established by the city council, to amend the original application, providing all information as required for partners in the first instance and, upon approval thereof, the transfer of the interests of one or more partners to the proposed partner or partners may occur. If the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the commercial cannabis permit, upon notification to the city manager, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partners. 
(b)  If the commercial cannabis permit is issued to a corporation, stock may be sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to stockholders who have been named on the application. If 51 percent or more of any stock is sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to a person not listed on the application as a stockholder, the permit shall be deemed terminated and void; provided, however, the proposed stock purchaser transferee may submit to the city manager, together with the fee established by the city council, an application to amend the original application providing all information as required for stockholders in the first instance under this chapter, and, upon approval thereof, the transfer may then occur. 
(c)  All changes in ownership as described in this section, with the exception of transfers occurring due to death of a partner or stockholder, must be submitted to the city within 30 calendar days, along with any organizational documents reflecting the changes. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-19. - Changes in name only. 
(a)  The permittee shall advise the city manager within 15 calendar days of all changes of name or designation under which the business is to be conducted. The change of name or designation shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee established by resolution of the city council to defray the costs of reissuance of the commercial cannabis permit. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on the business of a commercial cannabis business under any name other than the name of the commercial cannabis business specified in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-20. - Alterations to approved facility. 
All required city approvals, plan approvals, and permits must be obtained before causing, allowing, or permitting alterations to or extensions or expansions of the existing building(s), structure(s), or portions thereof, approved as a location for a commercial cannabis business. Alterations, extensions, or expansions shall comply with all applicable laws, regulations and standards, including those concerning building and fire safety, as well as occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-21. - City business license. 
Prior to commencing operations, a permittee of a commercial cannabis business shall obtain a city business license, in accordance with Pomona City Code section 50-555, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-22. - Permits and inspections prior to commencing operations. 
Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall be subject to a mandatory inspection of the premises, and must obtain all required building permits and approvals which would otherwise be required for any business of the same size and intensity operating in that zone. The permittee shall also obtain all required building safety department approvals, fire department approvals, health department approvals and any other permit or approval required by this code or applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-23. - Limitations on city's liability. 
(a)  To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a commercial cannabis permit or otherwise approving the operation of any commercial cannabis business. As a condition to the approval of any commercial cannabis permit, the applicant shall be required to meet all of the following conditions before they can receive the commercial cannabis permit: 
(1)  They must execute an agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend at the applicant's sole cost and expense, and hold harmless the city, and its officers, officials, employees, representatives, attorneys, and agents from any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way related to the city's issuance of the commercial cannabis permit, the city's decision to approve the operation of the commercial cannabis business or activity; the process used by the city in making its decision to issue, approve or deny a permit; or the alleged violation of any federal, state or local laws by the commercial cannabis business or any of its officers, employees or agents. 
(2)  Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon determined necessary and appropriate from time to time by the city's risk manager. 
(3)  Reimburse the city for all costs and expenses, including but not limited to attorney fees and costs and court costs, which the city may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city's approval of the applicant's commercial cannabis permit, or related to the city's approval of the applicant's commercial cannabis activity. The city may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve any of the obligations imposed hereunder. 
(b)  The terms and provisions as enumerated in this section related to indemnification and limitation on the city's liability shall be an explicit term of a commercial cannabis permit that an applicant and a permittee shall agree to in order for same to be valid. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-24. - Records and recordkeeping. 
(a)  Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain accurate books and records in an electronic format, detailing all of the revenues and expenses of the business, and all of its assets and liabilities. On no less than an annual basis, or at any time upon reasonable request of the city, each commercial cannabis business shall file a sworn statement detailing the commercial cannabis business' revenue and number of sales during the previous 12-month period (or shorter period based upon the timing of the request), provided on a per-month basis. The statement shall also include gross revenues for each month, and all applicable taxes paid or due to be paid. On an annual basis, each owner and operator shall submit to the city a financial audit of the business' operations conducted by an independent certified public accountant. Each permittee shall be subject to a regulatory compliance review and financial audit as determined by the city manager, or his or her designee. 
(b)  Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain a current register of the names and the contact information (including the name, address, and telephone number) of anyone owning or holding an interest in the commercial cannabis business, and separately of all the officers, managers, employees, agents and volunteers currently employed or otherwise engaged by the commercial cannabis business. The register required by this paragraph shall be provided to the city manager upon request. 
(c)  All records collected by a permittee pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained for a minimum of seven years and shall be made available by the permittee to the agents or employees of the city upon request, except that private medical records shall be made available only pursuant to a properly executed search warrant, subpoena, or court order. 
(d)  Subject to any restrictions under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations, each commercial cannabis business shall allow city officials to have access to the business's books, records, accounts, together with any other data or documents relevant to its permitted commercial cannabis activities, for the purpose of conducting an audit or examination. Books, records, accounts, and any and all relevant data or documents will be produced no later than 24 hours after receipt of the city's request, unless otherwise stipulated by the city. The city may require the materials to be submitted in an electronic format that is compatible with the city's software and hardware. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-25. - Restriction on alcohol and tobacco sales, dispensing or consumption. 
No person shall cause or permit the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages or tobacco products on or about the premises of a commercial cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-26. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  All related fees and charges associated with the operation of a commercial cannabis business as referenced or determined by this chapter shall be established by resolution of the city council, which may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  No person may commence or continue any commercial cannabis activity in the city, without timely paying in full all fees and charges required for the operation of a commercial cannabis activity, and as mandated by this chapter. 
(c)  All commercial cannabis businesses authorized to operate under this chapter shall pay all sales tax, use tax, business tax and other applicable taxes, and all license, registration, and other fees required under federal, state and local law. Each commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with the city with respect to any reasonable request to audit the commercial cannabis business' books and records for the purpose of verifying compliance with this section, including but not limited to a verification of the amount of fees, costs or taxes required to be paid during any period. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-27. - Operating requirements applicable to all commercial cannabis businesses. 
(a)  No commercial cannabis business may be located within a 1,000-foot radius of a school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades 1 through 12, a day care center, or a youth and recreation center, which is in lawful existence at the time a successful application for a commercial cannabis permit was submitted to the city. The distance specified in this section shall be the horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the property line of the school or other protected use to the closest property line of the lot on which the commercial cannabis business is located, without regard to intervening structures. 
(b)  Commercial cannabis businesses may operate only during the hours established by resolution of the city council and as specified in the commercial cannabis permit issued by the city. 
(c)  Cannabis shall not be consumed by anyone on the premises of any commercial cannabis business, unless explicitly authorized by a city ordinance, resolutions, rules, regulations or pursuant to explicit terms of a commercial cannabis permit. 
(d)  No cannabis or cannabis products shall be visible from the exterior of any property issued a commercial cannabis permit or on any of the vehicles owned or used as part of the commercial cannabis business. No outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis products is permitted at any time. 
(e)  Each commercial cannabis business shall have in place a point-of-sale or management inventory tracking system to track and report on all aspects of the commercial cannabis business including, but not limited to, such matters as cannabis tracking, inventory data, gross sales (by weight and by sale) and other information which may be deemed necessary by the city. The commercial cannabis business shall ensure that such information is compatible with the city's record-keeping systems. In addition, the system must have the capability to produce historical transactional data for review. Furthermore, any system selected must be approved and authorized by the city manager prior to being used by the permittee. 
(f)  All cannabis and cannabis products sold, tested, distributed or manufactured shall be cultivated, manufactured, and transported by licensed facilities that maintain operations in full conformance with the State of California and local regulations. 
(g)  No physician shall be permitted in any commercial cannabis business at any time for the purpose of evaluating patients for the issuance of a medicinal cannabis recommendation or medicinal cannabis identification card where applicable. 
(h)  All commercial cannabis retailers shall have a manager on the premises at all times during hours of operation. 
(i)  Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the city manager with the name, telephone number (both landline and mobile) of an on-site manager or owner to whom emergency notice may be provided at any hour of the day. 
(j)  Signage and notices: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements otherwise set forth in this section, business identification signage for a commercial cannabis business shall conform to the requirements of state law and the city Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements for a city sign permit and applicable zoning laws regulating signs. 
(2)  Each commercial cannabis business premises shall be visibly posted with clear and legible notices indoors indicating that smoking, ingesting, or otherwise consuming cannabis on the premises or in the areas adjacent to the commercial cannabis business is prohibited. 
(k)  Persons under the age of 21 years shall not be allowed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business and shall not be allowed to serve as a driver for a delivery service, except if pertaining to sales of cannabis for medicinal use. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to employ any person at a commercial cannabis business who is not at least 21 years of age. 
(l)  Odor control devices and techniques shall be incorporated in all commercial cannabis businesses to ensure that odors from cannabis are not detectable off-site. Commercial cannabis businesses shall provide a sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the commercial cannabis business that is distinctive to its operation is not detected outside of the facility, anywhere on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, on or about the exterior or interior common area walkways, hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for use by common tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit located inside the same building as the commercial cannabis business. As such, commercial cannabis businesses must install and maintain the following equipment, or any other equipment which the city engineer or public works director or building official determines is a more effective method or technology: 
(1)  An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally; 
(2)  An air system that creates negative air pressure between the commercial cannabis business's interior and exterior, so that the odors generated inside the commercial cannabis business are not detectable on the outside of the commercial cannabis business. 
(m)  The original commercial cannabis permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter, the city issued business license, and the state-issued seller's permit shall be posted inside the commercial cannabis business in a location readily-visible to any city, county or state employee, official, or agent authorized to enforce the city's Code, or applicable cannabis-related laws. 
(n)  The permittee of a commercial cannabis business shall prohibit loitering by persons outside on the premises, and is required to enforce this prohibition within its premises and adjacent public areas, including cooperating with the city's law enforcement agency dispatched to enforce same. The placement and use of no loitering signs shall be included as part of any submittal and depicted on a business or operational plan. 
(o)  Prior to the operation of a commercial cannabis business, the person intending to establish a commercial cannabis business must first obtain all applicable planning, zoning, building, and other applicable permits and approvals from the relevant city or county department or division which may be applicable to the zoning district in which such commercial cannabis business intends to establish and to operate. 
(p)  Permittees shall adhere to all applicable operating procedures, including those submitted as part of the initial application process, and pursuant to those established in applicable State of California laws, regulations, and policies. 
(q)  Permittees must comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to persons with disabilities. 
(r)  No commercial cannabis business may discriminate or exclude patrons in violation of local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(s)  Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the name, telephone number, and email address of a community relations contact to whom notice of problems associated with the commercial cannabis business can be provided. Each commercial cannabis business shall also provide this information to all businesses and residences located within 1,000 feet of the commercial cannabis business. 
(t)  The owner, manager, and community relations representative from each commercial cannabis business holding a commercial cannabis permit shall, if requested by the city manager, attend a quarterly meeting with the interested parties to discuss costs, benefits, and other community issues arising as a result of implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-28. - Additional operating regulations for storefront retail. 
(a)  No commercial cannabis retailer offering storefront purchase shall be located within 1,000 feet from another commercial cannabis storefront retailer. The distance specified in this section shall be the horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the property line of one commercial cannabis storefront retailer to the closest property line of the lot on which another commercial cannabis business is located without regard to intervening structures. 
(b)  Prior to dispensing medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products to any person, the commercial medicinal cannabis business shall obtain verification from the recommending physician that the person requesting medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products is a qualified patient, and shall maintain a copy of the physician recommendation or Identification Card as described in Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.71 through 11362.77, as may be amended from time to time, on site for period of not less than seven years. 
(c)  Storefront retailers also providing delivery shall comply with the requirements pertaining to deliveries in section 68-29 of this chapter. 
(d)  Commercial cannabis retailers selling medicinal cannabis shall verify the age and all necessary documentation of each customer to ensure the customer is not under the age of 18 years and that the potential customer has a valid doctor's recommendation. Adult use retailers shall verify the age of all customers to ensure persons under the age of 21 are not permitted on the premises. Entrances into the retailer shall be locked at all times with entry strictly controlled. A "buzz-in" electronic/mechanical entry system shall be utilized to limit access to and entry to the retailer to separate it from the reception or lobby area. 
(e)  Retailers may have only that quantity of cannabis and cannabis products reasonably anticipated to meet the daily demand readily available for sale on-site in the retail sales area of the retailer. 
(f)  All restroom facilities shall remain locked and under the control of management. 
(g)  A cannabis storefront retailer may not sell, give away, or donate specific devices, contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia necessary for consuming cannabis or cannabis products, including, but not limited to, rolling papers and related tools, pipes, water pipes, and vaporizers. 
(h)  A cannabis storefront retailer shall notify qualified patients, primary caregivers, and customers (verbally or by written agreement) and by posting of a notice or notices conspicuously in at least 15 point type within the permitted premises that state as follows: 
(1)  "The sale or diversion of cannabis or cannabis products without a permit issued by the City of Pomona is a violation of state law and the Pomona City Code." 
(2)  "Secondary sale, barter, or distribution of cannabis or cannabis products purchased from a permittee is a crime and can lead to arrest." 
(3)  "Patrons must not loiter in or near these premises and may not consume cannabis or cannabis products in the vicinity of this business or in any place not lawfully permitted. These premises and vicinity are monitored to ensure compliance." 
(4)  "Warning: the use of cannabis or cannabis products may impair a person's ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate heavy machinery." 
(5)  "CALIFORNIA PROP. 65 WARNING: Smoking of cannabis and cannabis-derived products will expose you and those in your immediate vicinity to cannabis smoke. Cannabis smoke is known by the State of California to cause cancer." 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-29. - Additional operating regulations for delivery-only retailers. 
(a)  Security plans developed pursuant to this chapter shall include provisions relating to vehicle security and the protection of employees and product during loading and in transit. 
(b)  A delivery-only retailer shall facilitate the vehicle dispensing of cannabis or cannabis products with a technology platform owned by or licensed to the delivery-only retailer that uses point-of-sale technology to track and database technology to record and store the following information for each transaction involving the exchange of cannabis or cannabis products between the permittee and qualified patient, primary caregiver, or customer: 
(1)  The identity of the individual dispensing cannabis or cannabis products on behalf of the licensee; 
(2)  The identity of the qualified patient, primary caregiver, or customer receiving cannabis or cannabis products from the licensee; 
(3)  The type and quantity of cannabis or cannabis products dispensed and received; 
(4)  The gross receipts charged by the licensee and received by the individual dispensing cannabis or cannabis products on behalf of the licensee for the cannabis or cannabis products dispensed and received; and 
(5)  The location or address where the sale or retail sale took place or closed. 
(c)  A permittee shall maintain a database and provide a list of the individuals and vehicles authorized to conduct vehicle dispensing, and a copy of the valid California driver's license issued to the driver of any such vehicle on behalf of the permittee to the chief of police. 
(d)  Individuals making deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products on behalf of the permittee shall maintain a physical copy of the delivery request (and invoice) and shall make it available upon the request of agents or employees of the city requesting documentation. 
(e)  During delivery, a copy of the permittee's Commercial Cannabis Permit shall be in the vehicle at all times, and the driver shall make it available upon the request of agents or employees of the city requesting documentation. 
(f)  A permittee shall only permit or allow delivery of cannabis or cannabis products in a vehicle that is (1) insured at or above the legal requirement in California; (2) capable of securing (locking) the cannabis or cannabis products during transportation; (3) capable of being temperature controlled if perishable cannabis or cannabis products is being transported; and (4) does not display advertising or symbols visible from the exterior of the vehicle that suggest the vehicle is used for cannabis delivery or affiliated with a cannabis retailer. 
(g)  A delivery-only retailer shall facilitate deliveries with a technology platform owned by or licensed to the delivery-only retailer that uses global positioning system technology to track, and database technology to record and store the following information: 
(1)  The time that the individual conducting vehicle dispensing on behalf of the delivery-only retailer departed the licensed premises. 
(2)  The time that the individual conducting vehicle dispensing on behalf of the delivery-only retailer completed vehicle dispensing to the qualified patient, primary caregiver, or customer. 
(3)  The time that the individual conducting vehicle dispensing on behalf of the delivery-only retailer returned to the licensed premises. 
(4)  The route the individual conducting vehicle dispensing on behalf of the delivery-only retailer traveled between departing and returning to the licensed premises to conduct vehicle dispensing. 
(5)  For each individual vehicle dispensing transaction, the identity of the individual conducting deliveries on behalf of the delivery-only retailer licensee. 
(6)  For each individual delivery transaction, the vehicle used to conduct vehicle dispensing on behalf of the delivery-only retailer licensee. 
(7)  For each individual vehicle dispensing transaction, the identity of the qualified patient, primary caregiver, or customer receiving cannabis or cannabis products from the delivery-only retailer. 
(8)  For each individual vehicle dispensing transaction, the type and quantity of cannabis or cannabis products dispensed and received. 
(9)  For each individual vehicle dispensing transaction, the gross receipts charged by the delivery-only retailer and received by the individual conducting deliveries on behalf of the delivery-only retailer for the cannabis or cannabis products dispensed and received. 
(h)  The individual making deliveries on behalf of the delivery-only retailer shall personally verify for each individual vehicle dispensing transaction (1) the identity of the qualified patient, primary caregiver, or customer receiving cannabis or cannabis products from the delivery-only retailer; and (2) the validity of the qualified patient's recommendation from a physician to use cannabis for medical purposes or primary caregiver's status as a primary caregiver for the particular qualified patient, and shall maintain a copy of the physician recommendation or Identification Card, as described in Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.71 through 11362.77, as may be amended from time to time, at its permitted business location for period of not less than seven years. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-30. - Additional operating requirements for cultivation facilities. 
(a)  The cultivation of all cannabis must occur indoors, and outdoor cultivation is prohibited. 
(b)  From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation except for any signage authorized by this code. 
(c)  The general public is not permitted on the cannabis cultivation licensed premises except for the agents, applicants, managers, employees, and volunteers of the cannabis cultivation permittee and agents or employees of the city. 
(d)  A permittee shall only be allowed to cultivate the square feet of canopy space permitted by state law and in the permit issued for the premises. 
(e)  Cannabis cultivation shall be conducted in accordance with state and local laws related to electricity, water usage, water quality, discharges, and similar matters. 
(f)  Permittee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations regarding use and disposal of pesticides and fertilizers. 
(g)  Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to avoid contamination through erosion, leakage or inadvertent damage from pests, rodents or other wildlife. 
(h)  The cultivation of cannabis shall at all times be operated in such a way as to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the employees working at the commercial cannabis business, neighboring properties, and the end users of the cannabis being cultivated; to protect the environment from harm to waterways, fish, and wildlife; to ensure the security of the cannabis being cultivated; and to safeguard against the diversion of cannabis. 
(i)  Prior to transportation, a cannabis cultivation licensee shall package and seal all cannabis or cannabis products in tamper-evident packaging and use a unique identifier, such as a batch and lot number or bar code, to identify and track the cannabis or cannabis products. 
(j)  All applicants for a commercial cannabis permit pertaining to cannabis cultivation shall submit the following in addition to the information generally otherwise required for a commercial cannabis permit: 
(1)  A cultivation and operations plan that meets or exceeds minimum legal standards for water usage, conservation and use; drainage, watershed and habitat protection; and proper storage of fertilizers, pesticides, and other regulated products to be used on the parcel; a description of the cultivation activities and schedule of activities during each month of growing and harvesting; or an explanation of growth cycles and anticipated harvesting schedules for all-season harvesting. 
(2)  A description of a legal water source, irrigation plan, and projected water use. 
(3)  Identification of the source of electrical power and plan for compliance with applicable building codes and related codes. 
(4)  Plan for addressing odor and other public nuisances that may derive from the cultivation site. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-31. - Additional operating requirements for cannabis manufacturing businesses. 
(a)  From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of cannabis manufacturing except for any signage authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  The general public is not permitted on the cannabis manufacturing premises except for the agents, applicants, managers, employees, and volunteers of the cannabis manufacturing licensee and agents or employees of the city. 
(c)  All cannabis manufacturing shall comply with the standards set by state law. 
(d)  Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing process shall not be stored on any property within the city in containers that exceed the amount which is approved by the fire chief and authorized by the commercial cannabis permit. Each site or parcel subject to a commercial cannabis permit shall be limited to a total number of tanks as authorized by the fire chief on the property at any time. 
(e)  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use the hydrocarbons N-butane, isobutane, propane, or heptane or other solvents or gases exhibiting low to minimal potential human-related toxicity approved by the fire chief. These solvents must be of at least 99 percent purity and any extraction process must use them in a professional grade, closed loop extraction system designed to recover the solvents and work in an environment with proper ventilation, controlling all sources of ignition where a flammable atmosphere is or may be present. 
(f)  If an extraction process uses a professional grade closed loop CO 2 gas extraction system, every vessel must be certified by the manufacturer for its safe use. Closed loop systems for compressed gas extraction must be commercially manufactured and bear a permanently affixed and visible serial number. 
(g)  Certification from an engineer licensed by the State of California must be provided to the fire chief for a professional grade closed loop system used by any commercial cannabis manufacturer to certify that the system was commercially manufactured, is safe for its intended use, and was built to codes of recognized and generally accepted good engineering practices, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME); 
(2)  American National Standards Institute (ANSI); 
(3)  Underwriters Laboratories (UL); or 
(4)  The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 
(h)  The certification document must contain the signature and stamp of the professional engineer and serial number of the extraction unit being certified. 
(i)  Professional closed loop systems, other equipment used, the extraction operation, and all related facilities must be approved for their use by the fire department and meet any required fire, safety, and building code requirements specified in the California Building and Fire Codes, as adopted by the city. 
(j)  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use heat, screens, presses, steam distillation, ice water, and other methods without employing solvents or gases to create keef, hashish, bubble hash, or infused dairy butter, or oils or fats derived from natural sources, and other extracts. 
(k)  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use food grade glycerin, ethanol, and propylene glycol solvents to create or refine extracts. Ethanol should be removed from the extract in a manner to recapture the solvent and ensure that it is not vented into the atmosphere. 
(l)  Cannabis manufacturing facilities creating cannabis extracts must develop standard operating procedures, good manufacturing practices, and a training plan prior to producing extracts for the marketplace. 
(m)  Any person using solvents or gases in a closed looped system to create cannabis extracts must be fully trained on how to use the system, have direct access to applicable material safety data sheets, and handle and store the solvents and gases safely. 
(n)  Parts per million for one gram of finished extract cannot exceed state standards for any residual solvent or gas when quality assurance tested. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-32. - Additional operating requirements for cannabis distribution. 
(a)  From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of cannabis distribution except for any signage authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  The general public is not permitted on the cannabis distribution licensed premises except for the agents, applicants, managers, employees, and volunteers of the cannabis distribution licensee and agents or employees of the city. 
(c)  Permittee for cannabis distribution shall only procure, sell, or transport cannabis or cannabis products that are packaged and sealed in tamper-evident packaging using unique identifiers, such as batch and lot numbers or bar codes, to identify and track the cannabis or cannabis products. 
(d)  Permittee shall maintain a database and provide a list of the individuals and vehicles authorized to conduct transportation on behalf of the cannabis distribution business pursuant to commercial cannabis permit issued by the city. 
(e)  Individuals authorized to conduct transportation on behalf of the cannabis distribution business shall have a valid California Driver's License. 
(f)  Individuals transporting cannabis or cannabis products on behalf of the cannabis distribution business pursuant to a commercial cannabis permit shall maintain a physical copy of the transportation request and invoice and shall make them available upon request of agents or employees of the city requesting documentation. 
(g)  During transportation, the individual conducting transportation on behalf of the cannabis distribution business shall maintain a copy of the commercial cannabis permit and shall make it available upon the request of agents or employees of the city requesting documentation. 
(h)  Cannabis or cannabis products shall be transported only in a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Insured at or above the legal requirement in California; 
(2)  Capable of securing (locking) the cannabis or cannabis products during transportation; and 
(3)  Capable of being temperature controlled if perishable cannabis products are being transported. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-33. - Additional operating requirements for cannabis testing. 
(a)  Cannabis testing shall take place within an enclosed locked structure. 
(b)  From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of cannabis testing except for any signs authorized by this chapter. 
(c)  All cannabis testing shall be performed in accordance with state law. 
(d)  Permittee shall adopt a standard operating procedure using methods consistent with general requirements established by the International Organization for Standardization, specifically ISO/IEC 17025, to test cannabis or cannabis products, and shall operate in compliance with state law at all times. 
(e)  Permittee shall be accredited by a body that is a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation Mutual Recognition Arrangement. 
(f)  Permittee shall establish standard operating procedures that provide for adequate chain of custody controls for samples transferred to the testing laboratory for testing. 
(g)  Permittee shall destroy the remains of samples of any cannabis or cannabis product upon completion of analyses. Destruction shall be done in a manner compliant with state law. 
(h)  Any testing that requires the use of solvents for extraction must comply with section 68-31, manufacturing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-34. - Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties. 
(a)  The city manager may promulgate additional or supplemental operating requirements applicable to all commercial cannabis businesses to promote the public's safety, welfare or health. 
(b)  The city manager may establish additional rules, regulations, policies and standards consistent with this chapter governing the application review and approval process; the issuance, denial or renewal of commercial cannabis permits; the ongoing operation of commercial cannabis businesses and the city's oversight of them; and concerning any other subject determined to carry out the intent and purposes of this chapter, including without limitation, establishing time periods to solicit applications pursuant to this chapter, and corresponding deadlines for timely submittals of applications to the city. 
(c)  Additional rules, regulations, policies and standards shall be published on the city's website and maintained and available to the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Rules, regulations, policies, and standards promulgated by the city manager shall become effective upon date of publication. Commercial cannabis businesses shall be required to comply with all state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to any rules, regulations or standards adopted by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-35. - Fees deemed debt to city. 
The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city that is recoverable in any manner authorized by this Code, state law, or in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-36. - Responsibility for violations. 
Permittees, their responsible persons and managers shall be responsible for violations of the laws of the State of California or of the city Code, whether committed by the permittee, or any employee or agent of the permittee, which violations occur on the premises of the commercial cannabis business whether or not the violations occur within the permittee's presence. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the permittee for purposes of determining whether the permit shall be revoked, suspended, or not renewed. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-37. - Inspections. 
(a)  The city manager, police chief, fire marshal and their designees charged with enforcing the provisions of the city Code may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time during regular business hours, without notice, and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business as well as any recordings and records required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or under applicable provisions of state law. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person having responsibility over the operation of a commercial cannabis business, to impede, obstruct, interfere with, or otherwise not to allow, the city to conduct an inspection, review or copy records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under state or local law. It is also unlawful for a person to conceal, destroy, deface, damage, or falsify any records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-38. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any permittee of a commercial cannabis business, or its responsible person, manager or any other person employed by or working in concert with them or on their behalf, whether directly or indirectly, to continue to operate, conduct, or maintain a commercial cannabis business after the city-issued commercial cannabis permit has been suspended or revoked, or not renewed, pursuant to a non-contested notice of decision issued by the city manager, or after the issuance of a final order after an appeal hearing. 
(c)  Any commercial cannabis business operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action, commence an administrative or civil action(s) or proceeding(s), for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief to abate, cause cessation, or remove such commercial cannabis business and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a commercial cannabis business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(e)  Whenever in this chapter any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(f)  The penalties set forth herein are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in this chapter, the city's Code, or in any other ordinance, laws, rules or regulations of the city, county, or the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-39. - Effect on other ordinances. 
Except as designated in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control for regulation of commercial cannabis businesses as defined herein if other provisions of the Code conflict therewith. This chapter shall not, however, relieve any person of his or her duty to comply with such laws if additional obligations, duties, or prohibitions are imposed thereby. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-40. - Whistleblower protection. 
It shall be unlawful for a permitee of a commercial cannabis business, or its responsible person, manager or any other person employed by the permitee, to discriminate in any manner or take adverse action against any employee in retaliation for exercising rights protected under this section. These rights include, but are not limited to: the right to file a complaint or inform any person about any party's alleged noncompliance with this chapter; and the right to inform any person of his or her potential rights under this section and to assist him or her in asserting such rights. Protections under this section shall apply to any employee who mistakenly, but in good faith, alleges noncompliance with this chapter. Taking adverse action against an employee within 90 days of the employee's exercise of rights protected under this section shall raise a rebuttable presumption of having done so in retaliation for the exercise of such rights. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-41. - Revolving door prohibition. 
(a)  A local elected official, appointed official or any former employee of the city shall not for a period of one year after leaving that office, position or employment, act as an agent or attorney for, consultant or otherwise represent, for compensation, any other person, by making any oral or written communication to the city council, or any committee, subcommittee, board, commission or present member thereof, or any officer or employee of the city, if the appearance or communication is made for the purpose of influencing administrative or legislative action, or influencing any action or proceeding involving issuance, amendment, awarding, or revocation of a permit, license, grant or contract, or the sale or purchase of goods or property, as described in this chapter. 
(b)  Subsection (a) does not apply to an individual who is, at the time of the appearance or communication, an elected official, a board member, officer, or employee of another local government agency or an employee or representative of a public agency and is appearing or communicating on behalf of that agency. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 68-42. - Process integrity provision. 
All permit applicants listed on the application or any persons lobbying on their behalf shall comply with the process integrity standards adopted by separate resolution of the city council. Failure to abide by the process integrity standards may result in disqualification from an existing cannabis permit review process or revocation if it is later determined that the applicant or any person associated with the application or any third party lobbying on their behalf has violated the standards. 
(Ord. No. 4257 , § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES  
Chapter 70 - ADMINISTRATION AND PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; signs, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Local planning and land use, Government Code § 65000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Imposition of conditions on certain matters. 
Conditions may be imposed in matters involving change of zoning, variances, conditional use permits, permits for building or dividing land into lots when required for public health, safety, or welfare. These conditions shall have a reasonable relationship to the increased or more intense use to be made to the land and public facilities, and such conditions may include dedication of land for public street purposes, and the construction of offsite public improvements shall be based upon the adopted general plan and official standard specifications. The director of public works/city engineer is authorized to enter into contracts on behalf of the city guaranteeing that conditions imposed pursuant to this section are met. Such contracts may require performance bonds. This section shall not supersede any regulations and conditions under the state Subdivision Map Act. 
(Code 1959, § 28-49.1; Ord. No. 2187, § 1; Ord. No. 3449, § 3)  
Secs. 70-2—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Planning commission, § 802. 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-521 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local planning commission authorized, Government Code § 65101. 
 
Sec. 70-31. - Created. 
There is created a planning commission which shall function as an advisory body to the city council and perform such other functions and duties as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1; Ord. No. 3449, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 70-32. - Chair and vice-chair. 
The planning commission shall select one of its members as chair and one member as vice-chair of the commission. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall act as the chair. 
(Code 1959, § 20-7; Ord. No. 3449, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq.  
Sec. 70-33. - Meetings; public records. 
The planning commission shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as it may fix by resolution and shall cause a record to be kept of all of its proceedings, which record shall be a public record. Staff shall be the body utilized by the commission to cause the record to be made. 
(Code 1959, § 20-8; Ord. No. 3449, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 70-34. - Powers and duties generally. 
The planning commission shall prepare a comprehensive, longterm general plan for the physical development of the city and of any land outside its boundaries which in the planning commission's judgment bears relation to its planning. This plan shall be referred to as the "general plan" and shall be officially certified as the general plan of the city upon its adoption by the planning commission and the city council. The general plan shall be comprised of all mandatory elements set forth in the Government Code and any other elements the planning commission or council may designate. Amendments shall be conducted pursuant to the Government Code. The planning commission shall also recommend to the city council zoning district changes and shall be the administrative body for conditional use permits and variances, subject to city council review. It shall also perform such duties and functions which the council shall designate to it by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 20-9; Ord. No. 3449, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Plans, Government Code § 65350 et seq.  
Secs. 70-35—70-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT FEES AND DEDICATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Development fees, Government Code §§ 66000 et seq., 65913.8. 
 
Sec. 70-66. - Waiver, reduction or adjustment. 
A developer of any development project subject to the fees provided for in this article may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The request shall be made in writing and filed with the city council. A building or public works permit shall not be issued until such time as the city council has rendered a decision upon the request. The request shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the request within 30 days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted and approved by the city council, any change in use or size of the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. This article shall not affect any development which has received final planning commission or city council approval. 
(Code 1959, § 9-286; Ord. No. 3506, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 70-67. - Traffic signal and control devices. 
A traffic signal and control device development program is hereby ordered and adopted pursuant to the following guidelines: 
(1)  Development priorities. The city council shall annually establish a priority list of intersections eligible for construction of traffic signals. The city council may authorize, as funding and needs dictate, the construction of signal control devices at any location included on the priority list. 
(2)  Traffic signal and control device construction fee. A traffic signal and control device construction fee is hereby established which shall be collected from all land developers in the city prior to the issuance of any building or public works permit by the city according to the resolution set forth by the city council and incorporated by reference in this section. 
(3)  Fee schedule basis. The basis for the fee schedule in the council resolution shall be the ratio of the traffic generated by the development for which a particular permit is requested compared to the traffic volume identified in the minimum Cal. Trans. warrant for a traffic signal in an urban area, multiplied by the average cost of a traffic signal system. The fee schedule is based, more specifically, on the following factors: 
a.  Generated traffic. Traffic generated by each development shall be calculated from the latest traffic generation data promulgated in the publication entitled "Trip Generation" (current edition), an information report as prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
b.  Minimum signal warrant. The traffic volume equivalent to the minimum Cal. Trans. warrant for a traffic signal in an urban area shall be 12,800 vehicles per day from all approaches. 
c.  Average traffic signal cost. The average cost of a traffic signal shall be $150,000.00. 
(4)  Traffic signal and control device fund. The fees required pursuant to this section shall be paid to the city and deposited into a separate traffic signal and control device fee fund. Moneys in this fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of traffic signals and control devices or to reimburse the city for the cost to design and construct such facilities. 
(Code 1959, § 9-280; Ord. No. 3506, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Traffic engineer and traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings, § 58-71 et seq.  
Sec. 70-68. - Road and highway improvement. 
A road and highway improvement program is hereby ordered and adopted in order to implement the city's capital facilities needs and to mitigate the various impacts caused by development projects within the city. The program shall be operated pursuant to the following guidelines: 
(1)  Road and highway improvement fee. A road and highway improvement fee is hereby established which shall be collected from all land developers in the city prior to the issuance of building or public works permits. The fee amount shall be as periodically set by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Fee schedule basis. The basis for the fees charged as shown in the city council resolution shall be based on the traffic generated by the development for which a particular permit is requested. The fee represents the fair share cost of constructing the necessary public facilities outlined in the five-year capital improvement program. The traffic generated by each development shall be calculated from the latest generation data promulgated in the publication entitled "Trip Generation" (current edition), an information report as prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(3)  Road and highway improvement fund. The fees required pursuant to this section shall be paid to the city and deposited into a separate road and highway improvement fund. Moneys in this fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of road improvements, streetscapes and streetlights as shown in the five-year capital improvement program. 
(Code 1959, § 9-281; Ord. No. 3506, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 70-69. - Parks and recreation improvement. 
(a)  A parks and recreation improvement program is hereby ordered and adopted. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Government Code § 66477. The purpose of this section is to provide for the development of park and recreation facilities through subdivision regulations. Each person constructing any new dwelling unit, habitation unit or space for a mobile home in the city shall dedicate lands or pay fees in lieu thereof or a combination of both for park and recreational purposes. Dedication requirements shall be conveyed to the city concurrent to recordation of the final map or prior to issuance of building permits. In-lieu fees shall be paid to the city prior to issuance of building permits. 
(b)  Land dedication figures per dwelling unit and in-lieu fees per dwelling unit shall be based on a ratio of three acres of park per 1,000 persons pursuant to Government Code § 66477(b). The number of persons per dwelling unit shall reflect the most recent department of finance figures. The actual amount of land dedication or fee amount shall be as periodically set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  The fees required pursuant to this section shall be paid to the city and deposited into a separate park improvement fund. Moneys in this fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of park improvements or to reimburse the city for the cost to design and construct such facilities. 
(Code 1959, §§ 9-282—9-284; Ord. No. 3506, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 38.  
Sec. 70-70. - Public safety improvement program. 
(a)  Established. A public safety improvement program is hereby ordered and adopted in order to implement the city's capital facilities needs for public safety services. The needs are shown in the five-year capital improvement program. 
(b)  Public safety improvement fee. A public safety improvement fee is hereby established which shall be collected from all land developers in the city prior to the issuance of building or public works permits. The fee amount shall be as periodically set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Public safety improvement fund. The fees required pursuant to this section shall be paid to the city and deposited into a separate public safety improvement fund. Moneys in this fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of public safety improvements as shown in the five-year capital improvement program. 
(Code 1959, § 9-285; Ord. No. 3506, § 1 (part))  
Chapter 74 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, § 301 et seq. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; abatement of buildings constituting nuisance, § 18-31 et seq.; fire prevention, ch. 22; signs, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; building moving permit, § 46-10; new construction tax, § 50-291 et seq.; utilities, ch. 62; diversion of construction and demolition waste, § 62-871 et seq.; administration and planning, ch. 70; subdivisions and zoning, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate construction, Government Code § 38660. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the governing rules, regulations and conditions of administrative procedure for the Building Codes adopted in Article II of this chapter shall be those set forth in Chapter 1 of the California Building Code, 2016 Edition and the California Administrative Code, 2016 Edition. 
(b)  Each model code, and any appendices thereto, adopted by reference in Article II of this chapter shall be an official record of the city maintained in the office of the city clerk, and shall be made available for public inspection. One copy of each model code adopted by reference and any appendices shall also be on file in the office of the building official pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and made available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 4095, § 2, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 4141, § 1, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 4231 , § 1, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 74-2. - Fees. 
Notwithstanding any provision of any Construction Code adopted by reference pursuant to article II of this chapter, all fees and charges shall be included in the "Schedule of fees and service charges" set forth in Section 2-924 of the Pomona City Code, as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4095, § 2, 12-3-2007)  
Secs. 74-3—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Construction codes adopted. 
(a)  For the purpose of prescribing regulations for erecting, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment use, height, and area of buildings and structures, the following construction codes and appendices subject to the modifications set forth in this chapter, are hereby adopted: the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, including Part 8 and Appendix A of said part, and including Part 10 and Appendix A1 of said part; the California Administrative Code, 2016 Edition; the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Residential Code with Appendix V Swimming Pool Safety Act as published by the International Code Council; the 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as published by the International Code Council; the California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition; the California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; the California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; the California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association; the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, as amended by the County of Los Angeles, otherwise known as the 2017 Los Angeles County Fire Code, based on the 2015 International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council; the California Energy Code, 2016 Edition, as published by the International Code Council; the California Reference Standards Code, 2016 Edition, as published by the International Code Council; the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council; and the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, as published by the International Code Council. For the purpose of prescribing regulations for grading and excavations, Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code is hereby adopted. The provisions of these Construction Codes as amended by this chapter shall constitute the Building Regulations of the City of Pomona. Where the California Code of Regulations and State Building Standards Code of Regulations differ from any sections of the Construction Codes, state regulations shall prevail over the Construction Codes. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the above-referenced construction codes, all permit fees and fees for services provided pursuant to the construction codes shall be in accordance with fees established by city council resolution pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66016 and 66020. 
(b)  Amendments to the 2016 California Building Code. 
a)  Section (A)105.2 Work exempt from permit. #2 is amended to read as follows: 
2. Wood, vinyl, chain or similar type of fencing not over 7' and block walls or similar type not over 2' maximum above lowest adjacent grade without a surcharge. 
b)  Section (A)105.2 Work exempt from permit. #4 is amended to read as follows. 
4. Retaining walls that are not over 2 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids. 
(Ord. No. 4095, § 2, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 4141, § 2, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 4231 , § 2, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 74-32. - Construction in fire hazard severity zones. 
(a)  Pursuant to Government Code Section 51179(a), this section adopts the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) "Very High Fire Hazard Safety Zone Maps," which shall be kept on file in the building and safety division and in the office of the city clerk as Exhibit A to Ordinance No. 4104. 
(b)  Effective July 1, 2008, new construction or building expansion within any Very High Fire Hazard Safety Zone shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 7A of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 4104, § 1, 6-16-2008)  
Secs. 74-33—74-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONVERSION OF COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL BUILDING TO JOINT LIVING AND WORK QUARTERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Building regulations for conversion of commercial or industrial buildings to joint living and work quarters, Health and Safety Code § 17958.11. 
 
Sec. 74-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessibility means the combination of various elements in a building or area which allows access, entry, circulation and the full use of the building and facilities by persons with physical disabilities. 
Adaptability means the capability of altering or adding to certain building spaces and/or elements such as kitchen counters, sinks, and grab bars so as to accommodate the needs of persons with or without disabilities or to accommodate the needs of persons with different types or degrees of disability. 
Artisan means one who is skilled in an applied art or profession; a craftsman. 
Artist means: 
(1)  One whose works are subject to aesthetic criteria. 
(2)  An individual who practices one of the fine arts; who works in one of the performing arts, including music; or whose trade or profession requires a knowledge of design, drawing, painting, sculpting, writing or similar trades such as the creative and/or applied arts. 
Building hours means established time periods identified such as 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. when an artist, artisan, professional or similarly situated individual may receive clients. 
Commercial building use means: 
(1)  An occupation, employment, or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee. 
(2)  A use that includes building storefronts for retail display. 
Industrial building use means: 
(1)  A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials. 
(2)  A use engaged in the storage of or manufacturing process using flammable or explosive materials or storage or manufacturing process that involves potentially hazardous conditions. 
(3)  A building use that does not include building storefronts for retail display. 
Listed and listing mean terms referring to equipment and materials which are shown in a list published by an approved testing agency qualified and equipped for experimental testing and maintaining an adequate periodic inspection of current productions and which listing states that the material or equipment complies with accepted national standards which are approved or standards which have been evaluated for conformity with approved standards. 
Occupant load factor means the number in square feet of floor area to be used in determining the number of persons allowed in a building or portion thereof. The total number shall be used to dictate the requirements for the design of the exit system to include, but not be limited to, door widths and required exits. 
Prevailing code means adopted state and local ordinances to be applied at the time of permit application. 
Professional means one who engages in a pursuit or activity professionally, including but not limited to architects, accountants, computer technicians, and executives. 
Work/live unit means an area comprised of one or more rooms or floors in a building originally designed for industrial or commercial occupancy which has been or will be remodeled or altered to include: 
(1)  Cooking space and sanitary facilities; 
(2)  Sleeping space; and 
(3)  Working space reserved for persons residing therein. 
(Code 1959, § 5-161; Ord. No. 3759, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-132. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for and make feasible the reuse of existing commercial and industrial buildings for joint work/live units as contemplated by Health and Safety Code § 17958.11. Work/live units in the city are intended to be occupied by artists, artisans, professionals and similarly situated individuals. 
(Code 1959, § 5-160; Ord. No. 3759, § 1)  
Sec. 74-133. - Administration. 
(a)  Requirements for application. Procedures for making application for a permit for a work/live unit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application for a work/live unit permit shall be made in accordance with the requirements for a building permit. The application shall be accompanied by a minimum of three sets of architectural drawings drawn to a scale of one-quarter inch to a foot, depicting the existing uses within the building and where the proposed work/live unit will be located. 
(2)  Building and safety division staff shall be responsible for distributing a copy of the submitted application and architectural drawing to all affected departments for review and approval. 
(b)  Work/live units permit required. No building shall be used for work/live units unless a work/live unit permit has first been obtained from the building and safety division. 
(c)  Building permit required. No building or structure regulated by this division shall be constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or portion thereof has first been obtained from the building official. 
(d)  Business license requirement. No work/live unit shall be occupied without obtaining a business license in accordance with article VIII of chapter 50. 
(e)  Certificate of occupancy. Procedures for issuance of a certificate of occupancy are as follows: 
(1)  Use and occupancy. No work/live unit or building shall be used or occupied until the building official has completed and approved the final inspection and a certificate of occupancy has been requested for the work/live unit. 
(2)  Posting. The certificate of occupancy for each work/live unit shall be posted in a conspicuous location within each work/live unit behind the exit door. 
(3)  Occupancy violations. Whenever any portion of a building designated as work/live unit is being used contrary to the applicable sections of this Code, the building official may order such use discontinued within the unit or specified portion of the building. Providing the violation is not life threatening to the occupants within the building, such person shall discontinue the use within seven days after the receipt of such notice, as prescribed by the building official, to make the structure or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 5-162; Ord. No. 3759, § 1) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 74-134. - Development criteria. 
(a)  Work/live units shall be permitted subject to this division in those areas designated as "mixed uses" on the land use map contained within the Downtown Pomona specific plan. 
(b)  Work/live units shall be located in upper stories, basements (below grade) or within the rear portions of the first floor of all commercial buildings located within the mixed use districts of the Downtown Pomona specific plan. 
(c)  Access to work/live areas shall be provided only from common access areas such as hallways, corridors, and exterior portions of the building. Access to and from adjacent work/live units shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Where any unit containing work/live occupancy is adjacent to any other unit containing work/live occupancy, such unit shall be separated by one hour fire resistive floors and walls. 
(e)  Doors opening into corridors shall be protected by 20 minute fire assemblies or solid wood doors, not less than 1¾ inches thick. Where an existing frame will not accommodate a 1¾-inch door, a 1 3/8 -inch solid, bonded wood core door or equivalent insulated steel door shall be permitted. The doors shall be maintained self-closing or automatic closing by smoke detection. Such doors shall be provided with a gasket so installed as to provide a seal where the door meets the stop on both sides and across the top. 
(f)  It is not intended that the residential component become the primary or dominant use of the building. Not over 50 percent of any individual work/live unit shall be used or arranged for residential purposes such as a sleeping area, kitchen, bathroom, and closet areas. The minimum area of a work/live unit shall be 600 square feet. The residential occupancy in any work/live unit shall not exceed four persons. 
(g)  For the purposes of determining the minimum number of persons for which the building exiting system must be designed, the following occupant load factors shall be used: 
Occupancy Load Factor 
Residential use 	= 	1 person per 300 sq. ft. 
Business use 	= 	1 person per 100 sq. ft. 
 
(h)  Each work/live unit shall have one openable window accessible for exiting with not less than a 20-inch by 30-inch opening. 
(i)  The life-safety requirements contained in the California Building Code for existing buildings other than high-rise buildings shall apply to all work/live units. For the purpose of providing a reasonable degree of life safety for individuals occupying work/live units, these requirements shall apply. 
(j)  An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be required on all floors throughout the building when work/live units are located above the third story or in basements. 
(k)  Work/live units located three or more stories in height or in buildings containing 16 or more work/live units shall be provided with an approved manual and automatic fire alarm system. However, a separate fire alarm system need not be provided in buildings which are protected throughout by an approved supervised fire sprinkler system having a local alarm system for the notification of all occupants. 
(l)  All work/live units shall be provided with smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall receive their primary power from the building's wiring system and shall be provided with battery backup. Detectors shall be installed in accordance with approved manufacturer's instructions. Location of smoke detectors within the building shall be as follows: Within work/live units each work/live unit shall be provided with single station smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling at a point centrally located in the residential portion of the unit and in each sleeping room. In the working area of the work/live unit, one hardwired smoke detector shall be centrally located on the ceiling. Where the working area is subdivided into separate rooms, one smoke detector shall be installed on the ceiling of each workroom. 
(m)  A minimum of one 2-A, 10-BC rated fire extinguisher shall be provided in each work/live unit. 
(n)  Any building converted or partly converted to work/live units shall not be considered to have changed occupancy classification. All work/live units, including any alteration to a work/live unit, shall be required to meet the minimum life-safety standards as set forth in this division and the following requirements: 
(1)  Each work/live unit shall have a kitchen area consisting of a sink and garbage disposal with GFI outlet provided. 
(2)  Each work/live unit shall have sanitation facilities consisting of a toilet, lavatory, shower and/or bathtub. 
(3)  Each work/live unit shall have heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit at a point of three feet above the floor of the unit. All heating equipment must be approved and listed. 
(4)  Habitable space shall have a dimension of not less than seven feet. 
(5)  Kitchens, hallways and bathrooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than six feet, six inches. 
(6)  The ratio of required disabled accessible or adaptable work/live units shall be as follows: 
Number of Work/Live Units 	Number of Accessible Units 
5—12 	1 
13—20 	2 
21 or more 	2 plus 1 for each additional 7 work/live units 
 
(o)  Modifications which create a life-safety, hazardous condition shall not be authorized by the building official. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this division and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of this division. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 5-163; Ord. No. 3759, § 1)  
Sec. 74-135. - Conditions of approval. 
(a)  This section shall not be applied to any building that was constructed under a building permit issued after December 11, 1989. 
(b)  For emergency and identification purposes, any building containing work/live units shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous location at each entrance to the building indicating such to fire department personnel. The sign shall be constructed of durable, weatherproof material and shall meet the requirements of NFPA 704. A red "A" on a white background shall be placed in the lower quadrant. The height of the sign shall be a minimum of ten inches. The "A" shall be a minimum of four inches. 
(c)  An evacuation plan shall be on the interior side of each entrance door to a work/live unit, at every stairway landing and immediately inside all public entrances to the building. 
(d)  Building hours shall be clearly posted within the main lobby area of the building containing work/live units. 
(e)  Occupancy standards for an instructional use within the work area of a work/live unit shall not exceed one person per each 100 square feet of floor space within the work/live unit. 
(f)  Work/live units shall not be used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The allowable quantities of flammable or combustible liquids in a work/live unit shall be restricted as follows: 
a.  Class I-A, none. 
b.  Class I-B and I-C, one gallon. 
c.  Class II, five gallons. 
d.  Class III, five gallons. 
e.  Combined total not to exceed 11 gallons. 
(2)  A permit must be obtained by the fire department for quantities in excess of the allowable amounts. 
(3)  All flammable and combustible liquids shall be stored in approved safety containers. 
(4)  Sources of ignition such as smoking, open flames or other sources of ignition shall not be located within 25 feet of any flammable or combustible liquids. 
(5)  The use of any welding equipment, open flame work or similar hazardous operations shall require approval by the fire department. 
(g)  Sales of artists' materials shall be restricted to products by the occupant. 
(h)  Work/live units shall be occupied and used only by an artist, artisan, professional or a similarly situated individual or his family, which maintains a common household by not more than four unrelated persons. 
(Code 1959, § 5-164; Ord. No. 3759, § 1)  
Secs. 74-136—74-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 74-171. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this article or as specified in the California Building Code or the housing code. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building code means the California Building Code. 
Dangerous building means any building, structure or portion thereof that has any or all of the following conditions or defects, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants are endangered: 
(1)  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, stair rails, guardrails, or other required means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit. 
(2)  The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, floor or floor covering is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as not to provide safe and adequate means of passage. 
(3)  The stress in any structural materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 1½ times the working stress allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or any other cause to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(5)  Any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Any portion of a building or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquake than is required for similar new construction. 
(8)  The building or structure or any portion thereof is likely to partially or completely collapse because of: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
b.  Faulty construction; 
c.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
d.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
e.  Any other cause. 
(9)  For any reason, the building or structure or any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(10)  The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-half of the base. 
(11)  The building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting members or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing walls or coverings. 
(12)  The building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to: 
a.  Become an attractive nuisance to children; 
b.  Become a harbor for vagrants or criminals; or 
c.  Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts. 
(13)  Any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the (i) strength, (ii) fire-resisting qualities, or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law for a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
(14)  A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement or inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities is determined by the building official or the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(15)  Any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections, or heating apparatus or other cause is determined by the building official or the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
(16)  Any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(17)  Any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(Code 1959, §§ 5-8, 5-9; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-172. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the building or housing code or otherwise available at law, whereby: 
(1)  Buildings or structures which, from any cause, endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished; 
(2)  Provision is made for the abatement of any hazardous condition on private property; and 
(3)  Provision is made to protect a structure from vandalism, burglary or other unlawful acts. 
(b)  Scope. This article shall apply to all dangerous buildings which are in existence or which may become dangerous. 
(Code 1959, § 5-1; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-173. - Alterations, additions and repairs. 
All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under this article shall be subject to the provisions of the administrative part of the building code which are applicable to existing buildings and structures. 
(Code 1959, § 5-2; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-174. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authorization and inspection. The building official or his authorized representative is hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce this article. The building official or his authorized representative is hereby given summary power to secure from entry any structure or to abate any hazardous condition upon private property which, after his inspection, he determines to be immediately dangerous to the public health or safety. He may use any method which, in his judgment and discretion, will be sufficient to safeguard the life, health and safety of the public or protect the structure from vandalism, burglary or other unlawful acts. He shall post the building as set forth in section 74-182 and shall notify the record owner as set forth in section 74-179. 
(b)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the sections of this article or whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article. However, if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; if such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
When the building official or his authorized representative shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Definition. The term "authorized representative," as used in this section, shall include the health officer, the fire marshal, the building official and/or their authorized inspection personnel. 
(Code 1959, § 5-3; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3450, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-175. - Declaration of nuisance. 
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined, after inspection by the building official, to be dangerous are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in section 74-179. 
(Code 1959, § 5-4; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Authority to define nuisance, Government Code § 38771.  
Sec. 74-176. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit such to be done in violation of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-5; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-177. - Inspection of work. 
All buildings or structures within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this article and the California Building Code. 
(Code 1959, § 5-6; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-178. - Administrative appeal. 
The city manager shall hear all appeals under this article. Appeals shall be processed in accordance with section 74-183(a). 
(Code 1959, § 5-7; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-179. - Notices and orders of building official. 
(a)  Commencement of proceedings. Whenever the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, he shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building. 
(b)  Notice and order. The building official shall issue and serve by certified mail a notice and order directed to the record owner and all interested parties, as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, of the building. The notice and order shall contain the following: 
(1)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located. 
(2)  A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the specific conditions found to render the building dangerous under section 74-171. 
(3)  A statement of the action required to be taken, as determined by the building official, as follows: 
a.  If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all necessary permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time, not to exceed 30 days from the date of the order, and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances. 
b.  If the building official has determined that the building or portion thereof must be vacated, the order shall require those portions to be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the building official to be reasonable. 
c.  If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that: 
1.  The building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable, not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order; 
2.  All required permits be secured therefor within 60 days from the date of the order; and 
3.  The demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable. 
(4)  Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work, without vacation also being required, is not commenced and completed within the time specified, the building official: 
a.  Shall order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed; and 
b.  May proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner. 
(5)  Statements advising that: 
a.  Any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the building official to the city manager, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this article and filed with the building official within 15 days from the date of such notice and order; and 
b.  Failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter. 
(c)  Service of notice and order. The notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property; one copy thereof also shall be served on each of the following if known to the building official or disclosed from official public records: the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the building official to serve any person required to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings under this article as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by this section. 
(d)  Method of service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to each such person at his address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the building official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official, a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed to the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner provided in this subsection shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(Code 1959, § 5-10; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3450, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-180. - Recordation of notice and order. 
The building official shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying (i) that the building is a dangerous building, and (ii) that the owner has been so notified at the time he issues and serves the notice and order described in section 74-179. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the certificate, the building official shall file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying that the building has been demolished or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate. 
(Code 1959, § 5-11; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3492, § 1)  
Sec. 74-181. - Repair, vacation and demolition. 
The following standards shall be followed by the building official in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any dangerous building or structure: 
(1)  Any building declared a dangerous building under this article shall either be repaired in accordance with the building code or shall be demolished at the option of the building owner. 
(2)  If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(Code 1959, § 5-12; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-182. - Notice to vacate. 
(a)  Posting. Every notice to vacate given under this article shall, in addition to being served as provided in section 74-179(d), be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Pomona 
(b)  Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued by him under section 74-179(b), reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to inspect, repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the building code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 5-13; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-183. - Appeal. 
(a)  Form. Any person entitled to service under section 74-179 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the building official under this article by filing at the office of the building official a written appeal containing the following: 
(1)  The names of all appellants participating in the appeal. 
(2)  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order. 
(3)  A brief statement describing the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellants. 
(4)  A brief statement of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside. 
(5)  The signatures of all parties named as appellants or their representatives and their mailing addresses. 
The appeal shall be filed within 15 days from the date of such order or action of the building official. 
(b)  Processing of appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the building official shall present it to the city manager who shall designate the hearing officer of such appeal. 
(c)  Scheduling and notice for hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the hearing officer shall fix the date, time and place for hearing the appeal. Such date shall be not less than ten days nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to each appellant at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. 
(Code 1959, § 5-14; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3450, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-184. - Effect of failure to appeal. 
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with section 74-183(a) shall constitute a waiver of his right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 5-15; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-185. - Scope of hearing of appeal. 
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal under this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-16; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-186. - Stay of order under appeal. 
Except for a vacation order made pursuant to section 74-179(b)(3)c., enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this article shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Code 1959, § 5-17; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3450, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-187. - Procedure for conduct of hearing appeals. 
(a)  Reasonable dispatch. Under this article the hearing officer shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives. He may grant continuances for good cause shown. 
(b)  Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the hearing officer or by a certified shorthand reporter. The costs of the certified shorthand reporter shall be an administrative cost under section 74-196 if the hearing officer determines that the building involved in the proceeding is a nuisance. 
(c)  Transcript. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon the payment of the costs therefor. 
(d)  Oaths; certifications. In any proceedings under this section, the hearing officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts. 
(Code 1959, § 5-18; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3492, § 2)  
Sec. 74-188. - Form of notice of hearing. 
The notice to the appellant of the hearing under this article shall be substantially in the following form, but may include other information: 
You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before (name) , the Hearing Officer appointed by the City Manager, at (place) on ________, ___, at _____ a.m./p.m., upon the Notice and Order served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to question all witnesses testifying against you. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents or other items by filing a declaration under penalty of perjury therefor with the Hearing Officer. 
(Code 1959, § 5-19; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-189. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  Filing of declaration. The hearing officer may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence at a hearing held pursuant to this article upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of a declaration under penalty of perjury therefor which states the name and address of the proposed witness, which specifies the exact items sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in detail to the issues involved, and which states that the witness has the desired items in his possession or under his control. A subpoena need not be issued when the declaration is defective in any particular. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who refuses without lawful excuse to attend any hearing or to produce material evidence in his possession or under his control as required by any subpoena served upon such person as provided for in this section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1959, § 5-20; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-190. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Rules. Hearings held pursuant to this article need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
(b)  Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(c)  Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil action in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(d)  Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(e)  Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(f)  Rights of parties. Each party shall have the right, among others, to: 
(1)  Call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing. 
(2)  Introduce documentary and physical evidence. 
(3)  Question opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing. 
(4)  Impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify. 
(5)  Rebut the evidence against him. 
(6)  Represent himself or be represented by anyone of his choice who is lawfully permitted to do so. 
(g)  Official notice. Official notice shall be given in accordance with the following: 
(1)  What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state. 
(2)  Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed. 
(3)  Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority. 
(4)  Inspection of premises. The hearing officer may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that (i) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; (ii) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; and (iii) the hearing officer shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer. 
(Code 1959, § 5-21; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-191. - Method and form of decision. 
(a)  Under this article the hearing officer shall, within 15 days from the date the hearing is closed, file a written decision in the office of the city manager. 
(b)  If the hearing officer determines that the building or portion thereof is dangerous and a nuisance, he shall direct the appellant to commence abatement of the condition within 15 days after the service of the decision and to complete the abatement within 90 days by having the building properly repaired or by having the building razed or removed and notifying the appellant that, if the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, the building will be razed, demolished and removed by the city and the expenses thereof made a lien on the lot or parcel of land upon which the building is located. The alternative abatement of the nuisance by reconstruction and repair shall not be available to the appellant if the repaired building will remain illegal because of violations of other statutes or codes. 
(c)  The appellant shall obtain, prior to reconstruction or repair, all appropriate building and similar permits. Each such permit shall expire 90 days after the service of the decision. 
(d)  Such decision shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and shall state the hearing officer's findings, conclusions and recommendations and shall set forth that it is subject to Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final forthwith. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to each party by certified mail. A notarized copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the county recorder. 
(Code 1959, § 5-22; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3435, § 1; Ord. No. 3450, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-192. - Enforcement of order. 
(a)  Generally. After any order of the building official or the hearing officer made pursuant to this article shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect to refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the building official or hearing officer made pursuant to this article has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may: 
(1)  Cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection (a) of this section; or 
(2)  Institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
(c)  Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 15 days after any final notice and order issued under this article becomes effective: 
(1)  The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading substantially as follows: 
DANGEROUS BUILDING 
DO NOT OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Pomona 
(2)  No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the building official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the building code. 
(3)  The building official may, in addition to any other remedy provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order pursuant to section 74-179 or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-23; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-193. - Extension of time to perform work. 
Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order issued pursuant to this article and an agreement by such person that he will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the building official may, at his discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete the repair, rehabilitation or demolition if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official's authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal his notice and order. 
(Code 1959, § 5-24; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-194. - Interference with work prohibited. 
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under this article or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to this article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative; person having an interest or estate in such building or structure; or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building pursuant to this article or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1959, § 5-25; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-195. - Performance of work. 
When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to section 74-193(c), the building official shall cause the finance department to have the repair or demolition work done pursuant to standard specifications and procedures. 
(Code 1959, § 5-26; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-196. - Recovery of cost. 
The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred, including administrative costs, in the repair or demolition work done pursuant to this article. He shall mail a copy of the accounting to the persons who have interest in the property, together with a notice of the time and place that the statement will be submitted to the city council for confirmation and approval, at which time the council will consider any objection which may be raised by any party involved in the proceeding. 
(Code 1959, § 5-27; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-197. - Lien against property for repair or demolition of building. 
(a)  At the time fixed for the hearing of the statement of expense as provided in section 74-196, the city council shall consider the statement together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the doing of the work and any other interested person, after which by resolution the report as submitted or as ordered, revised, corrected or modified by the city council shall be confirmed and adopted. If the statement is not paid within five days after the passing of the resolution, it shall constitute a lien on the real property from which the structure was repaired or removed and shall be collected as a special assessment against the real property. The resolution shall further direct that the city clerk shall file with the county auditor and the county tax assessor and tax collector certified copies of the resolution and the statement adopted therein. The clerk shall direct the auditor to enter the amounts of the charges against the real property described in the statement and resolution as it appears on the current assessment roll. The amount of the charges shall constitute a lien against the real property against which the charges have been imposed. The tax collector shall include the amount of the charges on bills for taxes levied against the real property. Thereafter, the amount of the charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same person as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest upon delinquent payment. 
(b)  If the building official has caused summary abatement as set forth in section 74-174(b), additional methods of ensuring payment of costs incurred by the city are as follows: 
(1)  If the building is vacant or unoccupied, the building official is authorized to order all utility companies to discontinue utility service and not restore service until authorized by the building official. Notice to the utility companies may be given verbally, and the disconnect order shall be confirmed in written form; 
(2)  Administrative costs may be recovered: 
a.  As set forth in subsection (a) of this section; or 
b.  By increasing the fee charged for the permit to repair or demolish the structure. 
(c)  When acting pursuant to this section, the city will conform to the procedures in Government Code §§ 38773.1 and 38773.5. 
(Code 1959, § 5-28; Ord. No. 3227, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3369, § 1 (part)) 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement authorized, Government Code § 38773.  
Secs. 74-198—74-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SUBSTANDARD RENTAL HOUSING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Rental units, § 30-501 et seq. 
State Law reference— Buildings used for human habitation, Health and Safety Code § 17950 et seq.; registration of owners of substandard buildings, Health and Safety Code § 17997 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 74-231—74-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOSS OF INCOME TAX DEDUCTIONS, CREDITS, ETC.[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Income tax adjustments for owners of substandard housing, Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 17274, 24436.5. 
 
Sec. 74-251. - Building official's report regarding activities to secure code enforcement. 
By July 1 of each year, the building official shall report to the city council the information required by Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 17274, 24436.5 for the preceding calendar year regarding his activities to secure code enforcement, which report shall be public information. 
(Code 1959, § 5-57; Ord. No. 3227, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 74-252. - Applicability. 
This division does not apply to deductions from income derived from property rendered substandard solely by reason of a change in applicable state or local housing standards unless the violations caused substantial danger to the occupants of the property, as determined by the building official who has served notice of violation. 
(Code 1959, § 5-55; Ord. No. 3227, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 74-253. - Buildings considered substandard. 
All buildings or structures which are used for rental housing and for which a state income tax deduction has been taken for interest, taxes, depreciation or amortization by the owner thereof which violate state law or city codes dealing with health, safety or building and which have not been brought to a condition of compliance within six months after notice of code compliance is served upon the property owner are substandard. 
(Code 1959, § 5-50; Ord. No. 3227, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 74-254. - Examination and notice. 
(a)  The building official shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure used for rental housing reported as substandard. If, upon inspection, such building or structure is found to be substandard as defined in section 74-253, the building official shall give notice by certified mail to the owner of such building or structure (taxpayer) at his last known address substantially as follows: 
Pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 17274, 24436.5, and Chapter 74, Article IV, Division 2, of the Code of the City of Pomona, the Building Official has determined that your building or structure used for rental housing at _______, Pomona, California, is substandard and violates certain state laws and city codes, to wit: _______ in that the following violations have been found to exist: _______. You are hereby also notified that you must bring your said building or structure into a condition of compliance within six months after the date of this notice. IF YOU FAIL TO DO SO YOU MAY LOSE YOUR CALIFORNIA INCOME TAX EXEMPTION FOR THIS BUILDING. 
Dated: _____ 	_____
Building Official 
 
(b)  The building official may extend the six-month compliance date upon the showing by the property owner of good faith efforts for compliance with the notice. 
(Code 1959, § 5-51; Ord. No. 3227, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 74-255. - Notice and hearing on compliance. 
(a)  If the owner of the building or structure deemed substandard by the building official has not complied with the notice set forth in section 74-254 within the six-month period or any extension thereof, the building official shall mail a notice of noncompliance by certified mail to the owner of the building or structure at his last known address. If there is more than one owner or a fictitious owner, notice shall be given to the names and at the addresses on the latest available property tax bill. 
(b)  Such notice of noncompliance shall be in such form and shall include such information as may be prescribed by the franchise tax board. The notice shall advise the property owner of the following: 
(1)  Of an intent to notify the franchise tax board of such noncompliance after ten days from the date on the notice unless an appeal is filed; 
(2)  Where an appeal may be filed; and 
(3)  A general description of the tax consequences of the filing with the franchise tax board. 
(c)  The owner may appeal by giving the building official a written request for a formal hearing. If the owner does not appeal within ten days, the building official shall notify the franchise tax board of the noncompliance. 
(Code 1959, § 5-52; Ord. No. 3227, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 74-256. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the property owner files an appeal in writing with the building official from his determination, as set forth in section 74-255, prior to the tenth day after service of the building official's findings and conclusions on the property owner, the appeal shall be processed and heard in the same manner as that of the abatement of dangerous buildings in article III of this chapter and in particular sections 74-183 through 74-191, pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 17274(c), 24436.5. 
(b)  If an appeal is filed, the hearing officer shall hear evidence, written or oral, on whether the building or structure: 
(1)  Complied with the state laws and city codes dealing with health, safety or building set forth in the notice required by section 74-254 at the time such notice was sent. 
(2)  Has been brought into compliance with such state laws and city codes dealing with health, safety, or building during the six-month period or additional periods of extension of the compliance date set forth in the notice required by section 74-254. 
(Code 1959, § 5-53; Ord. No. 3227, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 74-257. - Exemption from mailing notice of noncompliance. 
For purposes of this article, a notice of noncompliance shall not be mailed by the building official to the franchise tax board if: 
(1)  The rental housing was rendered substandard solely by reason of earthquake, flood or other natural disaster, except where the condition remains for more than three years after the disaster; 
(2)  The owner of the rental housing has secured financing to bring the housing into compliance with those laws or codes which have been violated, causing the housing to be classified as substandard, and has commenced repairs or other work necessary to bring the housing into compliance; or 
(3)  The owner of rental housing which is not within the meaning of housing accommodation as defined by Health and Safety Code § § 35805(d) has attempted to: 
a.  Secure financing to bring such housing into compliance with those laws or codes which have been violated, causing such housing to be classified as substandard; and 
b.  The financing is denied solely because such housing is located in a neighborhood or geographical area in which financial institutions do not provide financing for rehabilitation of any such housing. 
(Code 1959, § 5-54; Ord. No. 3227, § 3 (part))  
Sec. 74-258. - Notification of transfer of interest in rental housing. 
The owner of rental housing found to be in noncompliance with this division shall, upon total or partial divestiture of interest in the property, immediately notify the city of the name and address of the person to whom the property has been sold or otherwise transferred and the date of the sale or transfer. 
(Code 1959, § 5-56; Ord. No. 3227, § 3 (part))  
Secs. 74-259—74-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 74-291. - Location; support; walkways. 
(a)  A swimming pool shall not be located closer than five feet from side or rear property lines pursuant to the zoning code. A pool shall not be located closer than one-half the distance from ascending or descending slopes that is required for structures under the California Building Code. 
(b)  That portion of a pool within a horizontal distance of seven feet from the top of a slope shall be capable of supporting the water in the pool without soil support. 
(c)  A three-foot-wide walkway shall be maintained between a pool and any building. 
(Code 1959, § 30-2; Ord. No. 3860, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-292. - Protection of adjacent property and existing buildings. 
Soil on adjacent property and existing foundations on the same property which may be affected by any excavation for a swimming pool shall be adequately protected from settlement or lateral movement. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. No. 3860, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-293. - Design; enforcement. 
(a)  Each swimming pool or spa shall be designed by a registered civil or structural engineer. The design shall address the loads from water and soil, to the satisfaction of the building official, who may also require a soils investigation and geologist's report. The design engineer, over his signature, shall indicate that the plan as submitted is designed for the specific site, except that spas and aboveground pools need not be designed for specific sites. 
(b)  The building official shall enforce this article. 
(Code 1959, § 30-4; Ord. No. 3860, § 1 (part))  
Sec. 74-294. - Clarity of water and sanitation. 
It is a nuisance and unlawful for any person to keep in the city or suffer or permit to be kept at or upon any premises in the city owned, controlled or occupied by him a swimming pool, spa or hot tub in a foul, noxious, filthy or stagnant condition. The water of all swimming pools, spas and hot tubs must be kept sufficiently clear that the bottom will be visible at all times. 
(Code 1959, § 30-5; Ord. No. 3450, § 2)  
ARTICLE VI. - SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-295. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this division is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This division allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 4209, § 1, 9-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-296. - Applicability. 
This division applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this division are not subject to the requirements of this division unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like -kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 4209, § 1, 9-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-297. - Definitions. 
(a)  Association means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
(b)  Building department means the building and safety division for the City of Pomona. 
(c)  Building official means the building official for the City of Pomona. 
(d)  City means the City of Pomona. 
(e)  Common interest development means any of the following: 
(1)  A community apartment project. 
(2)  A condominium project. 
(3)  A planned development. 
(4)  A stock cooperative. 
(f)  Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Email 
(2)  The internet 
(3)  Facsimile 
(g)  Expedited permitting, and expedited review, means the process outlined in section 74-300 entitled "Expedited permit review and inspection requirements." 
(h)  A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit. 
(i)  Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is not larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
(2)  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City of Pomona and all State of California health and safety standards. 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City of Pomona. 
(j)  Solar energy system means either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. 
(k)  Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 4209, § 1, 9-14-2015)  
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS AND PERMITTING 
 
Sec. 74-298. - Solar energy system requirements. 
(a)  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the city and the State of California. 
(b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
(c)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 4209, § 1, 9-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-299. - Duties of building division and building official. 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the city's publicly accessible website. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via email, the city's website, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
(c)  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(d)  The building division shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
(e)  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(f)  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health & Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 4209, § 1, 9-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-300. - Expedited permit review and inspection requirements. 
(a)  The building division shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications within 30 days of adoption of this article. For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, the building division shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit within three business days. 
(b)  Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. 
(c)  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A)-(B). 
(d)  The city shall not condition the approval of an application on the approval of an association as defined in Civil Code Section 4080. 
(e)  If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
(f)  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
(g)  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request. 
(h)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4209, § 1, 9-14-2015)  
Secs. 74-301—74-309. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4185, § 1, adopted June 2, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as Article VI. At the editor's discretion, former Article VI has been renumbered as Artcle VII as set out herein. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-310. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Pomona Low Impact Development (LID) Ordinance" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-311. - Findings. 
The City of Pomona finds that: 
(1)  Waterbodies, roadways, structures, and other property within and downstream of the city are at times subject to flooding. 
(2)  Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, increased sediment transport and deposition, and increased non-point source pollutant loading to the receiving waterbodies and the beaches. 
(3)  Stormwater runoff produced by land development contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants. 
(4)  Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution have occurred as a result of land development, and have impacted the water resources of the San Gabriel River Watershed and the Santa Ana River Watershed. 
(5)  Increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes and the sediments and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future development projects within the city will, absent proper regulation and control, adversely affect the city's waterbodies and water resources, and those of downstream municipalities. 
(6)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater runoff from development. 
(7)  Adopting the standards, criteria, and procedures contained in this Article and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-312. - Purpose. 
The provisions of this article are adopted pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," codified and amended at 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. The intent of this article is to enhance and protect the water quality of the receiving waters of the United States in a manner that is consistent with the Clean Water Act (and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto), applicable implementing regulations, and the Municipal NPDES permit (as defined below, and any amendment, revision, or re-issuance thereof). It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the following objectives: 
(1)  Lessen the water quality impacts of development by using smart growth practices such as compact development, directing development towards existing communities via infill or redevelopment, and safeguarding of environmentally sensitive areas. 
(2)  Minimize the adverse impacts from stormwater runoff on the biological integrity of natural drainage systems and the beneficial uses of waterbodies. 
(3)  Minimize the percentage of impervious surfaces on land developments by minimizing soil compaction during construction, designing projects to minimize the impervious area footprint, and employing low impact development (LID) design principles to mimic predevelopment hydrology through infiltration, evapotranspiration, and rainfall harvest and use. 
(4)  Maintain existing riparian buffers and enhance riparian buffers when possible. 
(5)  Minimize pollutant loadings from impervious surfaces such as roof tops, parking lots, and roadways through the use of properly designed, technically appropriate best management practices (BMPs, defined below) including source control BMPs such as good housekeeping practices, LID strategies, and treatment control BMPs. 
(6)  Properly select, design and maintain LID and hydromodification control BMPs to address pollutants that are likely to be generated, reduce changes to pre-development hydrology, assure long-term function, and avoid the breeding of vectors. 
(7)  Prioritize the selection of BMPs to remove stormwater pollutants, reduce stormwater runoff volume, and beneficially use stormwater to support an integrated approach to protecting water quality and managing water resources in the following order of preference: 
a.  On-site infiltration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use. 
b.  On-site biofiltration, off-site ground water replenishment, and/or off-site retrofit. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-313. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases, words, and derivatives shall have the meaning defined below: 
Basin plan means the Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region, Basin Plan for Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994 and any subsequent amendments. 
Beneficial use means the existing or potential use of receiving waters as designated by the Los Angeles or Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Boards in their respective basin plans for the county. 
Best management practices or BMPs are practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water. 
City means the City of Pomona. 
City engineer means the city engineer for the City of Pomona. 
Conveyance facility means a storm drain, pipe, swale, or channel used to collect and direct stormwater. 
Design engineer means the registered professional engineer responsible for the design of the stormwater management plan. 
Detention system means a system which is designed to capture stormwater and release it over a given period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate. 
Development means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail and other non-residential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
Director means the director of public works for City of Pomona. 
Discharge means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance. 
Disturbed area means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, or excavation. 
Engineered site grading plan means a scaled drawing or plan and accompanying text prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect which shows alteration of topography, alterations of watercourses, flow directions of stormwater runoff, and propose stormwater management and measures which are prepared to ensure that the objectives of this article are met. 
Grading means any stripping, excavating, filling, and stockpiling of soil or any combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
Hardscape means any durable, pervious or impervious surface material, including paving for pedestrians and vehicles. 
Hydromodification means the alteration of a natural drainage system through a change in the system's flow characteristics. 
Impervious surface means a surface that does not allow stormwater runoff to slowly perchlorate into the ground. 
Low impact development or LID means technologies and practices that are part of a sustainable stormwater management strategy that controls, retains or filters stormwater and urban runoff on site. 
Maximum extent practicable or MEP means the extent to which the city can reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff. MEP requires selecting and implementing effective BMPs, and rejecting applicable BMPs only where: (a) other effective BMPs will serve the same purpose; (b) the BMPs would not be technically feasible; or (c) the cost would be prohibitive. Factors considered include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Effectiveness: Whether the BMP addresses a pollutant of concern; 
(2)  Regulatory compliance: Whether the BMP complies with storm water regulations, as well as other environmental regulations; 
(3)  Public acceptance: Whether the BMP has public support; 
(4)  Cost: Whether the cost of implementing the BMP has a reasonable relationship to the pollution control benefits achieved; 
(5)  Technical feasibility: Whether the BMP is technically feasible, considering soils, geography, and water resources. 
Municipal NPDES permit means California regional water quality control board, Los Angeles Region, Order No. R4-2012-0175, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001 waste discharge requirements for municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) discharge within the coastal watersheds of Los Angeles County, except those discharges originating from the City of Long Beach MS4, and any amendment thereto or re-issuance thereof. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (referred to herein as "MS4"), means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains): 
(1)  Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.2.(40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(8)). 
Natural drainage system means any unlined or unimproved (not engineered) creek, stream, river, or similar waterway. 
Non-storm water discharge means any fluid discharge to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of storm water but may not necessarily be an illicit discharge. 
NPDES or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System means the national permitting program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under Clean Water Act (CWA) §307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an "approved program." 
Mandated by Congress under the Clean Water Act, the NPDES stormwater program is a comprehensive two-phased national program for addressing the non-agricultural sources of stormwater discharges which adversely affect the quality of our nation's waters. The program uses the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting mechanism to require the implementation of controls designed to prevent harmful pollutants from being washed by stormwater runoff into local water bodies. 
Pollutants of concern means chemical, physical, or biological components of stormwater that impair the beneficial uses of receiving waters, including those defined in Section 502(6) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act ("Clean Water Act," 33 U.S.C. Section 1362(6)), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code Section 13373. 
Public works department means the City of Pomona public works department. 
Receiving water means a "water of the United States" (as defined in 33 C.F.R. section 328.3(a)(7)) into which waste and/or pollutants are or may be discharged. 
Retention means a holding system for stormwater, either natural or man-made, which does not have an outlet to adjoining watercourses or wetlands and in which water is removed through infiltration and/or evaporation processes. 
Runoff means any runoff including stormwater and dry weather flows from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it is typically comprised of base flow (either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated) and nuisance flows. 
Sediment means mineral or organic particulate matter that has been removed from its site of origin by the processes of soil erosion, is in suspension in water, or is being transported. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the current edition of the standard industrial classification manual issued by the executive office of the President of the United States, Office of Management and Budget, and as the same may be periodically revised. 
Storm drain means a conduit, pipe, swale, natural channel, or man-made structure which serves to transport stormwater runoff. Storm drains may be either enclosed or open. 
Stormwater means runoff that occurs as the result of rainfall. 
Stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv) means the runoff generated by the greater of either: 
(1)  The 0.75-inch, 24-hour rain event; or 
(2)  The 85th percentile, 24-hour rain event, as determined from the Los Angeles County department of public works 85th percentile precipitation isohyetal map. 
Urban runoff means surface flows, other than stormwater, emanating from development. 
Water quality design storm event means any of the volumetric or flow rate based design storm events for water quality BMP's identified in the national pollutant discharge elimination system municipal stormwater permit for the county of Los Angeles. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
DIVISION 2. - NEW DEVELOPMENTS AND REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 74-314. - Applicability. 
These procedures and standards set forth in this article, the BMP design information found in the Los Angeles County municipal storm water permit, and the County of Los Angeles department of public works low impact development standards manual (February 2014), and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof provide minimum standards to be complied with by developers and in no way limit the city's authority to adopt and publish or enforce higher standards as a condition of approval of developments. 
(a)  New development projects. Development projects subject to city conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate stormwater pollution prior to completion of the project(s) include: 
(1)  All development projects equal to one acre or greater of disturbed area and adding more than 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area; 
(2)  Industrial parks 10,000 square feet or more of surface area; 
(3)  Commercial malls ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of surface area; 
(4)  Retail gasoline outlets 5,000 square feet or more of surface area. 
(5)  Restaurants (SIC 5812) 5,000 square feet or more of surface area; 
(6)  Parking lots 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area, or with 25 or more parking spaces; 
(7)  Street and road construction of 10,000 square feet or more of surface area shall follow the city green street policy to the maximum extent practicable. Street and road construction applies to standalone streets, roads, highways, and freeway projects, and also applies to streets within larger projects; 
(8)  Automotive service facilities (SIC 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539) with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area; 
(9)  New development projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to the proposed significant ecological area ("SEA") which will: 
a.  Discharge stormwater runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and 
b.  Create two thousand 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface area; and 
(10)  Redevelopment projects in subject categories that meet redevelopment thresholds identified in Part B—Redevelopment projects, below; 
(11)  Redevelopment projects located in or within 200 feet of, or discharging directly to a significant ecological area (SEA) where the development will: 
a.  Discharge stormwater runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and 
b.  Create 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface area. 
(12)  Single-family hillside homes. During the construction of a single-family hillside home, the following measures shall be considered to the maximum extent practicable: 
a.  Conserve natural areas. 
b.  Protect slopes and channels. 
c.  Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage. 
d.  Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability. 
e.  Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability. 
(b)  Redevelopment projects. Redevelopment projects subject to conditioning and approval requirements outlined in this article for the design and implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate stormwater pollution prior to completion of the project(s) include: 
(1)  Land disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site. 
(2)  Redevelopment project that result in an alteration to more than 50 perfect of impervious surfaces of an existing development which had not been subject to post-construction stormwater quality control requirements at the time of the previous development shall be required to mitigate the entire project site. 
(3)  Redevelopment project that result in an alteration of less than 50 perfect of impervious surfaces of an existing development which had not been subject to post-construction stormwater quality control requirements at the time of the previous development shall be required to mitigate only the alteration and shall not be required to mitigate the entire project site. 
(4)  Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Impervious surface replacement, such as the reconstruction of parking lots and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the original grade and alignment, is considered a routine maintenance activity. Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing roads to maintain original line and grade. 
(5)  Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or replace 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-315. - Project performance criteria. 
All development projects that fit the project criteria listed above in section 74-331 of this article shall control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume by retaining the stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv) (as defined in definitions) on-site through: 
(1)  Minimizing the impervious surface area; and 
(2)  Controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-316. - Alternative compliance for technical infeasibility. 
(a)  To demonstrate technical infeasibility, the project applicant shall demonstrate to the city engineer that the project cannot reliably retain 100 percent of the SWQDv on-site, even with the maximum application of green roofs and rainwater harvest and use, and the compliance with the applicable post-construction requirements would be technically infeasible. This shall be demonstrated by submitting a site-specific hydrologic and/or design analysis conducted and endorsed by a registered professional engineer and shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer. 
(b)  When evaluating the potential for on-site retention, each applicant shall consider the maximum potential for evapotranspiration from green roofs and rainfall harvest and use. Alternative compliance measures include the following: 
(1)  On-site biofiltration. Biofiltration systems shall meet the design specifications provided in Attachment H of the Los Angeles County Municipal Storm Water Permit Order N. R4-2012-0175, and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof. If using biofiltration due to demonstrated technical infeasibility, then the new project must biofiltrate 1.5 times the portion of the SWQDv that is not reliably retained on site, as calculated by Equation 1 below: 
Equation 1: 
Bv=1.5* [SWQDv-Rv) 
Where: 
Bv = Biofiltraton volume 
SWQDv= the stormwater runoff from a 0.75 inch, 24-hour storm or the 85th percentile storm, whichever is greater 
Rv=volume reliably retained on-site 
(2)  Off-site infiltration. Use infiltration or bioretention BMPs to intercept a volume of stormwater runoff equal to the SWQDv, less the volume or stormwater runoff reliably retained on-site, at an approved offsite project. The required off-site mitigation volume shall be calculated by Equation 2 below: 
Equation 2: 
Mv=1.0*[SWQDv-Rv] 
Where: 
Mv=Mitigation Volume 
SWQDv=Runoff from the 0.75 inch, 24-hour storm event or the 85th percentile storm, whichever is greater 
Rv=the volume of stormwater runoff reliably retained on-site 
(3)  Offsite project. Retrofit existing development. Use infiltration, bioretention, rainfall harvest and use and/or biofiltration BMPs to retrofit an existing development, with similar land uses as the new development or land uses associated with comparable of higher stormwater runoff event mean concentrations (EMCs) than the new development. The retrofit plan shall be designed and constructed as described in the Los Angeles County Municipal Storm Water Permit Order N. R4-2012-0175, and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof. 
(4)  Other alternative compliance requirements are detailed in the Los Angeles County Municipal Stormwater Permit Order No. R4-2012-0175. 
(c)  Applicants and/or designers may select any combination of stormwater BMPs which meet the performance standards provided in this section and identified in the Los Angeles Municipal Storm Water Permit Order N. R4-2012-0175, and the County of Los Angeles Department of Public Works Low Impact Development Standards Manual (February 2014), and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 74-317—74-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS, FEES, AND MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 74-331. - Review Procedures. 
(a)  All stormwater plans shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer. 
(1)  If the proposed plan is not sufficient as originally submitted, the city engineer, or his/her designee, will notify the applicant in writing, setting forth the reasons for withholding a recommendation or approval, and will state the changes necessary to obtain approval. 
(2)  If staff determines that all of the required information has not been received, the proprietor may request additional time to allow for the submittal of the required information. 
(3)  If all of the required information has been received, staff shall recommend approval, recommend approval with conditions, or recommend denial of the stormwater plan. 
(b)  If the plan is approved, the city will require the following: 
(1)  The applicant will provide copies of all necessary state, federal, or local permits relating to the project for stormwater management to the city. 
(2)  A satisfactory maintenance covenant agreement that assures long-term maintenance of all drainage improvements shall be submitted as part of the final plan. The maintenance covenant shall include a listing of the BMPs, locations, and required maintenance frequency. The property owner shall be required to document proper maintenance and operations and maintain records for a period of two years. Maintenance agreements and records shall be provided upon request to the city inspector at any time for compliance verification. Failure to do so will result in enforcement actions per the City Code. The approved covenant shall be recorded with the Los Angeles County registrar-recorder/county clerk prior to issuance of occupancy. 
(3)  A satisfactory maintenance covenant shall at a minimum include the developer's signed statement accepting responsibility for maintenance until the responsibility is legally transferred, and either: 
• A signed statement from the public entity assuming responsibility for BMP maintenance; or 
• Written conditions in the sales or lease agreement, which require the property owner or tenant to assume responsibility for BMP maintenance and conduct a maintenance inspection at least once a year; or 
• Written text in project covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CCRs) for residential properties assigning BMP maintenance responsibilities to the home owners association (HOA). Residential development with HOAs shall include a stormwater pollution prevention plan and compliance elements in the CCRs. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-332. - Review fees. 
Fees and escrow account payments shall be sufficient to cover administrative and technical review costs anticipated to be incurred by the city including the costs of on-site inspections. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-333. - Maintenance agreement required. 
(a)  Maintenance agreement required. A maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the city for review by the city engineer and his/her designee, and if necessary, city attorney. The designers may select any combination of stormwater BMPs which meet the performance standards provided in this section and identified in the Los Angeles County Municipal Storm Water Permit No. R-2012-0175 and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof. A formal maintenance plan shall be included in the maintenance agreement. 
(b)  Purpose of the maintenance agreement is to provide the means and assurance that maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be undertaken. 
(c)  Maintenance agreement provisions: 
(1)  The maintenance agreement shall include a plan for routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of all stormwater BMPS, with a detailed annual estimated budget for the initial two years, and a clear statement that only future maintenance activities in accordance with the maintenance agreement plan shall be permitted without the necessity of securing new permits. Written notice of the intent to proceed with maintenance not within the scope of the maintenance agreement plan shall be provided by the party responsible for maintenance to the City of Pomona at least 14 days in advance of commencing work. 
(2)  The maintenance agreement and all its covenants shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater BMPs. 
(3)  If it has been found by the city, following notice and an opportunity to be heard by the property owner, that there has been a material failure or refusal to undertake maintenance as required under this article and/or as required in the approved maintenance agreement as required hereunder, the city shall abate such violations, as a public nuisance, pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 18 of the Municipal Code. 
(d)  A fully executed "Maintenance covenant for permanent BMPs requirements" shall be recorded with the Los Angeles County registrar-recorder/county clerk and submitted to the public works department prior to the certificate of occupancy. Covenant documents shall be required to include exhibits that detail all of the installed treatment control devices as well as any site design or source control BMPs for post construction. The information to be provided on this exhibit shall include, but not be limited to: 
• 8½"x11" exhibits with record property owner information. 
• Types of BMPs (i.e., site design, source control, and/or treatment control) to ensure modifications to the site are not conducted without the property owner being aware of the ramifications to BMP implementation. 
• Clear depicting of location of BMPs, especially those located below ground. 
• A matrix depicting the types of BMPs, frequency of inspection, type of maintenance required, and if proprietary BMPs, the company information to perform the necessary maintenance. 
• Agreement to retain documentation of proper maintenance records for a period of two years plus current year. 
• Understanding the documentation of proper maintenance must be presented to the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Secs. 74-334—74-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 74-341. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the city's progressive enforcement policy as detailed in the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-342. - Stop work order. 
Where there is work in progress that causes or contributes in whole or in part, a violation of any provision of this article, the city is authorized to issue a stop work order so as to prevent further or continuing violations or adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop work order is directed, or who are involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stop work order shall fully and promptly comply therewith. The city may also undertake or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures so as to prevent violations of this article or to avoid or reduce the effects of non-compliance herewith. The cost of any such protective measures shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done and the responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-343. - Failure to comply. 
In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the provisions of this article, the city may, after the giving of reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the city for all costs of such work. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-344. - Emergency measures. 
When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to protect public safety, health, and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury or damage to property, the city is authorized to carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this article, and shall promptly reimburse the city for all such costs. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 74-345. - Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system. 
A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as a result of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs a storm drain, or water quality violation, or violates any of the provisions of this article. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties levied by the Environmental Protection Agency or Los Angeles and Santa Ana regional water quality control boards for violation of an NPDES Permit, attorney fees, and other costs and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Chapter 78 - SUBDIVISIONS AND ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning atlas, or rezoning specific property saved from repeal, § 1-11(14); any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-11(15); environment, ch. 18; adult-oriented businesses, § 30-191 et seq.; signs, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 62; water utility connection charges for subdivision development, § 62-323; buildings and building regulations, ch. 74. 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Chapter 29 of the 1959 edition of the Code of the City of Pomona, California, or any ordinance contained in such chapter or amendatory of such chapter. 
(2)  The city's zoning ordinance, being Ord. No. 1466, as amended. 
(b)  All such provisions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 


7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

APPENDIX I - Zoning ordinance.
PART I.
Sec. .010. - Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to encourage, classify, designate, regulate, restrict, and segregate the highest and best location and use
of buildings, structures, and land for agriculture, residence, commerce, trade, industry, water conservation, or other purposes in appropriate
places; to regulate and limit the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures hereafter designed, erected, or altered;
to regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces; and to regulate and limit the density of population, and for said purpose
to divide the city of Pomona into districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and
provide for their enforcement. Further, such regulations are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to
conserve and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air and to prevent and fight fires; to prevent
undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion of streets; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities such as
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare,
all as part of the master plan of the city of Pomona.
Sec. .020. - Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Pomona."
Sec. .030. - Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this ordinance insofar as they are substantially the same as existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter,
shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments. The re-enactment of these provisions shall not constitute
validation of any use not conforming to the zone in which it is located.
Sec. .040. - Existing uses.
The existing use or uses of all buildings, improvements and premises not in conformity with the standards or requirements of the land
use zoning district in which they are located, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and which uses are legal, or for which
permits, variances or conditional exceptions were granted under previous zoning ordinances, may continue as "Nonconforming uses," (See
Section .550) or "Variances," (See Section .560) as hereinafter defined, and subject to the provisions regulating such nonconforming uses.
Sec. .050. - Legally existing lots.
Where a lot has width, depth, or area less than that required in the zoning district of which it is a part and was legally of record at the
time changes to this ordinance became effective, such lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in the district, subject to all the other
development standards of said district.
(Ord. No. 2480, § 1; Ord. No. 3660, § 25.)

Sec. .060. - De nitions.
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this ordinance, words, phrases and terms shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to
them in the following sections covering definitions.
Sec. .061. - General terminology.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the
plural; and those in the plural number include the singular.
A.

Assessor. The word "assessor" shall mean the county assessor of the county of Los Angeles.

B.

Building. The word "building" includes the word "structure."
1/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

C.

Shall, may. "Shall" shall not be construed to hold the city or any officer or employee responsible for any damage to person o
reason of a failure to perform duties as provided for in this code. No provision of this code is intended to require that an off
perform a mandatory duty under Section 815.6 Government Code. "May" is permissive.

(Ord. No. 3289, § 1.)

D.

Used. The word "used" includes the words "arranged for, designed for, occupied or intended to be occupied for."

E.

Council. The word "council" shall mean the city council of the city of Pomona.

F.

Commission. The word "commission" shall mean the planning commission of the city of Pomona.

G.

City. The word "city" shall mean the city of Pomona.

H.

County. The word "county" shall mean the county of Los Angeles.

I.

County recorder. The words "county recorder" shall mean the county recorder of the county of Los Angeles.

J.

State. The word "state" shall mean the state of California.

K.

Federal. The word "federal" shall mean the government of the United States of America.

Sec. .062. - Speci c de nitions.

Access, dwelling unit. A doorway or doorways providing entry or exit to the living space of a dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1.)

Accessory building. A building, part of building, or structure or use which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to that of
the main building structure or use on the same lot. Where an accessory building is a part of, or joined to the main building, such accessory
building shall be counted as part of the main building.

Accessory living quarters. Living quarters within an accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, not rented,
used primarily for employees.

Accessory use. A use incidental or subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the main use of the land, or building thereon.
Adult manufactured housing development. A manufactured housing development designated and operated exclusively for adults and
does not permit families with children or dependents who are sixteen years of age or younger.
(Ord. No. 2494 § 1 (c) (part); Ord. No. 3137, § 2 (part).)

Advisory agency. The city planning commission is designated as the advisory agency to the city council on all matters related to the
zoning and use of land and structures.

Airport. Any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking-off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any
appurtenant areas which are used or are intended to be used for airport building, or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways, and tiedown
areas.

Alley. A public or private way at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting
property. Frontage on said alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this ordinance related to frontage on a dedicated
street.

Altered. See "structural alteration."
Alternative fuel processing. Technologies to generate alternative fuel(s) for use within common private and commercial motorized
vehicles and similar devices, including motorized gardening equipment, cars, vans, light trucks, boats and RV's, consisting of the
manufacturing, processing, treating, distilling, purifying, refining or collection of fuel(s) from solid, semi-solid or liquid raw, previously
processed or recycled materials wherein the quantity of fuel(s) generated per day do not exceed the production as determined by the
Planning Commission. Said technologies do not include mechanical, chemical or photochemical devices used for the sole purpose of the
generation of electricity.
(Ord. No. 4073, § 4.)

2/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Animal hospital. A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such
treatment. The use of the premises as a kennel or a place where animals or pets are boarded for remuneration may be permitted only when
incidental to the principal use.

Animal slaughtering plant. The use of a building or buildings and/or land for the purpose of processing or slaughtering, or killing or the
cleaning and preparing of the killed poultry for market, but this definition does not include the use of a building or buildings and/or land for
these same uses or purposes if done incidental to, in connection with, ancillary, or subordinate to an existing and permitted agricultural use
of raising such animals whether such use is in an existing agricultural zone or exists as a prior existing nonconforming use.
(Ord. No. 1685, § 1.)

Apartment. A room or suite of two or more rooms in a multiple dwelling, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one
family.

Apartment hotel. A commercial establishment providing temporary lodging facilities for a price and which may provide accommodations
for extended stays beyond the normal period offered by transient lodging establishments.
(Ord. No. 3254, § 1 (part).)

Apartment house. A building or portion thereof designed or used for three or more dwelling units, or a combination of three or more
dwelling units and not more than five guest rooms or suites of rooms.

Applicant. A person or persons who, acting as the legal owner, or the authorized representative of the legal owner of a parcel of land,
causes the City to inspect, review, approve, or hold public hearings on any proposed action or improvement that affects the land held by the
legal owner.
(Ord. 3137, § 2 (part).)

Arbor. A structure that is freestanding or connected to a fence or wall that has a roof and walls that are substantially open. (Ord. No.
4118, § 19.)

Art gallery. A facility where people view and may purchase on a retail basis works of visual art including, but not limited to, paintings,
sculpture, and ceramics. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Auditorium. A facility designed to accommodate fewer than 300 people who gather as an audience to experience educational and
cultural presentations including, but not limited to, music recitals, lectures, and plays. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Auto Body and Fender Repair Shop. Any building used for body and fender replacement and repair. It includes work on frames, chassis,
and mounting of truck bodies and platforms on beds on trucks and trailers. It includes modification of truck cabs, lengthening of truck
chassis, modification of sports and high performance cars, glass and window replacement in vehicles, replacement of grilles and chassis
reinforcement for winches and towing devices (other than portable towing hitches for domestic automobiles for light duty rental trailers).
(Ord. No. 3360, § 18 (part).)

Auto court. See "motel."
Automatic Service Station. Same as an automobile service station, but the dispensing of fuels is done by the customer after payment by
coins, cards, or other forms of currencies into a machine or automatic device which activates the pump which dispenses the fuel. This
definition shall include all sites with automatic dispensing devices regardless of the various uses on the site, but excludes private fuel pumps
not available to the public.
(Ord. No. 2394, § 1.)

Automobile and trailer sales lot. An open area used for the display, sales, and/or rental of new or used automobiles, and trailer coaches,
but where no repair, repainting or remodeling is done.

Automobile Repair Facility. Any building, structure, improvements or land used for the mechanical or electrical repair, maintenance,
servicing, or reconditioning of automobiles, motorcycles, and trucks including but not limited to muffler or upholstery work, tune ups, oil
change and lubrication, transmission repair/rebuilding, tire or brake service.
(Ord. No. 3360, § 18 (part).)

3/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Automobile service station. Retail place of business engaged in the sale and/or supply of motor fuel and oils, and no other use except the
supply goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. Included in this definition are all
commercial uses that sell motor fuels through dispensing devices. This definition does not include trucking stations, or the establishment
that has as its primary activity the washing of automobiles, and may only incidentally dispense gasoline.
(Ord. 2236, § 8 (part); Ord. No. 2438, § 1 (part).)

Automobile trailer. Any vehicle used for living or sleeping purposes and equipped with wheels or other means to facilitate movement
from place to place.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 2 (part).)

Automobile wrecking. The wrecking or dismantling of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage of, sale of, or dumping of
dismantled, partly dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts.

Automobile Accessory and Installation Facility. Any building, structure, improvements, or land used for the installation, minor repair, or
maintenance of vehicles including CB radios, and cellular phones. Also included are installation of batteries, fan belts, light bulbs, and
windshield wiper blades.
(Ord. No. 3660, § 18 (part).)

Bachelor apartment. A dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one family in which the
sleeping, cooking and living spaces are combined into one room.
(Ord. No. 1957, § 1.)

Banquet hall. A facility primarily engaged in providing banquet rooms and meals for special occasions including, but not limited to,
formal dinners, receptions, reunions, promotions, benefits, and club meetings. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Basement. A space wholly or partly underground, and having more than one-half of its height, measuring from its floor to its ceiling
below the average adjoining grade; if the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six feet above grade at any point, such
basement shall be considered a story. A basement shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes.

Block. A parcel of land bounded by public streets, highways, freeways, railroad rights of way, flood control channels, creeks, washes,
rivers or acreage unsubdivided into urban lots or any combination thereto.

Board and care facility. Providing food or shelter to five or more persons not related by blood or marriage within the same building or
upon the same premises but not including motels, hotels, or other similar establishments which cater primarily to transient guests who are
not regular residents and when food is made available in a cafe, coffee shop or restaurant open to the general public adjacent to the motel,
hotel or other similar units. This definition shall not include multiple-family dwelling structures when each dwelling unit is separately
maintained by the tenants occupying each unit and such tenants completely care for themselves, and when five or less persons not related
by blood or marriage occupy each dwelling unit. Neither shall this definition apply to restaurants, cafes, cafeterias or other commercial eating
establishments which are open to the general public and do not regularly provide meals primarily for persons being provided shelter on the
same premises or immediately adjacent premises. This term shall include rest homes, sanitariums, fraternity houses, sorority houses,
boardinghouses, rooming houses and other similar types of operations when all the provisions of this definition are shown to exist.
(Ord. No. 2360, § 1.)

Boardinghouse and/or rooming house. A building containing a single dwelling unit and not more than five guest rooms, where lodging is
provided with or without meals for compensation, but not to include rest homes or homes for the aged.

Building. Any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
Building Area. The sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all buildings and structures on a lot.
Building, Height of. The vertical distance measured from the adjoining curb level to the highest point of the structure, exclusive of
chimneys and ventilators; provided, however, that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height shall be measured from the
average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building.

4/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Building Line. A line on private property, established by ordinance which regulates the location of buildings and/or structures as they
relate to the rights-of-way of alleys, streets or highways.

Building, Main. A building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot, as provided by this ordinance.
Building Setback Line. The minimum distance, as prescribed by this ordinance, between the property line of a lot or parcel of land, and
any point on a building or structure related thereto, exclusive of those architectural features permitted to extend there into.

Building Site. The ground area of a building together with all the open space required by this ordinance.
Business or Commerce. The purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition (other than that included in the
term "industry" as defined herein) of any article, substance or commodity for profit or a livelihood, including in addition, automobile or trailer
camps, tourist courts and motels, public garages, office buildings, offices of doctors and other professionals, outdoor advertising signs and
structures, public stables, recreational and amusement enterprises conducted for profit, shops for the sale of personal services, places where
commodities or services are sold or are offered for sale, either by direct handling of merchandise or by agreements to furnish them, but not
including dumps and junk yards.

Carport. A permanently roofed structure open on one or more sides, used or intended to be used for automobile parking.
(Ord. No. 1675, § 1; Ord. No. 2498, § 9 (part).)

Center Line. Same as "Street center line."
Circuses, carnivals and fairs. Temporary events attended by people who may or may not be charged admission and which may include
any combination of the following: rides, entertainment, games, food stands, exhibitions, and animal displays. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Clinic. A place for group medical services not involving overnight housing of patients.
Club, civic and private. A facility without lodging where an association of persons (whether or not incorporated), religious or otherwise,
gather for a common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit.
(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Collection facility means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of recyclable material from the public. A
collection facility may include mobile collection facilities, kiosk-type units, unattended containers and other small collection facilities which
occupy an area of not more than five hundred square feet and is a secondary use of the lot.
(Ord. No. 3598, § 2 (part).)

Commercial Coach. A vehicle with or without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial professional or
commercial purposes and shall include a trailer coach.
(Ord. No. 2494, § 1(c)(part).)

Commercial stadium. A privately operated open or enclosed space with tiers of seats designed to accommodate spectators for viewing
any combination of the following: sports, entertainment, and other recreational events. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Common Carrier Trucking Company. A freight transporting or transfer company serving the general public and/or business community,
and regulated by the State Public Utilities Commission and/or the Federal Interstate Commerce Commission. Such businesses pay
transportation taxes to the state. The city receives a portion of this tax in lieu of city business license fees, which are not required of such
businesses.
(Ord. No. 2937, § 3.)

Common Wall. A wall forming the only separation between two or more spaces in a building or buildings.
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1.)

Compatible Use. A use that by its manner of operation is suitable in the district in which it may be nonconforming. Said use of land
and/or buildings shall be in harmony with the uses on abutting properties in the same district.

5/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Conference center. A facility designed to accommodate fewer than three hundred (300) people and used for any combination of the
following: conferences, seminars, product displays, recreational activities, entertainment functions, and accessory uses such as temporary
outdoor displays and food preparation and service for on-site consumption. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Convalescent Home. See rest homes.
Convention center. A facility designed to accommodate three hundred (300) or more people and used for any combination of the
following: conventions, conferences, seminars, product displays, recreational activities, entertainment functions, and accessory uses such as
temporary outdoor displays and food preparation and service for on-site consumption. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Co-operative Multiple Dwellings. Any multiple dwelling where persons possess an undivided equitable or legal, right or interest including
but not limited to shares, stock or beneficial interest in trust, or as a condominium, community apartment project as defined by state law,
coupled with an exclusive right or interest to possess, occupy or use one or more dwelling unit in such multiple dwelling.
(Ord. 3036, § 1.)

Couplet, Ingress-egress. A pair of freeway on and off ramps that allow a traveling motorist to enter a freeway on the same side as the exit
and to continue traveling in the same direction prior to exiting.
(Ord. No. 2487, § 3.)

Court. A partially enclosed unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or buildings and bounded on opposite
sides by the exterior walls of such building or buildings. Such court may be open, partially or completely roofed.
(Ord. No. 1930 § 2.)

Court Apartment. A group of dwellings arranged about two or more sides of a court which opens into a dedicated street or public way, or
on a place approved by the commission.

Coverage. That portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, regardless of whether said building or
structure is intended for human occupancy.

Dance hall. Any establishment that has at its primary use dancing or has a floor that is primarily used for dancing and is two hundred
square feet or greater and allows dancing by persons other than paid performers.
(Ord. No. 2438, § 1 (part).)

Day care center. Any day care facility, other than a day care home, that provides non-medical care, protection, and supervision to
children or adults for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day.
(Ord. No. 3971, § 3 (part).)

Day care home. Any residential unit that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision to fourteen (14) or fewer children or adults,
as incidental to the use of the unit as a residence, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day.
(Ord. No. 3971, § 3 (part).)

Day nursery. A building or any group of buildings or portion thereof used primarily for the day time care of children, where the total
occupancy exceeds five persons including supervised children.
(Ord. No. 1957, § 3.)

Detrimental. Anything which is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property
so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is detrimental.
(Ord. No. 2485, § 1 (part).)

District. The land area as shown or described on the land use zoning map which is an integral part of this ordinance, and to which the
regulations of this ordinance apply. "District" shall have the same meaning as zone or zoning district.

Dormitory. A guest room designed, intended or occupied as sleeping quarters by more than two persons.
Drive-in, drive-through, food-to-go business.

6/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(a)

Any establishment that does business with a motorist while he is in his car, or

(b)

Any place of business in which the primary activity is the preparation of food which is not eaten on the premises or which
is eaten in a car or seated at tables not within fully enclosed structures.

(c)

Shall not include businesses located as an integral part of a shopping center (where there are five or more separate uses
and businesses in separate quarters which are located in a single building group) and where the building for said
business is situated a minimum distance of two hundred feet from any property line.

(Ord. No. 2460, § 1.)

Drive-through business. Any establishment that does business with a motorist while he is in his car.
(Ord. No. 3698 § 2.)

Driveway. A concrete or asphalt paved access leading directly to a required off-street parking facility.
(Ord. No. 2498, § 9 (part); Ord. No. 3621, § 6.)

Dump. A place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding, dumping, reduction, burial by incineration, or by any other means, of any
garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, waste material, offal or dead animals.

Duplex. Same as "dwelling, two family."
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy, with exception of permitted home
occupations, including one-family, two-family, and multiple dwellings, but not including hotels or motels.
(Ord. No. 4051, § 2 (part).)

Dwelling occupancy. Any building or portion thereof designed or used for human habitation and including an area or facilities for
sleeping.
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1.)

Dwelling unit. Two or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes
and having only one kitchen.

Dwelling, one family. A detached building designed and/or used exclusively for the occupancy of one family.
Dwelling, two family. A building designed and/or used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, multiple. A detached building designed and used for occupancy by two or more families, all living independently of each other.
Easement. A space on a lot or parcel of land, and so indicated on a subdivision map or in a deed restriction, reserved for and/or used for
public utilities, and/or public uses. No building may be constructed within said space so designated.

Educational institutions. Schools, colleges or universities supported wholly or in part by public funds and other schools, colleges or
universities giving general academic instruction as determined by the State Board of Education.

Efficiency apartment. Same as bachelor apartment.
(Ord. No. 1957, § 2.)

Family. Family means an individual or group of individuals, related or unrelated, living together as a single housekeeping unit, including
necessary servants. A family does not include institutional group living situations such as a residential facility, rest home, dormitory, or
similar use, nor does it include such commercial group living arrangements such as a roominghouse, motel, hotel, or similar uses.
(Ord. No. 4051, § 2 (part).)

Family manufactured housing development. A manufactured housing development designed and operated for adults who may have
children younger than sixteen years of age.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 2 (part).)

7/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Fence, open. Any structural device forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that not less than fifty percent of the vertical
surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. This shall include wire mesh,
steel mesh, chain link, louvered, stake and other similar materials. Planting shall be regulated to maintain the required open areas in said
fence structure. For additional definitions pertaining to fences, see Sec. .503-I.

Floor area. Whenever the term "floor area" is used in this ordi-nance as a basis for requiring off-street parking in any structure, it shall be
assumed that, unless otherwise stated, said floor area not only applied to the ground floor area, but also to any additional stories or
basement of said structure.

Floor space index. The ratio of gross building floor area to total lot area expressed as a fraction. Example: Two square feet of gross floor
area for each three square feet of total lot area would result in a "floor space index" of 2/3.

Front wall. The wall of a building or structure nearest the street which the building fronts, but excluding certain architectural features as
cornices, canopies, eaves or embellishment.

Frontage. All property fronting on one side of a street between a street and right-of-way, waterway, or between intersecting or
intercepting streets, the end of a dead-end street, or city boundary measured along a street line. An intercepting street shall determine only
the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street that it intercepts.

Fortunetelling. Any place of business where any person does allows or professes to carry on, engage in or practice the art or transaction
of palmistry, fortunetelling, clairvoyance, crystal gazing, seancing, numerology, mediumship, tarot-card reading, past-life regression,
prophecy, phrenology or divination for personal gain or other similar activity.
(Ord. No. 3621, § 3.)

Garage, private. A completely enclosed structure designed to be used for automobile parking.
(Ord. No. 1675, § 1; Ord. No. 2498, § 9 (part).)

Garage, public. Any garage other than a private garage.
Garage, storage. Any premises, used exclusively for the storage of vehicles.
Grade. The average of the finished ground level at the center of all of the exterior walls of a building. In case the front wall is parallel to
and within five feet of a sidewalk, the grade shall be measured at the sidewalk at the centerline of the front of the lot.

Greenhouses. Shall be classified as a building in determining lot coverage.
Group care facility. A facility maintained and operated to provide residential or nonresidential care and services to children or adults
including day care centers, day care homes, residential care facilities, and residential service facilities.
(Ord. No. 3971, § 3 (part).)

Group Home Care Facilities. Any facility maintained and operated for mentally, physically, and developmentally handicapped persons,
persons requiring special care or services, children or adults requiring special care or services, day care or overnight supervision.
(Ord. No. 3660, § 4 (part); Ord. No. 3787, § 4.)

Guest. Any transient person who occupies a room for sleeping purposes.
Guest home. See "rest homes."
Guest house (accessory living quarters). Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the
main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.

Guest room. A room which is designed to be occupied by one or more guests for sleeping purposes. Each one hundred square feet of
totally enclosed space in a dormitory shall be considered as a separate guest room.

Half story. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, plates of which are not more than three feet above the floor of such story.

8/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Health club. Any place, location, or premises used primarily for physical activities involving bodily exertion for the purpose of physical
fitness, sport, or game or for the pursuit of recreational amusement including, but not limited to, gymnasiums, racquet clubs, weight training
facilities, and similar athletic establishments. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Hedge. A plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure.
Height of building. See "building height."
Highway setback line. The minimum distance between the centerline of the highway fronting the subject property and/or the right-ofway line of said highway and the closest point on any building or structure related thereto.

Homeless. Persons or families who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence and includes those staying in temporary or
emergency shelters or who are accommodated with friends or others with the understanding that shelter is being provided as a last resort.
(Ord. No. 3660, § 4 (part).)

Homeless Shelter or Emergency Shelter. A facility which provides immediate and short term housing and supplemental services for the
homeless. Supplemental services may include food, counseling and access to other social programs. Such facility is operated by a
government agency or private non-profit organization, which shelter meets the standards contained in Title 25, California Administrative
Code, Part 1, Chapter F, Subchapter 12, Section 7972.
(Ord. No. 3660, § 4 (part).)

Home occupation. A home occupation is any use conducted by occupants of a dwelling entirely within the dwelling and clearly being an
accessory use of the structure. The use shall not change the character of the dwelling nor shall it adversely affect the surrounding residential
areas.
(Ord. No. 2098, § 1.)

Hospital. Any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured, infirmed persons and including
sanitariums, rest homes, homes for the aged, alcoholic sanitariums, institutions for the cure of chronic drug addicts and mental patients, or
other licensed medical or state health facility. A hospital may include as an accessory use massage and/or baths, sauna and the like.
(Ord. No. 2565, § 1.)

Hospitals, animal. See "animal hospitals."
Hotel/Motel. A commercial facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and which may provide such
additional services as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities.
(Ord. No. 3254, § 1 (part).)

House court. See "bungalow court."
Industry. The manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other
treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character of appearance thereof, and including storage, elevators, truck storage
yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise.

Intent and purpose. Shall mean that the commission and council, by the adoption of this ordinance, have made a finding that the health,
safety and welfare of the community will be served by the creation of the district and by the regulations prescribed therein.

Junk material. Any worn-out, cast-off, or discarded articles or materials including, but not limited to, garage doors, windows, corrugated
metal, inoperable motor vehicles and parts, construction material, household wastes including discarded appliances, and yard debris. (Ord.
No. 4118, § 19.)

Junk yard. Any lot, or the use of any portion of a lot, for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other motor vehicles or
machinery, or for the storage or keeping for sale or parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking, or for the storage or
keeping of junk, including scrap metal or other scrap materials.

Kennel. Any lot or premises on which more than three (3) dogs, at least four (4) months of age, are kept, boarded or trained.
Kitchen. Any room designed to be used or maintained for the cooking and/or preparation of food.
9/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Landscaping. The planting and continuous maintenance of some combination of natural vegetation such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground
covers, flowers on lawns. In addition to such plant life, landscaping may include stones, benches, ponds, and statuary. Plant life must
predominate.
(Ord. No. 3621, § 4.)

Library. A public or quasi-public facility that houses printed and recorded material which may be used on-site or loaned for use off-site.
Such material may include, but is not limited to, books, periodicals, and audio-visual recordings. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Living area. Whenever the term "living area" is used in this ordinance as a basis to determine the minimum dwelling unit size it means
the total area of all rooms within the dwelling as measured from outside the exterior walls, but excluding garages, carports, patios, porches
and all other accessory buildings and rooms.
(Ord. No. 2568, § 1.)

Living unit owner. A person, persons, or legal entity who, by virtue of a valid legally recorded instrument is acknowledged as the legal
owner.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 2 (part).)

Loading space. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading. It shall abut a street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress or egress.

Lodginghouse. A building with not more than five (5) guest rooms where, for compensation, lodging is provided for five (5) but not more
than ten (10) persons.

Lot.
1.

A parcel of real property when shown as a delineated parcel of land with a number or designation on a subdivision map
or parcel map recorded in the office of the county recorder, and created in conformance with the subdivision map act
and applicable local ordinances and which abuts at least one (1) street; or

2.

A parcel of real property when shown on a record of survey map or deed filed in the office of the county recorder, when
such map or deed was filed as the result of and was made a condition of a lot division approved under the authority of
prior ordinances.

3.

Street. A public or recorded private thoroughfare other than an alley which affords the primary means of access to
abutting property.

(Ord No. 3360, § 11.)

Lot area. The total of the lot area, measured in a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot.
Lot, corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
Lot, corner, reversed. A corner lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the lots to its rear, whether
across an alley or not.

Lot depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot
Lot, key. Shall mean any lot where the side lot line abuts the rear lot line of one (1) or more other lots, and not separated by an alley.
Lot line. Any line bounding a lot as herein defined.
Lot line, front. All property fronting on one (1) side of a street between a street and right-of-way, waterway, or between intersecting or
intercepting streets, the end of a dead-end street, or city boundary measured along a street line. In case of a corner lot, a line separating the
narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line as the
front lot line.

10/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Lot line, rear. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or goreshaped lot,
a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten feet.

Lot line, side. Any lot boundary line, not a front line or a rear lot line.
Lot of record. A parcel of land as shown on the records of the county assessor at the time of the passage of this ordinance.
Lot, through. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel dedicated streets. The lot frontage in instances such as this
shall be determined by the planning manager. (Ord. No. 4118, § 19.)

Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the
front and rear lot lines.

Major land use category. The major groupings of similar uses which are: agriculture, residential, retail stores, offices, services, light
industry, general industry, and uncategorized government uses.
(Ord. No. 2521 § 2 (part).)

Manufactured home lot. The area designated in a manufactured housing development for the recessed placement of an individual
manufactured housing unit. Each lot must be developed in accordance with the standards of the Residential-Manufactured Housing
Development Zone.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 2 (part).)

Manufactured house. A housing unit built with a vehicular chassis, designed and equipped for human habitation, and for being drawn by
a motor vehicle, conforming to the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
(Ord. No. 3070, § 1 (part).)

Manufactured housing development. A comprehensively planned residential development designed and conceived to accommodate
multiple manufactured housing units that are installed on individual lots meeting the minimum standards of the Residential-Manufactured
Housing Development Zone (Section .480). Each of the lots and the units are to be distinct and separate within the boundaries of the
development.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 2 (part).)

Marquee. A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property.
Medical marijuana dispensary. Any facility or location where a primary caregiver intends to or does make available, sell, transmit, give,
exchange for consideration or otherwise provide medical marijuana to any of the following: a qualified patient, a person with an
identification card or a primary caregiver. For purposes of this ordinance, the terms "primary caregiver," "qualified patient" and "person with
an identification card" shall have the same meanings as those set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. A "medical
marijuana dispensary" shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses is otherwise regulated by applicable law and
as long as such uses strictly comply with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq.: (1) a
clinic, licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; (2) a health care facility, licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of
Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; (3) a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness, licensed pursuant to
Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; (4) a residential care facility for the elderly, licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of
Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; or (5) a residential hospice or home health agency, licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of the Health and
Safety Code.
(Ord. No. 4096, § 2.)

Mobile home lot. The area designated in a mobile home park for the placing of a mobile home with accompanying yards and accessory
buildings.
(Ord. No. 2494, § 1(c) (part).)

Mobile home park. Any area or tract of land where one or more mobile home lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to
accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. The rental paid for any such mobile home shall be deemed to include rental for the
lot it occupies.

11/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 2494, § 1(c) (part).)

Modular house. A dwelling assembled from finished, off-site constructed, separate standardized modules which are not capable of being
drawn by a motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 3070, § 1 (part).)

Museum. A public or quasi-public facility serving as a repository for collections of any combination of natural, scientific, artistic, or literary
objects of interest, designed and arranged to be viewed by the public, with or without admission. Accessory uses at such facilities may
include, but are not limited to, restaurants, cafeterias, and gift shops. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Night club. A facility where people gather for any combination of the following purposes: to view various comedy, musical, or dance
performances; to dance to live or recorded music; and to consume food or beverages. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Nonconforming building. A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time this ordinance became effective and which was
designed, erected or structurally altered for a use which does not conform to the use of the district in which it is located, or which does not
comply with all the height and area regulations of the district in which it is located.

Nonconforming use. A use of a building or land existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance which does not conform to the
regulations for the district in which it is located, as set forth in this ordinance.

Nursing home. See "hospital."
Outside sales. Display of merchandise for sale not entirely enclosed within a building.
(Ord. No. 2324, § 1.)

Panelized house. A dwelling assembled on-site with a majority of pre-made panels, or pre-cut building materials.
(Ord. No. 3070, § 1 (part).)

Parking area, private. An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of automotive vehicles capable of movement under their
own power and restricted from general public use.

Parking area, public. An area, other than a private parking area or street used for the parking of vehicles and available for public or quasipublic use, either free or for remuneration.

Parking space, automobile. Space exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, loading areas, office or work areas, within a building or openparking area for the parking of one automobile and being accessible and usable for the parking of an automobile. Parking space size is
according to the appropriate zoning district.
(Ord. No. 2498, § 9 (part).)

Patio. Roofless or one (1) story structure not exceeding twelve (12) feet in height, which may have enclosure walls, provided the open
area of the longer wall and one additional wall is at least sixty-five percent (65%) of the area below a minimum of six (6) feet eight (8) inches
of each wall and having concrete or wood floor construction. Patio shall not be used for carport, garage, storage room or habitable room.
Any patio with roof, open slats or other covering shall constitute lot coverage but not square footage.
(Ord. No. 3621, § 8.)

Permanent Structures. Non-temporary structures constructed with conventional materials as prescribed in individual zoning districts and
intended to be used for a period longer than one year.
(Ord. No. 3988, § 2 (part).)

Permittee. Shall be the person, firm or corporation who is proposing to use or who is using the land pursuant to the permit required
herein at the time the matter is under consideration in connection with any procedure under this ordinance.

Person. An individual, firm, co-partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, the federal or state government, city, county, district, or any other group or combination acting as an entity.

Place. An open, unoccupied space, other than a street or alley, permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting
property.
12/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Planned residential unit development. An arrangement of residential dwelling units, meeting the minimum standards of development of
the zoning district in which proposed, except for the standards of lot area, lot dimensions, and yard requirements, and a dwelling row is one
of three or more attached dwelling units which are distinct and noncommunicating and are separated by party walls or partition walls.

Porte cochere. An accessory structure open on three sides and attached to the side of a dwelling through which cars pass and is
established for the convenience loading and unloading of passengers from an automobile. Not a carport.

Poultry processing plant. The use of building or building and/or land for the purpose of processing, or slaughtering, or killing, or the
cleaning and preparing of the killed poultry for market, but this definition does not include the use of a building or buildings and/or land for
these same uses or purposes if done incidental to, in connection with, ancillary, or subordinate to an existing and permitted agricultural use
of raising such poultry whether such use is in an existing agricultural zone or exists as a prior existing nonconforming use.
(Ord. No. 1685, § 1.)

Public assembly uses. Facilities where groups of ten (10) or more people regularly gather for any combination of the following: civic,
cultural, educational, political, and religious activities. Such facilities include art galleries; auditoriums; civic and private clubs; conference
centers; educational institutions; libraries; museums; and religious facilities but do not include adult-oriented businesses; banquet halls;
circuses, carnivals, and fairs; commercial stadiums; convention centers; cyber cafes; cyber learning centers; dance halls; health clubs; night
clubs; restaurants; skill game centers; and theatres. For purposes of this definition, "regularly gather" shall mean assembling at the same
location more frequently than once every fourteen (14) days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this definition shall not include groups of fewer
than thirty (30) people gathering within a private residence less frequently than once every six (6) days for the following purposes: (a)
religious study; (b) neighborhood safety meetings which, for the purposes of this definition, shall mean neighborhood watch meetings or
meetings of similar community groups, organized to address issues such as public safety, crime reduction, and neighborhood improvement;
or (c) youth activity meetings which, for the purposes of this definition, shall mean Boy or Girl Scout meetings, or meetings of similar youth
groups, organized to foster the personal and social development of young people. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Recreational vehicle. A camper, motor home, travel trailer or tent trailer, with or without motive power designed for human habitation
for recreational or emergency occupancy, with a living area less than two hundred twenty square feet.
(Ord. No. 2494, § 1(c) (part).)

Recycling Center. A center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor
means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage
Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1989. The recycling facility does not include storage container or processing activities located
on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential
property, business or manufacturer.
(Ord. No. 3598, § 2 (part).)

Redevelopment agency. An agency empowered to redevelop through the means of planning, development, replanning, redesign,
clearance, reconstruction or rehabilitation, or any combination of these, of all or part of a redevelopment project and the provision of such
residential, commercial, industrial, public or other structures or spaces as may be appropriate or necessary in the interest of the general
welfare including recreational and other facilities appurtenant to them.
(Ord. No. 2521, § 2 (part).)

Redevelopment project. Any undertaking of a redevelopment agency pursuant to redeveloping a designated area.
(Ord. No. 2521, § 2 (part).)

Religious facility. Premises such as, but not limited to, a cathedral, church, mosque, synagogue, or temple where people regularly gather
to participate in religious meetings and where associated accessory uses may be located when authorized by the same type of land use
permit required for the primary use. Such accessory uses may include, but are not limited to, living quarters for staff and day care centers.
Other establishments maintained by religious organizations such as full-time educational institutions, hospitals, outdoor recreational camps,
and religious retreat centers are classified according to their respective activities. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

Residential care facility. A facility licensed by the State of California at which care, services, or treatment is provided to children or adults
living in a community residential setting.
13/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 3971, § 3 (part).)

Residential service facility. A residential facility, other than a residential care facility or a single housekeeping unit, at which the operator
receives compensation for the provision of personal services in addition to housing including, but not limited to, protection, supervision,
assistance, guidance, training, therapy, or other non-medical care.
(Ord. No. 3971, § 3 (part).)

Restaurant. Shall mean a "bona fide public eating place" which is regularly and in a bona fide manner used and kept open for the serving
of meals to guests for compensation and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, containing conveniences for cooking an
assortment of foods which may be required for ordinary meals, the kitchen of which must be kept in a sanitary condition with the proper
amount of refrigeration for keeping of food on such premises and must comply with all regulations of the local department of health.

"Meals" means the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day. "Guests" shall mean persons who, during
the hours which meals are regularly served therein, come to a bona fide public eating place for the purpose of obtaining, and actually order
and obtain at such time a meal therein. Nothing in this section, however, shall be constructed to require that any food be sold or purchased
with any beverage.
(Ord. No. 1964, § 1; Ord. No. 3335, § 1 (part).)

Restaurant, Fast Food. A restaurant whose principle business is the sale of a pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the
customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either on or off the premises.
(Ord. No. 3698 § 3 (part).)

Restaurant, Take-Out. A restaurant where foods and/or beverages are sold directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for
consumption off-site. A take-out restaurant provides no more than four tables and sixteen seats, either inside or outside, for on-site
consumption.
(Ord. No. 3698 § 3 (part).)

Rest home. Premises serving as a residence for more than five persons and used for the housing of and caring for the ambulatory, aged,
or infirm. There shall be only incidental convalescent care not involving either trained nurse or physician residing on the premises. There
shall be no surgery, physical therapy or other similar activities such as is customarily provided in sanitariums and hospitals.
(Ord. No. 1957, § 1.)

Retail store. A business selling goods, wares or merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer.
Room. An unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closet, hallways and service porches.
Roominghouse. A dwelling where housing is provided to three or more individuals, pursuant to an arrangement for compensation by
month or greater term, and in which rooms are not occupied by, nor meals served, to transients.
(Ord. No. 4051, § 2 (part).)

Sanitarium. A health station or retreat or other place where patients are housed and where medical or surgical treatment is given. This
does not include mental institutions caring for acutely mentally disturbed persons or treatment of narcotic addicts.
(Ord. No. 2360, § 3.)

Service station. Retail place of business engaged in some degree of sale and/or supply of motor fuels, oils and services to traveling public
generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles and is further defined as either automatic, automobile, super or
trucking.
(Ord. No. 2485, § 1 (part).)

Schools, elementary and high. An institution of learning which offers instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to
be taught in the public schools by the education code of the state of California. See "educational institutions."

Second-Unit Housing. "Second-unit housing" means a separate living quarters containing a maximum of one kitchen and one bedroom.
Such a unit may be attached or detached on a single lot containing a legal single-family residence as the primary use. Second-unit housing
shall be subject to restrictions and limitations as follows:
14/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

A.

Second units are allowed in all residential zones on single lots developed with a legal single-family use, except PD overlay zo

B.

Not more than one second unit shall be created on any lot.

C.

A second unit must comply with all R-1-10,000 standards of development except as modified in this section.

D.

The minimum area for a lot on which a second unit may be permitted shall be 20% greater than the required lot area in
each residential zone.

E.

The second unit shall be located within the rear half of the lot and not cover more than 30% of the rear half of the lot.

F.

The gross floor area of a second unit shall be at least 400 square feet but not exceed 750 square feet.

G.

The floor area of an attached second unit shall not exceed 30% of the living area in the existing single-family residence.

H.

The second unit shall be one-story with a maximum height of 16 feet to top of roof and, for attached units, located on the
first or ground floor level of an existing structure. The second unit shall be designed so as to eliminate the need to climb
stairs.

I.

One additional on-site parking space shall be provided in addition to the required two-car garage.

J.

The exterior design and materials of the second unit shall have the same appearance as those of the existing dwelling in
regards to the roof, building walls, doors, windows, horizontal/vertical expression, and architectural detail.

K.

All new utility hook-ups shall be underground.

L.

No home occupation permits shall be allowed for the second unit.

M.

Second units shall not be sold independently of the primary dwelling unit on the lot and shall not be installed with a
separate meter but shall share all gas, electric, and water bills.

N.

A covenant, approved by the city attorney, shall be recorded with the county recorder's office; copies of said recorded
covenant shall be filed with the Community Development Department. Said covenant shall indicate all pertinent
restrictions and limitations on a second unit as included in this section, shall run with the land, and shall be binding upon
any future owner, heirs, or assigns.

O.

The owner/occupant of an existing single family dwelling located in a residential zone may apply for a second unit permit
by submitting required materials to the Planning Division. The Planning Manager is authorized to approve or deny
requests for second unit permits. If the proposed project meets all standards included herein, the request shall be
approved and a permit issued. If all standards are not met, the request shall be denied. After the denial of a permit, the
applicant may seek review by way of an administrative hearing in accordance with the following procedure:
1.

A written appeal petition and a nonrefundable appeal fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council must
be filed with the City Manager within ten (10) calendar days after the decision of the Planning Division, provided,
however, that if the ten (10) days expires on a date that City Hall is not open for business, then the appeal period
shall be extended to the next City business day. Failure to file a timely petition, together with the nonrefundable
appeal fee, deprive the hearing officer of jurisdiction to hear the appeal. The appeal petition must indicate in what
way the appellant contends the Planning Division's decision was incorrect or must provide extenuating
circumstances that the appellant contends would justify reversal or modification of the Planning Manager's
decision.

2.

The City Manager shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for
hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the petition, unless the applicant consents in writing to an extension. At
least ten (10) calendar days prior to such hearing, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant by first
class U.S. mail with a proof of service attached.

3.

All parties involved shall have the right to: (1) offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the
issues; (2) be represented by counsel; and (3) confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be
admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a
party or witness, provided the applicant consents in writing.

4.

The hearing officer shall make a final determination supported by written findings, within five (5) City business days
after the hearing pursuant to this section. No later than three (3) City business days of the hearing officer's decision,
notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant.
15/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and the applicant may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision in accordance
with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. or as otherwise permitted by law. The applicant shall be notified of the decision.
(Ord. No. 3620, § 2; Ord. No. 3804, § 1; Ord. No. 3985, § 2.)

Self-storage facility (miniwarehouses or ministorage). A complex of buildings containing separate, enclosed units or cubicles, or other
spaces which are available for rent to individuals for storage of dry goods, personal belongings, and other miscellaneous articles of value.
(Ord. No. 3756, § 2.)

Single housekeeping unit. The functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are a nontransient interactive group of
people jointly occupying a single dwelling unit, including the joint use of common areas, and sharing household activities and responsibilities
such as meals, chores, and expenses.
(Ord. No. 3971 § 3 (part).)

Site plan. A plan showing the relation of the proposed building to the boundary of the lot as related to provisions of this ordinance and
other ordinances of the city of Pomona.

Skill game center. Any establishment providing amusement facilities which include, but are not limited to, pinball machines, shooting
galleries, electronic or video type skill games. No type of gambling equipment shall be included in a skill game center.
(Ord. No. 2731, § 1.)

Stable, private. A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for
remuneration, hire or sale.

Stable, public. A stable other than a private stable.
Story. A space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, then
the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above.

Street. A public thoroughfare or right of way dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and other thoroughfare,
except as excluded in this ordinance.

Street center line. The center line of a street or right of way as established by official surveys.
Street line. The boundary line between street and abutting property.
Street, local. Shall mean any street, dedicated and such, serving as the principal means of access to property, which street is not shown
as a major or secondary highway or major traffic street on the master plan for the city.

Street, side. That street bounding a corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the
lot.

Structure. Anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground.

Structural, alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as in a bearing wall column, beam or girder, floor or
ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, or retaining walls or similar components.

Super market. A commercial development which includes any or all of the following uses: Grocery department, meat market, drug
department, liquor sales department, fruit and vegetable department, and sections or departments for the sale of incidental items of a
convenience type.

Super service station. Same as an automobile service station, but with a wider range of operations. The super service station may serve
as a "trucking station" and may supply towing services, and may be a place where major repair work is performed, as well as such other autorelated activities that normally would not be permitted in a regular automobile service station. Rental of trailers and equipment may also be
conducted as an adjunct to a super service station. Where major repair work is performed, it shall be conducted according to the standards
of the Uniform Building Code of the city for repair garages.
16/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 2236, § 9.)

Temporary Structures. Structures constructed using metal, plastic or wood frames or posts to support covers made of cloth, canvas,
thermoplastic composite and/or other similar non-rigid materials that provide a weather barrier. Alternative terms to describe such
structures include, but are not limited to, air-inflated structures, air-supported structures, cable structures, frame-covered structures, and
membrane structures.
(Ord. No. 3988, § 2 (part).)

Tenant. A person, persons, family, or any combination thereof that legally inhabits an individual residential living unit as their primary
place of residence and of which they are not the legal owner.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 2 (part).)

Theatre. Any establishment or place used primarily for theatrical performances and/or the showing of films with or without payment.
(Ord. No. 2466, § 1.)

Tourist court. See "hotel/motel."
Tourist home. Shall mean a home which has been converted into premises offering rooms to transient guests for remuneration.
Trailer, automobile. A vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for
carrying persons and property, including a trailer coach.

Trailer coach. Any camp car, trailer or other vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public
thoroughfares at the maximum allowable speed limit and in accordance with the provisions of the State Vehicle Code, and designed or used
for human habitation.
(a)

A dependent trailer coach is one not equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal.

(b)

An independent trailer coach is one equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal.

(Ord. No. 1674, § 1.)

Transient. A person who requests temporary lodging accommodations for a price, with or without meals, for a period of not more than
fifteen days.
(Ord. No. 3254, § 1 (part).)

Travel trailer. A vehicle other than a motor vehicle that is designed or used for human habitation and which may be moved upon a public
highway without a special permit without violating any provision of the Vehicle Code.
(Ord. No. 2494, § 1(c) (part).)

Truck and trailer sales lot. An open area where trucks and/or trailers are sold, leased or rented and where no repairs, repainting or
remodeling is done.

Trucking facilities. Any property and improvements used for freight transfer truck terminals or for the operations of a "common carrier
trucking company," including the parking, or servicing, or repairing, or storage of trucks, truck tractors, and/or truck trailers, except where
such activities are not part of a "common carrier trucking company" operation, and are incidental and accessory to a primary use, permitted
in the zone district, serving only said use, and located on the same property or on property adjacent to that occupied by said primary use.

Trucking station. An establishment designed or used primarily for dispensing of fuel or service to trucks and characterized by features
such as high canopies or absence of canopies, a high percentage of diesel fuel or propane fuel dispensed in comparison with gasoline, and
solicitation to the trucking trade. A restaurant serving the traveling public may be a part of the development of a trucking station.
(Ord. No. 2236, § 8 (part); Ord. No. 2485, § 2 (part).)

Urban area. Any land within the city limits which is not in an "agricultural district."
Urban lot. A lot containing less than ten thousand square feet of area and served by such urban facilities as sanitary sewers, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, etc.

17/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Use. The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be
occupied or maintained.

Used car sales lot. Any lot or contiguous lots utilized for the retail sale of used cars, trucks, vans or similar motorized vehicles. A used car
sales lot shall not include businesses which are not licensed by the city which utilize commercial lots for the individual sale (consignment) of
private vehicles.
(Ord. No. 3714, § 3; Ord. No. 3878, § 1.)

Walkways. Improved concrete or asphalt surface or continuous blocks of flagstone three (3) feet, to five (5) feet in width for pedestrian
travel.
(Ord. No. 3621, § 7.)

Wall. Any structure or device forming a physical barrier, which is so constructed that fifty percent or more of the vertical surface is closed
to prevent the passage of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. This shall include concrete, concrete block, wood or
other materials that are solids and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier. For additional definitions pertaining to walls, see Sec. .503-I.
(Ord. No. 4118, § 19.)

Wall, permanent. Any physical structure composed of materials that are of a permanent nature and which requires no maintenance. This
shall include solid masonry, concrete slab, concrete block and other materials acceptable to the commission.

Yard. Any open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward to the sky, except for the
projections and/or accessory buildings permitted by this ordinance. All yards must be completely landscaped except for driveways, walkways,
or side or rear-yard open patios.
(Ord. No. 3621, § 5.)

Yard, front. A yard between the front line of a building and the front boundary line of the lot on which the building is situated, and
extending the full width of the lot.

Yard, rear. A yard between the extreme rear line of a building and the rear of the lot on which the building is situated, and extending the
full width of the lot.

Yard, side. A yard extending from the front yard, or from the front lot line where no front yard is required by this ordinance, to the rear
yard, or rear lot line, between the side lot line and the nearest wall of the main building or of accessory building attached thereto.

Zone. Shall mean the same as district.
Zoning district. Shall mean the same as district.
Zoning district, change of. Shall mean the legislative act of removing one or more parcels of land from one zoning district and placing
them in another zoning district on the land use zoning map of the city.

Zoning review. Shall mean the right of the commission and/or the council to review, after the establishing of a date for said review in a
district changing procedure, the appropriateness of the change, if the privileges granted by such changes are not exercised within the period
of time set for the development of the land included in the district change procedures. The commission may recommend and the council
may change the land to more appropriate districts after such review.
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1; Ord. No. 2048, § 1; Ord. No. 3254, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3480, § 12; Ord. No. 3625, § 1; Ord. No. 3660, § 3.)

Sec. .100. - Planning fees.

PLANNING

FEE:

ACTION:

18/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Conditional
Use Permit
Variance
Public Use

$ 900.00/each

Permit or a
modi cation
of one of
these actions
Variance for
OwnerOccupied
Single-Family

$ 195.00

Project
Minor

$ 90.00

Deviation
Variance
Change of

$1,350.00/each

Zone or
General Plan
Amendment
Tentative

$1,030.00/plus $ 65.00 per lot

Tract Map or
reversion to
acreage of 5
lots or more
Tentative

$1,030.00/plus $ 55.00 per lot

Parcel Map or
reversion of
acreage of 4
lots or fewer
Environmental
Assessment:
Initial Study

$ 300.00/

and Negative
Declaration

19/322

7/11/2019

Environmental

Pomona, CA Zoning

plus cost of preparation, including 15% above actual costs for sta review

Impact Report
Home

$ 150.00

Occupation
Permit
Determination

$ 200.00

of Similarity
Request for

$ 300.00/each

Time
Extension
Request for

$ 125.00/each

Time
Extension by
Owner for
OwnerOccupied
Single Family
Project
Zoning Code

$ 1,350.00

Amendment
Speci c Plan

$1,350.00

Amendment
Appeals

$ 925.00

(This fee shall be a deposit. If the appeal is not set for a public hearing by the city council, $570.00 of the appeal ling fee
shall be returned to the appellant.)(Ord. No. 3727, § 3.)
Appeal by

$ 125.00

Owner for
OwnerOccupied
Single Family
Project
Development

$ 180.00

Review

20/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Conceptual

$ 900.00

Development
Plan
Final

$ 900.00

Development
Plan

(Ord. No. 3131, § 7: Ord. No. 3388, § 1; Ord. No. 3614, § 1.)

PART II.
Sec. .201 - Designation of land use districts.
For the purposes related to the orderly development of the City of Pomona, and in order to carry out the provisions of this ordinance,
the city is hereby divided into twenty-four (24) districts, known as follows:

Section

Symbol

District

.220

O

Publicly owned land

.229.4

R-1-20,000

Single-family residential district (20,000 square foot lot
area)

.230

R-1-10,000

Single-family residential district (10,000 square foot lot
area)

.240

R-1-7,500

Single-family residential district (7,500 square foot lot
area)

.250

R-1-7,200

Single-family residential district (7,200 square foot lot
area)

.260

R-1-6,000

Single-family residential district (6,000 square foot lot
area)

.270

R-1-E Overlay

Single-family residential overlay district

.275

PD Overlay

Planned development overlay district

.280

R-2

Low density multiple-family residential district

.290

R-3

Medium density multiple-family residential district

.300

R-4

High density multiple-family residential district

.316

PRD

Planned residential development district

21/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

.320

A-P

Administrative and professional o ce district+

.340

C-1

Neighborhood stores and services commercial district

.350

C-2

Neighborhood shopping center commercial district

.360

C-3

General commercial

.365

C-C

Community shopping center commercial district

.370

C-4

Highway commercial district

.390

C-IND

Commercial-industrial district

.395

M

Special industrial district

.410

M-1

Light industrial district

.420

M-2

General industrial district

.435

F

Fairgrounds zoning district

.440

S

Supplemental use overlay district

.470

Redevelopment Supplementary Use District

.450

Civic

Civic supplementary use district

.480

R-MHD

Residential-manufactured housing development district

.490

SP

Speci c plan district

.5810

H

Hillside overlay district

(Ord. No. 1529, § 1: Ord. No. 1716, § 5: Ord. No. 1866, § 1; Ord. 3385, § 1; Ord. No. 3717, § 3.)

Sec. .202. - Uses prohibited.
When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to "uses permitted," it shall be assumed that such uses are expressly
prohibited unless a determination of similarity is approved per Section .501-A of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3713, § 5.)

Sec. .203. - District boundaries on the land use zoning map.
A.

The districts aforesaid and the boundaries of such districts are shown upon a map adopted herewith and made a part of this
ordinance, said map being designated as the "official zoning district map" and said map and all the notations, references and
other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if the matters and information set forth by said
map were all fully described herein.

B.

The district areas shown on the official zoning district map shall not be controlled by maximum or minimum areas otherwise
set forth in the ordinance.
22/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. .204. - Uncertainty as to district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district as shown on the official zoning district map the following shall apply:
A.

Street, alley or lot lines:

Where indicated district boundaries are approximately street, alley or lot lines said lines are determined to be the boundaries of
the district. Otherwise, the boundaries shall be determined by the dimensions shown on the official zoning district map. In the
absence of a dimension the boundary shall be determined by use of the scale shown on said map.
B.

Streets, rights of way, etc. A street, alley, railroad or railway right of way, watercourse, channel or body of water, included
on the zoning district map shall, unless otherwise indicated, be included within the zone of adjoining property on either
side thereof; and where such street, alley, right of way, watercourse, channel or body of water serves as a boundary
between two or more different zoning districts, a line midway in such street, alley, right of way, etc., extending in the
general direction of the long dimension thereof shall be considered the boundary between zoning districts.

C.

Uncertainties:

Where uncertainties exist, the commission shall, by written decision, determine the location of the district boundary.
D.

Vacations:

In the event that a vacated street, alley, right of way or easement was the boundary between two districts, the new zoning
district boundaries shall be at the new property line; provided, however, that said new line shall not exceed a distance greater than
fifty (50) feet from the center line of said vacated street, alley, right of way, or easement.
Sec. .205. - Zoning map on le with the city clerk and building o cial.
The original of said official zoning district map shall be kept on file with the city clerk and shall constitute the original record. A copy of
said map shall also be filed with the building official for his use.
Sec. .206. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3633.
Sec. .207. - Revision of the zoning map.
The city council may from time to time order the revision of the official zoning district map so as to include all changes to date and to
take the place of the original map which is part of this ordinance. No changes shall be made upon such revised map that have not been made
in regular form by the city council of the City of Pomona.
Sec. .208. - Zoning annexed areas.
Any area annexed to the city after the effective date of this ordinance shall automatically be placed into the most restricted single-family
residential district immediately adjoining it. When, however, there are more than one such adjoining district, the property development
standards for the land annexed shall conform to those applying in the most restrictive adjoining district, and shall remain in said district until
an official zoning district map for the area has been adopted by the commission and council, unless the commission and council determine
the precise zoning as a part of the annexation procedure. The commission shall recommend to the council appropriate districting of the land
within ninety (90) days after application for change of zoning has been filed with the commission.
Sec. .209. - New construction and new uses.
All new construction, building, improvements, alterations, enlargement, or building movement undertaken after the effective date of this
ordinance; and all new uses or occupancy of premises within the city shall conform with the requirements, character, and conditions as to
use, height, and area laid down for each of these several zones or districts as described in the following sections of this ordinance. It shall be
unlawful for any person to design, erect, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge, or use, or to cause, or permit to be erected,
constructed, established, moved into, altered, enlarged or used, any building, structure, improvement, or use of premises located in any
zoning district described in this ordinance contrary to the provisions of this ordinance.
23/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. .210 - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3633.
Sec. .211. - Public utilities and services.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not be so construed as to limit or interfere with the construction, installation, operation and
maintenance of any use which falls within the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission, which uses are related to public utility purposes,
of water and gas pipes, mains and conduits, electric light and power transmission and distribution lines, telegraph and telephone lines,
sewers and sewer mains and incidental appurtenances.
Sec. .220. - "O" Open space land zone district. Intent and purpose.
The open land use district, "O," is intended to provide for permanent open spaces and governmental facilities in the community.
(Ord. No. 2508, § 1.)

Sec. .221. - Uses permitted.
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
(A)

Recreational uses owned and/or controlled by a governmental or quasi-public agency;

(B)

All permanent structures that are developed to be the primary or dominant use of a property within this zone by either a
governmental agency or a private party shall be allowed only by conditional use permit. All permanent structures that
are a collateral, accessory, or incidental component of a recreational open-space or an open space agricultural use shall
be allowed without the requirement of a conditional use permit. The conditional use permit shall be reviewed per criteria
described in section .221 (G)(7);

(C)

Flood control facilities;

(D)

Off-street parking facilities;

(E)

Golf courses (not to include miniature golf, driving ranges, or night-lighted courses);

(F)

Raining of crops;

(G)

Open space uses allowed by conditional use permit only:

(H)

(1)

Archery ranges,

(2)

Bridle trails,

(3)

Camp grounds,

(4)

Driving ranges,

(5)

Fishing ponds,

(6)

Accessory food and beverages uses,

(7)

Any other use the city planner determines to be similar to the above.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and other amusements subject to a public use permit, Section .581.

(Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part).)

(I)

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14

(Ord. No. 3971, § 5.)

When approving the conditional use permit, the planning commission shall determine that the proposed use is not incompatible with the
surrounding uses and that there is sufficient off-street parking, protective screening and landscaping to retain the welfare and the existing
character of the surrounding area.
(Ord. No. 2508, § 2; Ord. No 3219, § 1; Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

Sec. .222. - Uses expressly prohibited.

24/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(A)

Residential uses, except for a watchman or caretaker and his family;

(B)

Commercial uses other than those uses approved by the planning commission by conditional use permit or those related to
and under the regulations of the city, county, state or federal government as limited by section .221(B);

(C)

Industrial uses.

(Ord. No. 2508, § 3; Ord. No. 3219, § 2.)

(D)

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 3.)

Sec. .223. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "O" District:
(A)

LOT AREA: No limitations;

(B)

LOT DIMENSIONS: No limitations;

(C)

POPULATION DENSITY: None permitted, except for a residence of a watchman or caretaker and his family;

(D)

YARDS: No requirements;

(E)

COVERAGE: None permitted, except for accessory buildings or structures related to the uses allowed;

(F)

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS: No requirements;

(G)

OFF-STREET PARKING: Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirement in this district;

(Ord. No. 3385, § 2.)

(H)

All permanent buildings and facilities that are required to obtain a conditional use permit shall use the development
standards as specified in the zoning district that contains uses analogous to the use proposed by the developer of the
property.

The determination of the appropriate zoning district standards to be applied to the proposed project shall be determined by the city
planner, whose decision may be appealed to the planning commission.
(Ord. No. 2508, § 4; Ord. No. 3219, § 3; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

Sec. .224. - Other conditions to use.
See Section .504-A.
Secs. .226 to .229.3. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .229.4. - R-1-20,000 Single family residential district intent and purpose.
This district is intended to provide for the development of single family detached dwellings, not more than one such dwelling on each lot,
and for such accessory uses as are related, incidental and not detrimental to the residential environment. The following regulations shall
apply in the "R-1-20,000" single family residential district.
(Ord. No. 1900, § 1.)

Sec. .229.5. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

Single-family dwellings, not more than one (1) dwelling unit on a lot;

B.

Home occupations, for limitations see Section .530;

C.

Governmental uses, which shall be submitted to and reported upon by the commission;

D.

Raising of crops;
25/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

E.

Public and private uses, as follows, subject to the granting of a conditional use permit:
1.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the applicable development standards of this district except as
follows:
a.

The minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet.

b.

On each side of the lot, there shall be a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet that extends from the front yard
to the rear yard and is open from the ground to the sky.

c.

The side and rear yards may be used for off-street parking, subject to the design and landscaping requirements of
Sections .503-H and .503-J.

2.

Country clubs and golf courses, except driving ranges, miniature courses and other similar commercial enterprises;

3.

Planned residential unit developments;

(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

F.

Mobile Home/Manufactured Homes. Manufactured housing may be located in R-1 single-family residential zones only on
lots shown on map entitled "Designated Lots for Federally Certified Manufactured Homes";

G.

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14;

(Ord. No. 3971, § 6.)

H.
I.

Roominghouse, as defined in Section .062, shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
And such other uses as the planning commission may determine to be similar and which are not specifically listed in a
less restricted zoning district. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed
pursuant to Section .560F1.

(Ord. No. 1900, § 1; Ord. No. 3717, § 4; Ord. No. 4051, § 3.)

Sec. .229.6 - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Multiple family residential uses.

B.

Commercial uses.

C.

Industrial uses.

(Ord. No. 1900, § 1.)

D.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 4.)

Sec. .229.7. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the R-1-20,000 district, provided, however, that
where a lot has an area, width or depth less than that required in this district, and was held under separate ownership or was of record in the
effective date of this ordinance, such lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in Section .229.5 subject to the provisions below.
A.

LOT AREA

Each lot shall have a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B.

C.

LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

Width: One hundred (100) feet

2.

Depth: One hundred fifty (150) feet

POPULATION DENSITY

There shall be a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit.
D.

YARDS.
1.

Front: Each lot shall have a front yard extending across the full width of the lot, said yard to have a depth of not less
than thirty (30) feet, excepting in hilly areas. In no case may said yard be less than ten (10) feet.

For regulations governing the following, see Section .503-D.
26/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(a)

Partially built-up blocks;
(b)

2.

(c)

Hillside lots;

(d)

Large scale developments.

Key lots;

Side: There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard, said yard to
be open from the ground to the sky, and said yard shall be not less than eight (8) feet in width.

For regulation governing the following see Section .503-D.

3.

(a)

Corner lots;

(b)

Reversed corner lots;

(c)

Hillside lots;

(d)

Accessory building;

(e)

Main building when abutting an alley;

(f)

Swimming pools;

(g)

Projection into yards.

Rear: There shall be a rear yard on each lot extending across the full width of the lot, said yard to have a depth of
not less than thirty (30) feet. Temporary structures as defined in Section .062, with the exception of
playground/party jumpers, shall be permitted only in rear yards as defined in Section .062, provided that they are
not visible from the public right-of-way and they do not obstruct access to required parking.

For regulations governing the following, see Section .503-D.
(a)

Garages and other accessory buildings, including temporary structures, may be permitted in the required rear
yard.

(Ord. No. 3988, § 3.)

E.

(b)

Hillside lots;

(c)

Swimming pools;

(d)

Lots abutting dedicated alleys.

COVERAGE

The maximum coverage of the lot by all structures shall be thirty-five (35) percent.
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. For roof
structure and hillside property exceptions, see Section .503-F.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
1.

Accessory buildings (except those with a dwelling occupancy) shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from any
main buildings, except where said accessory building is used for garage purposes and where said garage is located
within the area defined by the projection of side lines of any main building, and where the vehicular access to said
garages faces any main building falls more than twenty-five (25) percent within said area; the garage shall be not
less than twenty-five (25) feet from main building or buildings.

2.

Where accessory buildings (except those with a dwelling occupancy) are attached to a main building by a breezeway
roof, and where the condition in subsection (G)(1) of this section exists, the intervening space shall be considered as
an outer court and further, the minimum distance above in subsection (G)(1) of this section shall apply.

3.

The minimum distance between accessory buildings (except those with dwelling occupancy) shall be not less than
six (6) feet unless said buildings have a common or party wall.

H.

OFF-STREET PARKING
27/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
I.

FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS

For requirements of same, see Section .503-I.
J.

ACCESS

There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property
requiring off-street parking.
K.

STANDARD OF LIVING AREA IN EACH DWELLING UNIT. The following shall be a minimum living area for each dwelling
unit: Fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet if the dwelling unit has three or fewer bedrooms. One hundred and fifty (150)
square feet shall be required for each bedroom over three in the dwelling unit. For purposes of this section, a room shall
be considered a bedroom if it has a clothes closet. A dwelling built by a non-profit organization, defined by 501(c) of the
United States Internal Revenue Code, may have living area, as defined by Section .069 of this Chapter, less than 1,500
square feet provided the living area is not less than 80% of the median living area of existing dwellings on the same block
(defined as the dwellings located on the same side of the street between intersecting public streets). However, in no case
shall the minimum living area of such dwelling be less than 900 square feet.

(Ord. No. 4081, § 4 (part).)

L.

ARCHITECTURAL STYLES
1.

Roof Overhang. All dwelling units and accessory parking structures shall have a minimum of 16 horizontal inches of
roof overhang per elevation.

2.

Roof Material. Roofing materials shall include:
(a)

Woodshake

(b)

Wood shingle

(c)

Composition asphalt shingle

(d)

Tile/tile-like material

(e)

Rock

(f)

Other similar materials as determined appropriate by the City Planner

3.

Roof Pitch. Shall be a minimum of a three-inch rise for every horizontal twelve-inch run.

4.

Siding Material. Siding materials shall include one or more of the following:

5.

(a)

Wood;

(b)

Stucco;

(c)

Masonry;

(d)

Textured metal siding, with the exception of all reflective materials;

(e)

Siding materials shall extend from the eaves to the permanent foundation;

(f)

Other similar materials as determined appropriate by the city planner.

Grade Siting. Floor elevations shall be located as close to the lot grade level as possible, consistent with grading
practice as specified in the Uniform Building Code.

6.

Foundation. All foundations shall be consistent with the requirements of Chapter 29 of the Uniform Building Code.

7.

A list of all exterior building materials shall be submitted with building plans for approval by the city planner.

8.

Tie-downs (Transverse Bracing). Shall be used on all manufactured houses, and are subject to approval by the
Building Division.

(Ord. No. 1900, § 1: Ord. No. 2568, § 6; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3717, § 4.)

Secs. .229.8 to .229.11. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .230. - R-1-10,000 Single family residential district intent and purpose.

28/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

This district is intended to provide for the development of single family detached dwellings, no more than one such dwelling on each lot,
and for such accessory uses as are related, incidental and not detrimental to the residential environment. The following regulations shall
apply in the "R-1-10,000" single family residential district.
Sec. .231. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:

E.

A.

Single family dwellings, not more than one (1) dwelling unit on a lot.

B.

Home occupations, for limitations see Section .530.

C.

Governmental uses, which shall be submitted to and reported upon by the commission.

D.

Raising of crops.

Public and private uses, as follows, subject to the granting of a conditional use permit or a public use permit:
1.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to .062, subject to a conditional use permit and to the applicable development standards
of this district except as follows:
a.

The minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet.

b.

On each side of the lot, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet that extends from the front yard to
the rear yard and is open from the ground to the sky.

c.

The side and rear yards maybe used for off-street parking, subject to the design and landscaping requirements of
Sections .503-H and .503-J.

2.

Country clubs and golf courses, except driving ranges (miniature courses and other similar commercial enterprises
excluded) subject to a conditional use permit.

3.

Children's day nurseries subject to a conditional use permit.

4.

Planned residential unit developments subject to a conditional use permit.

5.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and other amusements subject to a public use permit, Section .581. (Ord. No. 3618, § 2(part).)

(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

F.

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14;

(Ord. No. 2923, § 2; Ord. No. 3660, § 7; Ord. No. 3787, § 6; Ord. No. 3971, § 7.)

G.

Mobile Home/Manufactured Home. Manufactured housing may be located on R-1 single-family residential zones only on
lots shown on map entitled "Designated Lots for Federally Certified Manufactured Homes."

(Ord. No. 3070, § 7; Ord. No. 3406, § 2.)

H.
I,

Roominghouse, as defined in Section .062, shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
And such other uses as the planning commission may determine to be similar and which are not specifically listed in a
less restricted zoning district. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed
pursuant to Section .560F1.

(Ord. No. 1529, § 2; Ord. No. 1866; Ord. No. 2103, § 1; Ord. No. 2123, § 3; Ord. No. 2923, § 2; Ord. No. 3223 § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4; Ord. No. 4051, § 4.)

Sec. .232. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Multiple family residential uses.

B.

Commercial uses.

C.

Industrial uses.

D.

Mobile home/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an addition to any site-built structure.

E.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as accessory living quarters.

(Ord. No. 3070, § 8.)

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.
29/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 4096, § 5.)

Sec. .233. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the R-1-10,000 district, provided however, that
where a lot has an area, width, or depth less than that required in this district, and was held under separate ownership or was of record on
the effective date of this ordinance, such lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in Section .231, subject to the provisions below.
A.

LOT AREA

Each lot shall have a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

2.

Width:
(a)

Interior lots, eighty (80) feet.

(b)

Corner lots, eighty-five (85) feet.

(c)

Lots siding on freeways, drainage channels or railroad rights-of-way, ninety (90) feet.

Depth:
(a)

Lots fronting on local streets, one hundred twenty (120) feet.

(b)

Lots fronting on or backing up to major or secondary highways, one hundred forty (140) feet. When fronting
on highways said lots shall have a twenty (20) foot alley to the rear.

(c)
C.

Lots backing to freeways, drainage channels or railroad rights-of-way, one hundred fifty (150) feet.

POPULATION DENSITY

There shall be a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit.
D.

YARDS
1.

Front:

Each lot shall have a front yard extending across the full width of the lot, said yard to have a depth of not less than twentyfive (25) feet, excepting in hilly areas. In no case may said yard be less than ten (10) feet.
For regulations governing the following, see Section .503-D.

2.

(a)

Partially built-up blocks.

(b)

Key lots.

(c)

Hillside lots.

(d)

Large scale developments.

Side:

There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard, said yard to be open from
the ground to the sky, and said yard shall be not less than five (5) feet in width.
For regulations governing the following, see Section .503-D.

3.

(a)

Corner lots.

(b)

Reversed corner lots.

(c)

Hillside lots.

(d)

Accessory buildings.

(e)

Main building when abutting an alley.

(f)

Swimming pools.

(g)

Projection into yards.

Rear: There shall be a rear yard on each lot extending across the full width of the lot, said yard to have a depth of
not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Temporary structures as defined in Section .062, with the exception of
30/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

playground/party jumpers, shall be permitted only in rear yards as defined in Section .062, provided that they are
not visible from the public right-of-way and they do not obstruct access to required parking.
For regulations governing the following, see Section .503-D.
(a)

Garages and other accessory buildings, including temporary structures, may be permitted in the required rear
yard;

(Ord. No. 3988, § 4.)

(b)

Hillside lots.

(c)

Swimming pools.

(d)

Lots abutting dedicated alleys.

(Ord. No. 1591, § 1.)

E.

COVERAGE

Maximum coverage of the lot by all structures, thirty-five (35) percent.
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. For roof
structure and hillside property exceptions, see Section .503-F.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
1.

Minimum distances involving main building and accessory building without a dwelling occupancy.
a.

Seven (7) feet shall be required between a main building and an accessory building (except those with a
dwelling occupancy) unless said buildings have a common wall. Where vehicular access to a garage falls more
than 25% within the area defined by a projection of the side lines of another building, twenty-five (25) feet (for
turning radius) shall be required between the buildings in the projected area.

b.

Six (6) feet shall be required between accessory buildings (except those with a dwelling occupancy) unless said
buildings have a common wall.

2.

The minimum distances between a main building and an accessory building with a dwelling occupancy or two (2) or
more accessory buildings with dwelling occupancy and the minimum dimensions of courts created by such
buildings shall be as follows:
a.

Ten (10) feet shall be required for any space between such buildings except when such space is a court,

b.

Ten (10) feet shall be required when there is no access to a dwelling occupancy from a court.

c.

Fifteen (15) feet shall be required when there is access to one dwelling occupancy from a court.

d.

Twenty (20) feet shall be required when there is access to more than one dwelling occupancy from a court.

e.

Seven (7) feet shall be required between an accessory building with a dwelling occupancy and an accessory
building without a dwelling occupancy.

(Ord. No. 1930, § 3.)

H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 3385, § 5.)

I.

FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS

For regulations of same, see Section .503-I.
J.

ACCESS

There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property
requiring off-street parking.

31/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

There shall be no vehicular access to property from major or secondary highways as shown on the master plan, excepting in
cases where lots were of record on the effective date of this ordinance and such access cannot be provided by way of an alley or
service road.
K.

STANDARDS OF LIVING AREA IN EACH DWELLING UNIT

The following shall be minimum living area for each dwelling unit: Same as R-1-20,000 zone.
(Ord. No. 2568, § 8; Ord. No. 3717, § 5.)

L.

ARCHITECTURAL STYLES

Same as Section .229.7.L.
(Ord. No. 3070, § 9; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3717, § 6 (part).)

Sec. .240. - "R-1-7,500" Single family residential district intent and purpose.
This district is intended to provide for the development of single family detached dwellings, not more than one such dwelling on each lot,
and for such accessory uses as are related, incidental and not detrimental to the residential environment, the following regulations shall
apply in the "R-1-7,500" single family residential district.
Sec. .241. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes: Same as "R-1-10,000" (Section .231).
Sec. .242. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Multiple family residential uses.

B.

Commercial uses.

C.

Industrial uses.

D.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an addition to any site-built structure.

E.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as accessory living quarters.

(Ord. No. 3070, § 10.)

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 6.)

Sec. .243. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the R-1-7,500 district, provided, however, that
where a lot has an area, width, or depth less than that required in this district, and was held under separate ownership or was of record on
the effective date of this ordinance such lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in Section .241, subject to the provisions below.
A.

LOT AREA

Each lot shall have a minimum area of seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

2.

Width:
(a)

Interior lots, sixty-five (65) feet.

(b)

Corner lots, seventy-five (75) feet.

(c)

Lots siding on freeways, drainage channels, or railroad rights-of-way, eighty (80) feet.

Depth:
(a)

Lots fronting on local streets, one hundred (100) feet.

(b)

Lots fronting on or backing up to major or secondary highways, one hundred twenty (120) feet. When fronting
32/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

on highways said lots shall have a twenty (20) foot alley to the rear.
(c)
C.

Lots backing to freeways, drainage channels or railroad rights-of-way, one hundred fifty (150) feet.

POPULATION DENSITY

There shall be a minimum of seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit.
D.

YARDS

Same as "R-1-10,000" district, see Section .233-D except: Forty (40) feet is the maximum depth for front yards.
E.

COVERAGE

Same as "R-1-10,000."
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

Same as "R-1-10,000."
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

Same as "R-1-10,000."
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Same as "R-1-10,000."
I.

FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS

For regulations of same, see Section .503-I.
J.

ACCESS

Same as "R-1-10,000."
K.

STANDARD OF LIVING AREA IN EACH DWELLING UNIT. The following shall be a minimum living area for each dwelling
unit: Fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet if the dwelling unit has three or fewer bedrooms. One hundred and fifty (150)
square feet shall be required for each bedroom over three in the dwelling unit. For purposes of this section, a room shall
be considered a bedroom if it has a clothes closet. A dwelling built by a non-profit organization, defined by 501(c) of the
United States Internal Revenue Code, may have living area, as defined by Section .069 of this Chapter, less than 1,500
square feet provided the living area is not less than 80% of the median living area of existing dwellings on the same block
(defined as the dwellings located on the same side of the street between intersecting public streets). However, in no case
shall the minimum living area of such dwelling be less than 900 square feet.

(Ord. No. 2568, § 3; Ord. No. 2964, § 2; Ord. No. 4081, § 4 (part).)

L.

ARCHITECTURAL STYLES

Same as Section .229.7.L.
(Ord. No. 3070, § 11; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3717, § 6 (part).)

Sec. .250. - "R-1-7,200" Single family residential district intent and purpose.
This district is intended to provide for the development of single family detached dwellings not more than one such dwelling on each lot,
and for such accessory uses as are related, incidental and not detrimental to the residential environment. The following regulations shall
apply in the "R-1-7,200" single family residential district.
Sec. .251. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes: Same as "R-1-10,000" (Section .231).
Sec. .252. - Uses expressly prohibited.
33/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

A.

Multiple family residential uses.

B.

Commercial uses.

C.

Industrial uses.

D.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an addition to any site-built structure.

E.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as accessory living quarters.

(Ord. No. 3070, § 12.)

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 7.)

Sec. .253. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "R-1-7,200" district; provided, however, that
where a lot has an area, width, or depth less than that required in this district, and was held under separate ownership, or was of record on
the effective date of this ordinance, such lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in Section .251, subject to the provisions below.
A.

LOT AREA

Each lot shall have a minimum area of seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

2.

Width:
(a)

Interior lots, sixty-five (65) feet.

(b)

Corner lots, seventy (70) feet.

(c)

Lots siding on freeways, drainage channels or railroad rights-of-way, eight (80) feet.

Depth:
(a)

Lots fronting on local streets, one hundred (100) feet.

(b)

Lots fronting on or backing up to major or secondary highways, one hundred twenty (120) feet. When fronting
on highways said lots shall have a twenty (20) foot alley to the rear.

(c)
C.

Lots backing to freeways, drainage channels or railroad rights-of-way, one hundred fifty (150) feet.

POPULATION DENSITY

There shall be a minimum of seventy-two hundred (7,200) square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit.
D.

YARDS

Same as "R-1-10,000" district, see Section .223, except: Forty (40) feet is the maximum depth for front yards.
E.

COVERAGE

Same as "R-1-10,000."
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

Same as "R-1-10,000."
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

Same as "R-1-10,000."
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Same as "R-1-10,000."
I.

FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS

For requirements of same, see Section .503-1.
J.

ACCESS
34/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Same as "R-1-10,000."
K.

STANDARDS OF LIVING AREA IN EACH DWELLING UNIT

The following shall be minimum living area for each dwelling unit: Same as the R-1-7500 zone.
(Ord. No. 2568, § 4.)

L.

ARCHITECTURAL STYLES

Same as Section .229.7.L.
(Ord. No. 3070, § 13; Ord. No. 3625 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3717, § 6 (part).)

Sec. .260. - "R-1-6,000" single family residential district intent and purpose.
This district is intended to provide for the development of single family detached dwellings, not more than one such dwelling on each lot,
and for such accessory uses as are related, incidental and not detrimental to the residential environment.
The following regulations shall apply in the "R-1-6,000" single family residential district.
Sec. .261. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes: Same as "R-1-10,000" (Section .231).
Sec. .262. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Multiple family residential uses.

B.

Commercial uses.

C.

Industrial uses.

D.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an addition to any site-built structure.

E.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an accessory living quarters.

(Ord. No. 3070, § 14.)

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 8.)

Sec. .263. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "R-1-6,000" district; provided, however, that
where a lot has an area, width, or depth less than that required in this district, and was held under separate ownership, or was of record on
the effective date of this ordinance, such lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in Section .261, subject to the provisions below.
A.

LOT AREA

Each lot shall have a minimum area of six thousand (6,000) square feet.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

2.

Width:
(a)

Interior lots, sixty (60) feet.

(b)

Corner lots, sixty-five (65) feet.

(c)

Lots siding on freeways, drainage channels or railroad rights-of-way, seventy (70) feet.

Depth:
(a)

Lots fronting on or backing up to local streets, one hundred (100) feet.

(b)

Lots fronting on or backing up to major or secondary highways, one hundred twenty (120) feet. When fronting
on highways, said lots shall have a twenty (20) foot alley to the rear.
35/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(c)
C.

Lots backing to freeways, drainage channels or railroad rights-of-way, one hundred thirty-five (135) feet.

POPULATION DENSITY

There shall be a minimum of six thousand square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit.
D.

YARDS

Same as "R-1-10,000" district, see Section .233-D, except: Forty feet is the maximum depth for front yards.
E.

COVERAGE

Same as "R-1-10,000"
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

Same as "R-1-10,000"
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

Same as "R-1-10,000"
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Same as "R-1-10,000."
(Ord. No. 2430.)

I.

FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS

For regulations of same, see Section .503-I.
J.

ACCESS

Same as "R-1-10,000."
K.

STANDARDS OF LIVING AREA IN EACH DWELLING UNIT

The following shall be minimum living area for each dwelling unit:
Fifteen hundred square feet if the dwelling unit has three or fewer bedrooms. One hundred and fifty square feet shall be
required for each bedroom over three in the dwelling unit. For purposes of this section, a room shall be considered a bedroom if
it has a clothes closet.
(Ord. No. 2568 § 2; Ord. No. 2964, § 3.)

L.

ARCHITECTURAL STYLES

Same as Section .229.7.L.
(Ord. No. 3070, § 15; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3717, § 6 (part).)

Sec. .270. - "R-1-E" Single family, residential overlay intent and purpose.
This district is intended to provide for the development of deep lots where the opening of interior streets is physically impossible. The
development of the land, however, is intended not to exceed the density of the base district upon which the overlay district is applied with
not more than three dwelling units being determined on a site plan which shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(Ord. No. 3590, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .271. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

Uses permit in the "R-1-10,000" district. See Section .231.
36/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

B.

On lots with a depth of one hundred seventy-five feet or more, where said lots cannot practically be divided into more than
with frontage on a dedicated street:
1.

Development of the land shall not exceed the density of the base district upon which the overlay district is applied
with not more than three dwelling units on any one lot;

2.

Each building site shall comply with all of the property development standards of the base district upon which the
overlay district is applied; and

3.

No lot or parcel of land held under separate ownership at the time this ordinance became effective shall be
separated in ownership or reduced in size below the minimum standards provided for lots in the base district upon
which the overlay district is applied, nor may any separate ownerships be established without having both the
existing and the newly created lots comply with all provisions of this ordinance, including required frontage on a
dedicated street, and the installation of all required improvements in said street.

(Ord. No. 3590, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .272. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Multiple family residential uses.

B.

Commercial uses.

C.

Industrial uses.

D.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an addition to any site-built structure.

E.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as accessory living quarters.

(Ord. No. 3070, § 16.)

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 9.)

Sec. .273. - Property development standards.
A.

Same as the base district upon which the overlay district is applied; except that there is no maximum front yard setback
requirement.

B.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
1.

Seven feet shall be required between a main building and an accessory building (except those with a dwelling occupancy)
unless said buildings have a common wall. Where vehicular access to a garage falls more than twenty-five percent within
the area defined by a projection of the side lines of another building, twenty-five feet (for turning radius) shall be
required between the buildings in the projected area.

2.

Six feet shall be required between accessory buildings (except those with a dwelling occupancy) unless said buildings
have a common wall.

3.

In the R-1-E district, thirty-five feet shall be required between the exterior walls of main buildings and/or dwelling units.

(Ord. No. 1930, § 4.)

C.

Access to garages for each residential unit constructed in this district shall be means of a driveway having a minimum width of
twenty (20) feet.

D.

Standards of Living Area in Each Dwelling Unit: the minimum living area for each dwelling unit (same as R-1-6000 zone) shall
be the same as the base district upon which the overlay district is applied.

E.

ARCHITECTURAL STYLES

Same as Section .229.7.L.
(Ord. No. 2568, § 9; Ord. No. 3070, § 17; Ord. No. 3590, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3717, § 7.)

Sec. .275. - Planned development "PD" to overlay district.
A.

INTENT AND PURPOSE. The purpose of this overlay district is to provide an alternative to the standard single-family tract
wherein the same low densities and ownership of land is preserved, but flexibility is provided by allowing smaller lots and the
37/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

combining of small and unusable open space into more effective open and recreation areas. The regulations of this overlay
district are intended to produce developments which meet standards of open space; light and air; pedestrian and vehicular
circulation; safety, sound and privacy; and density of dwelling units which are similar to those required by the standards of the
district in which such development is to be located.
The ordinance establishing a "PD" overlay district shall contain a number prefixed with the "PD" district symbol which shall indicate
the boundaries of the zone classification. The number shall be the average number of dwelling units per acre of land, exclusive of public
streets, in the planned development; e.g. "R-1," "PD-4," which indicates that the development has an average of four dwelling units per
acre. The average number of dwelling units per acre shall not exceed the maximum number permitted by the underlying zone or
designation of the general plan, whichever is greater.
(Ord. No. 3593, § (1).)

B.

PERMITTED USES.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or

enlarged except for the following specific purposes only:
(Ord. No. 4096, § 10.)

1.

Uses permitted in the base district upon which the overlay district is applied.

2.

Recreation elements, including structures in connection with the planned development.

3.

Home occupations, for limitations see Section .530.

(Ord. No. 3623, § 2.)

C.

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the
planned development overlay district.
1.

Site Area. The minimum site area for development within this overlay district shall be one acre.

2.

Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot size of 4,500 square feet in any planned development. Lots for detached and
attached single-family dwellings which front on a through street which allows parking on both sides shall be at least
forty-five (45) feet wide.

(Ord. No. 3593, § 3 (2); Ord. No. 3660, § 12.)

3.

Unit Size. The minimum floor area for each unit shall be one thousand two hundred square feet and have a minimum of
two bedrooms.

4.

Building Coverage. The building coverage for any planned development shall not exceed thirty percent of the net land
area being developed exclusive of public streets. Recreation buildings and facilities shall be excluded from building
coverage and considered as open space.

5.

Building Height. No building or structure shall be higher than thirty-five feet or two stories.

6.

Setbacks.
a.

Perimeter Setbacks. When adjacent to an existing public street, the minimum perimeter setback shall be at least
five (5) feet and shall be permanently maintained landscaping. A six (6) foot high decorative masonry wall may be
provided along said setback line.

b.

Front Yard Setbacks. The minimum setbacks from the back of sidewalk of any interior street shall be eighteen feet
to the garage door and fifteen feet to any living area or covered porch.

c.

Side Yard. The minimum side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet, not including fireplaces or
architectural protrusions up to two feet. Each side yard separation between structure and property line shall be a
minimum of five feet except that "0" lot line developments may have one side yard of zero feet if the other side yard
from the unit is at least ten (10) feet.

d.

Rear Yard. Rear yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet.

(Ord. No. 3660, § 13.)

7.

Open Space.
a.

Private Open Space. A minimum of 200 square feet of private open space, such as private patios or balconies, shall
38/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

be provided for each unit.
b.

Common Open Space. In designing areas for permanent open space, consideration shall be given to the project, the
natural characteristics of the open space and the recreation needs of the potential residents. Common open space
shall not include streets, drives, utility easements, parking, nor other areas primarily designed for operational
functions. All common open space shall be landscaped by the project developer and maintained by the
homeowners association for the project. A minimum of 2½% of the entire Planned Development shall be devoted to
common usable open space. Such common open space shall be available to all residents of the development and
shall be centrally located to the extent feasible and reasonably accessible to all dwelling units.

(Ord. No. 3660, § 14.)

8.

Parking. Two covered spaces in garages shall be provided per unit. In no case shall parking provided on public or private
streets count toward any guest parking requirement. For dwelling units which front on a cul-de-sac street, one (1) guest
parking space per four (4) dwelling units shall be provided. Such guest parking shall be provided in clusters of two (2) or
more spaces within the development, such as at the end of cul-de-sacs. No off-street guest parking shall be required for
through streets, as such streets shall have sufficient width to accommodate parking for guests.

(Ord. 3660, § 15.)

9.

Streets. All public streets shall be constructed pursuant to the requirements of the public works department. Private
streets must be constructed to material standards that will ensure against premature deterioration. Private streets shall
be constructed with a minimum width, curb-to-curb, of twenty-eight (28) feet for interior cul-de-sac streets where no
parking is permitted, and thirty-six (36) feet curb-to-curb for through streets where parallel parking is permitted on both
sides of the streets. Rolled-type curbs shall be prohibited.

(Ord. No. 3660, § 16.)

10.

Pedestrian Circulation. Sidewalks at least three (3) feet in width shall be provided on both sides of all streets within the
Planned Development.

(Ord. No. 3660, § 17.)

11.

Architectural Style. Same as Section .229.7.L

(Ord. No. 3988, § 5.)

D.

CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
1.

Procedure and Applications.
a.

Concept Development Plan Approval. Prior to the submission of a "PD" district rezoning application, the applicant
shall submit a preliminary development plan for approval in principle by the planning commission.

A written consent of all property owners within the proposed "PD" district shall be on file with the planning division before
staff study of a concept development plan shall be commenced. Approval in principle of the concept development plan shall be
limited to the general acceptability of the land uses proposed and their inter-relationship and shall not be construed to endorse
precise location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering feasibility. Any concept development plan and text shall include
the following information comprehensively presented in a general, schematic fashion:

E.

(1)

Proposed land uses and population densities.

(2)

Proposed circulation pattern, indicating both public and private streets.

(3)

Proposed parks, playgrounds, school sites, and other open spaces.

(4)

Delineation of project phasing, if any.

(5)

Relation to future land use in surrounding area and general plan.

ESTABLISHMENT OF "PD" DISTRICT.
1.

"PD" districts may be established or removed from the zone map upon the application of a property owner or owners or
upon the initiative of the city council or planning commission in accordance with the zone change procedures.

2.

An application for a "PD" district shall include and be accompanied by a final development plan. If approved by the
planning commission, and city council, the "PD" district shall become a part of the zoning map of the city.

3.

The application shall include fifteen copies of the proposed development plans containing the following items:
39/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

a.

A boundary survey map of the property. (A tentative subdivision map may be substituted for this requirement if the ap
subdivide the property.)

b.

Existing topography of the development area shall be shown with contours at two-foot intervals. Such survey shall
accurately indicate the location of the property lines.

c.

The gross land area of the development, the present zoning classification thereof and the zoning classification and
existing land use on all adjacent properties, including the location of structures and other improvements thereon.

d.

The final development plan with at least the following details shown to scale and dimensioned:
(1)

Location and use or uses proposed for each existing and each proposed structure in the development area,
the number of stories, gross building area and approximate location of entrances.

(2)

All existing and proposed storage, curb cuts, trash areas, driving lanes, parking areas and loading areas.

(3)

All pedestrian walks and open areas for the use of occupants of the proposed development and the public.

(4)

Types of surfacing proposed for all walks and driveways.

(5)

A detailed plan for the landscaping of the development, including the location and height of all proposed walls,
fences and screen planting, and a statement setting forth the method by which such landscaping and fencing
shall be preserved and maintained.

(6)

Preliminary grading plan shall be prepared by a licensed civil engineer or licensed surveyor. This plan shall be
at a minimum scale of 1′ = 100″ and shall include the following:
(a)

Tract number.

(b)

Legal description.

(c)

Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owner, subdivider and design engineer.

(d)

North arrow, engineering scale and date.

(e)

The widths and approximate grades of existing and proposed rights-of-way within and adjacent to the
property involved.

(f)

Locations, widths and approximate grades of existing and proposed highways and streets.

(g)

Lot layout, approximate dimensions, proposed elevation and number of each lot.

(h)

Existing and proposed contours of the land.

(i)

Proposed method of sewage disposal and drainage.

(j)

Existing and proposed zoning.

(k)

Location and diameter of all existing trees.

e.

Plans and elevations of one or more structures to indicate architectural type and materials of construction.

f.

Where a portion of a single parcel is to be developed in successive phases, the applicant shall submit a projected
general plan of land use, circulation and anticipated sequence of development for the entire parcel. This plan must
contain sufficient information for the city to assess the relationship of the entire project, and all of its individual
phases, with: (1) the general plan, (2) existing and proposed development adjoining the parcel.

g.
F.

All such development plans may be approved subject to conditions.

GENERAL PROVISIONS. The following general provisions shall apply to each "PD" overlay district. In addition, after review by
the planning commission, conditions may be imposed as necessary.
1.

Maintenance. The right to maintain the buildings and use the property for a planned development shall continue in effect
only so long as all of the mutually available features, such as recreational areas, community buildings, landscaping, as
well as the general appearance of the premises and buildings are all adequately maintained, and as indicated on the
approved final development plan.

2.

Sale of Lots or Units. No dwelling unit or lot shall be sold or encumbered separately from an interest in the common
areas and facilities in the development which shall be appurtenant to such dwelling unit or lot. No lot shall be sold or
transferred in ownership from the other lots in the total development, or approved phase of the development, unless all

40/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

approved community buildings, structures, and recreational facilities for the total development, or approved phase
thereof, have been completed, or completion is assured, by bonding or other methods satisfactory to the planning
commission.
3.

Management Agreement. No lot or dwelling unit in the development shall be sold unless a corporation, association,
property owners group or similar entity has been formed with the right to assess all those properties which are jointly
owned with interests in the common areas and facilities in the development to meet the expenses of such entity, and
with authority to control, and the duty to maintain, all of said mutually available features of the development. Such entity
shall operate under recorded conditions, covenants and restrictions which shall include compulsory membership of all
owners of lots and/or dwelling units, and flexibility of assessment to meet changing costs of maintenance, repairs and
services. The developer shall submit evidence of compliance with this requirement to and receive the approval of
planning division prior to making any such sale. This condition shall not apply to land dedicated to the city for public
purposes.

4.

Final Development Plans. All final development plans shall be in substantial conformance with the concept development
plan approval. Prior to the issuance of any permits for the erection or enlargement of any buildings within an established
PD district, final precise site and elevation plans for all buildings and landscaping within said district or approved phase
thereof, shall be submitted to the planning division for approval. The planning commission may disapprove the final
development plans only if they determine that such plans are not in substantial conformance with the preliminary plans.

5.

Permits. No permit shall be issued for grading, or for the erection, enlargement or maintenance of buildings or
structures for a planned development, and no person shall perform any such development or construction work, except
in full compliance with the final development plans approved as herein provided.

6.
G.

Modification. Modification to an approved development plan shall follow the same procedure as the original approval.

FILING FEE—PLANS AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL. Fee and charges shall be paid in connection with the following:
1.

Concept Development Plan. Each request for a concept development plan approval by the Planning Commission shall be
accompanied by a fee as set forth in Section .100. This application shall be made prior to application for final
development plan approval.

2.

Establishment of "PD" District. A filing fee as set forth in Section .100 is to be paid with the final development plan
application for establishment of a "PD" district.

3.

Final Development Plan. Each final development plan for a residential planned development filed with the Planning
Commission for its review for the establishment of a "PD" district shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in
Section .100.

4.

Modification of Plans or Conditions. Each request to the Planning Commission for its review on modifications of any
approved final development plan in a "PD" district or of a condition imposed on a planned development shall be
accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in Section .100.

(Ord. No. 3433, § 2; Ord. No. 3615, § 1.)

Sec. .280. - "R-2" Low density multiple-family zone.
Title.
This zone will be referred to as the low density multiple-family zone ("R-2" zone.)
A.

Intent and Purpose.

This zone is to provide for the amenities and characteristics of single-family development at moderately higher densities. It is to
provide for new alternatives in housing type for both owner and renter occupants. The "R-2" zone will accommodate the
development of single lots as well as planned projects which incorporate common open spaces and facilities. It is essential that
development in this zone have a scale, appearance and function similar to single-family development. And, while the densities
permitted in the "R-2" zone are higher than that of single-family zones, the concern for privacy, convenience and security are equally
important.
B.

Permitted Uses.

41/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or
enlarged except for the following specific purposes only:
(Ord. No. 4096, § 11.)

1.

Uses permitted in the "R-1" zones subject to the requirements and property development standards of the "R-17200" zone;

2.

Multiple-family residential uses consistent with the density standards of the "R-2" low density multiple-family
residential zone. Multiple-family residential complexes shall comply with the development and operational
standards contained in Section .5809-17;

(Ord. No. 3879, § 2.)

3.

Accessory structures related to such development permitted within this zone, provided that no such accessory
structure shall be used for habitation, and further provided that garage space be used exclusively for the storage of
vehicles of the occupants of such development;

4.

Public assembly uses, Pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the applicable
development standards of this zone except as follows:
a.

The minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet.

b.

On each side of the site, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet that extends from the front yard to
the rear yard and is open from the ground to the sky.

c.

The side and rear yards may be used for off-street parking, subject to the design and landscaping requirements of
Sections .503-H and .503-J.

(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

5.

Such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar and which are not specifically listed as permissive
in a less restrictive zone.

(Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

C.

Dwelling Unit Density.

The "R-2" low density multiple-family residence zone permits densities from seven to fifteen units per net acre. Development of
densities of eleven to fifteen units per net acre must satisfy the following development criteria:

D.

1.

Include central recreation space;

2.

Have access to a collector street.

Site Area.

The minimum site area for low density multiple-family residential developments shall be three thousand square feet.
E.

Lot Area Per Unit.

The minimum lot area per unit shall be as follows:

Detached Units
Conventional

3,000 sq. ft.

Zero lot line

5,000 sq. ft.

Attached units

3,000 sq. ft./unit

F.

Unit Sizes.

Minimum floor area in square feet:

42/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

One Bedroom

1,000 sq. ft.

Two Bedroom

1,100 sq. ft.

Three Bedroom

1,300 sq. ft.

For Each Additional over Three Bedroom

200 sq. ft.

G.

Site Dimensions.

H.

Front Yard.

The front yard setback shall be twenty-five feet.
I.

Side Yards.

The side yard on a lot shall be equal to one-half the height of the building wall adjacent to the yard.
1.

Corner Lots. On corner lots, the side yard abutting the side street shall be twenty percent of the width of the lot, but
need not exceed fifteen feet nor shall it be less than ten feet.

2.

Reversed Corner Lots. The side yard on reversed corner lots shall be one-half the front yard of the adjacent lot as
shown below.

3.

Zero Lot Line. The zero lot line concept may be applied in developments of ten units or more, and in conformance
with the following:
a.

Side Yard. The one side yard in a zero lot line development shall be a minimum of twenty feet:

b.

Adjacent Properties. No zero lot line unit shall be placed on the peripheral property line of such a
development.

J.

Rear Yard.

43/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The rear yard on a lot shall be equal to the height of the building wall adjacent to the rear yard. but in no case less than fifteen
feet.
1.

Accessory Buildings and Structures.
a.

A garage or accessory building may be located on a rear property line when the building is:
(1)

Constructed in one-hour fire resistant materials: and

(2)

Constructed so that all roof drainage is directed to the subject lot: and

(3)

Constructed so that there are no openings on the side of the building which is on the rear property line:
and

(4)
b.

Not abutting an existing or proposed alley:

A garage or accessory building that cannot comply with all of the conditions set forth in the subsection above
shall have a rear yard of three feet. Roof eaves on the building may project one foot, and the eaves shall not
be closer than two feet from the rear property line;

c.

A garage or accessory building that abuts and has garage doors opening onto an existing or proposed alley or
common driveway shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley or
driveway.

2.

Adjacent Alleys. When abutting an existing or proposed alley, a main building shall be located not less than fifteen
feet from such alley.

3.

Swimming Pools.

The substructure of swimming pools shall be located not less than five feet from any rear property line.
4.

Rear Yard Variation. If a residential unit is designed such that its floor plan is oriented to a side yard or court yard.
the rear setback may be reduced to ten feet.

K.

Projections into Yards.

Architectural features, landscape architectural structures, stairways, chimneys and fire escapes may project into the required
yards and open areas and in no case are less than three feet from the property line.
1.

Porches and Landings. Porches and open-roofed structures attached to the main dwelling may be constructed in
required side or rear yard providing that the following is complied with:
a.

The maximum coverage of the required yard by all existing and proposed structures. shall not exceed forty
percent: and

b.

Ten feet shall be required between structural supports and the rear property line, and five feet shall be
required between structural supports and the side property line: the eaves of such structures shall be at least
two and one-half feet from a rear or side property line: and

c.

Porches and open-roofed structures as set forth in this subsection shall be constructed, and remain
thereafter, in conformance with the definition of an open patio structure as defined in the Uniform Building
Code.

2.
L.

Eaves. Eaves of all main building and accessory buildings must be two and one-half feet from the side property line.

Building Separation.
1.

2.

Building separation standards are established for the following purposes:
a.

To maintain visual privacy from one unit to another:

b.

To reduce disruptive noise between the living areas of one unit and bedroom areas of another unit:

c.

To provide usable outdoor areas for each unit: and

d.

To maintain an open, uncrowded image.

Residential Buildings. A principal residential building or building wing of the same structure shall be separated by a
minimum of fifteen feet.

3.

Accessory Buildings. There shall be a minimum separation of seven feet between principal and accessory buildings.
The minimum distance between two or more accessory buildings shall be six feet.
44/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

M.

Building Height.
1.

Standard. No building or structure shall be higher than thirty-five feet or two stories. whichever is less, except as
provided below.

2.

Roof Structures. Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, architectural features,
recreational equipment, towers, or wireless masts or similar structures may be erected above the standard height
limit, provided that they can be safely erected, and maintained.

3.

Average Building Height Incentive. The height of a residential building or cluster of buildings may exceed the
standard height limit if the overall height of the structure or group of structures averages no more than 2.25 stories.
The average will be calculated by the following method:

Average

Total Residential Building Coverage

=

Height
Total Residential Floor Area

(stores)

This average may not exceed 2.25 stories.

P.

N.

Property Access and Off-street Parking. (Refer to Section .503-H.)

O.

Signs. (Refer to Section .503-J.)

Walls, Fences and Landscape Screens.
1.

Corner Cutoff— Intersection Visibility. See Sec. .503-I.2.(a) & (b).

2.

Front Court Yard Walls. The use of a fence, wall or hedge to enclose an entrance court yard may be constructed in a
portion of the front yard providing the following conditions are met:
a.

Maximum height shall be five feet for those portions of such wall in the front yard area; and

b.

A courtyard wall must be related to the entrance to a unit and shall not project across driveways or into other areas
of the front yard not in the proximity of the unit's entry; and

3.

c.

A courtyard wall may encroach into the front yard by one-third the distance required by the "R-2" zone; and

d.

Materials used for courtyard walls shall be consistent with those on the dwelling unit; and

e.

Any overhead structures in this area are to be limited to open post and beam structures or lattice work.

Required Fences or Walls.
a.

Zero lot line development will be required to construct a six-foot-high decorative masonry wall along all property
lines with the exception of the front yard area:

b.

All residential development on lots that back onto arterial streets shall have a six-foot-high decorative masonry wall
along the street right-of-way:

c.

All lots next to freeways and railroads shall have a six-foot-high masonry wall along the common property/right-ofway line.

For definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional regulations pertaining to walls and fences in the R-2 zone, see Sec.
.503-I of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 4118, § 3.)

Q.

Open Space.

Usable open space shall be provided in two forms, private and common open space. Private open space shall be directly related
to individual units. Common open space shall be dispersed throughout the development and shall be available to all residents of the
development.
1.

Private Open Space. "Private open space" means and is defined as usable space assigned for the exclusive use of
the occupant of a specific dwelling unit.
45/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

a.

b.

2.

Ground Floor Units.
(1)

Area. One hundred fifty square feet per unit.

(2)

Dimensions. The minimum dimension shall be eight feet.

(3)

Enclosure. This space shall be enclosed in a manner to define the privacy of the space:

Above Ground Floor Units.
(1)

Area. Ninety square feet per unit in the form of terraces, balconies or rooftop patios.

(2)

Dimensions. The minimum dimension shall be six feet.

Common Open Space. Common open space shall be defined as usable open space on the site which is available to
all the occupants of the development to be used by all residents. This open space shall be generally distributed
throughout the development and must be reasonably accessible to all the dwelling units.
a.

Area. The area required will be based upon the number of bedrooms per unit as follows:

(1)

One Bedroom Unit

300 sq. ft./unit

(2)

Two Bedroom Unit

400 sq. ft./unit

(3)

Larger Units—100 sq. ft./bedroom/unit for units over two bedrooms.

b.

Dimensions. A minimum dimension of fifteen feet shall be required of any area that is to be counted as
common open space.

c.

Location. Common open space shall not be located in required front yards, side yards, off-street parking areas
or driveways.

d.

Grade. A grade may not exceed ten percent; except for landscape features such as earthen mounds or berms
that are used to improve the quality and/or function of the space.

e.

Landscaping. A minimum of fifty percent of the common open space shall be appropriately landscaped with
plant materials. Three-fourths of this amount shall be in lawn or turf. The remainder of this space shall be
planted in ground cover, trees, shrubs and provided with a permanent irrigation system. Such landscaping
shall include a minimum of one tree (twenty-four inch box minimum standard of the trade for such variety
used) for every dwelling unit.

f.

Recreation Facilities. A minimum of forty percent of the common open space may be in paved surface
including a swimming pool, walks, patios, terraces, courts and fountains. Recreation buildings or other
communal buildings may cover not more than ten percent of this area.

Specialized recreation equipment and facilities may be required by the planning commission based on the anticipated
age and interest of the occupant: i.e., play equipment for children, shuffleboard for senior citizens.
R.

Landscaping.
1.

General. All open areas and parking area planters shall be landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs, vines
and ground cover as is appropriate to the purpose of the landscaped area. Plantings shall be dispersed throughout
parking areas.

2.

Curbs. All landscaped areas shall be separated from driveways and parking areas by continuous six-inch curb.

3.

Existing Trees. When healthy, mature trees exist on a site, every effort shall be made to preserve them and tie them
into the overall landscape design concept.

4.

Plant Maintenance. All landscaped areas shall be serviced with permanent irrigation system. All planters shall be
kept weed-free, fertilized, and pruned as is needed to maintain healthy, attractive plants.

5.

Landscape Plans. A landscaping plan shall be drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals twenty feet. This plan
shall clearly show the location of all plant materials, the irrigation system (meter size, pipe sizes and valves and
head types). All landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the department of community development.
46/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The following criteria will be used in the review of those plans:
a.

Larger specimens of shrubs and trees shall be used along the site periphery, particularly along setback areas
adjacent to public streets;

b.

Greater intensity of landscaping shall be used along building elevations that lack window, door openings or
other details that provide adequate visual interest;

c.

Trees shall be located so as to screen parking areas and private first floor areas and windows from secondstory units;

d.

In order to provide a crime deterrent, shrubs planted below first floor windows shall be of a variety which has
thorns and/or prickly leaves.

S.

Building and Site Design.

When designing a project, the exterior appearance and site design shall: relate with the existing character of the area, enhance the
surrounding vicinity, be compatible with adjacent uses, and maintain a high quality and standard of development. Each project shall be able
to meet all of the following criteria in order to be approved:
1.

Exterior Appearance. The monotony of straight building lines shall be remedied by limiting the size of individual
buildings or units, staggering of units and the use of different building materials.

2.

Relief. Varying relief shall be incorporated in the design of a project as a method of illustrating the theme or
character of a building. Details that create shade and cast shadows shall be used on all elevations of each building;

3.

Height. The scale of the project shall not overwhelm any adjacent buildings or uses. Varying the height of the roof
line helps to reduce the perceived height of a project.

4.

Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be compatible in design and materials with the main building. All
mechanical equipment including public utility boxes shall be attractively screened utilizing a combination of building
materials and landscaping;

5.

Compatibility. Buildings shall be designed and oriented to reduce overflow of private rear yards and patio areas.

6.

Architectural Styles. Same as Section .229.7.L

(Ord. No. 3385, § 6.)

(Ord. No. 3988, § 6.)

Secs. .281 to .283. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3385.
Sec. .290. - "R-3" Medium density multiple-family zone.
Title.
This zone will be referred to as the medium density multiple-family residential zone ("R-3" zone.)
A.

Intent and Purpose.

This zone is to provide for the amenities and characteristics of the city's most dense residential environments. The range of
densities permitted is intended to provide for a variety of housing types and guarantee their compatibility with surrounding existing
neighborhoods. In that much of the development that will occur in this zone will bring people into close living arrangements, such
things as dwelling-unit privacy, openness, convenient parking, private and common outdoor spaces, security and overall visual
qualities will be of utmost importance. Development in this zone, although providing for higher density living environments, will be
expected to create a low density residential image.
The potential undesirable impact of medium density multiple-family residential development is recognized and therefore special
review procedures are considered necessary to insure that minimum development standards and features are incorporated into a
proposed project. Incentives to create multiple-family residential developments that are above minimum standards is also to be
established. Further, it is recognized that the residential density should be consistent with the characteristics of the surrounding
neighborhood and public facilities.

47/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

B.

Permitted Uses.

No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or
enlarged except for the following specific purposes only:
(Ord. No. 4096, § 12.)

1.

Multiple-family residential uses consistent with the density standards of the "R-3" medium density-multiple family
residential zone;

2.

Uses permitted in the "R-1-7,200" zone and "R-2" zone subject to the requirements and property development
standards set forth in the respective zoning district, except Section .280.C.2, pertaining to dwelling unit density in
the "R-2" zone; Multiple-family residential complexes shall comply with the development and operational standards
contained in Section .5809-17;

(Ord. No. 3680, § 5; Ord. No. 3879, § 3.)

3.

Accessory structures related to such development permitted within this zone, provided that no such accessory
structure shall be used for habitation, and further provided that garage space be used exclusively for the storage of
vehicles of the occupants of such development;

4.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the applicable
development standards of this zone except as follows:
a.

The minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet.

b.

On each side of the site, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet that extends from the front yard to
the rear yard and is open from the ground to the sky.

c.

The side and rear yards may be used for off-street parking, subject to the design and landscaping requirements of
Sections .503-H and .503-J.

(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

5.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and other amusements subject to a public use permit, Section .581;

6.

Home occupations, for limitations see Section .530;

7.

Such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar and which are not specifically listed as permissive

(Ord. No. 3623, § 3.)

in a less restrictive zone.
(Ord. No. 3439, § 1; Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

C.

Dwelling Unit Density.

The "R-3" multiple-family residential zone permits densities from fifteen to thirty units per net acre. For any given site the density
will be determined by satisfaction of the following development criteria.

DENSITY DU's/Net Area

MINIMUM

40,000 sq.

SITE

ft.

AREA (net

20,000 sq.

area)

ft.
10,000 sq.

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25—30

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

ft.
(minimum)

48/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

D.

Lot Area per Unit.

The minimum lot area per unit for a single dwelling unit shall be one thousand five hundred square feet.
E.

AREA

Lot and Site Dimensions.

2500 sq. ft.

3000 sq. ft.

4000 sq. ft.

5000 sq. ft.

6000 sq. ft.

7000 sq. ft.

8000 sq. ft.

9000 sq. ft.

INTERIOR

27′

27′

40′

50′

55′

60′

65′

70′

CORNER

45′

45′

50′

55′

60′

65′

70′

75′

80′

80′

80′

90′

100′

100′

100′

100′

WIDTH
WIDTH

DEPTH

STANDARD

F.

Unit Sizes.

Minimum floor area in square feet:

One Bedroom

900 sq. ft.

Two Bedroom

1,000 sq. ft.

Three Bedroom

1,200 sq. ft.

For Each Additional over Three Bedrooms

200 sq. ft.

G.

Front Yards.

The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet.
H.

Side Yards.

The side yards on a lot shall be equal to one-half the height of the building wall adjacent to the yard.
1.

Corner Lots. On corner lots, the side yard abutting the side street shall be twenty percent of the width of the lot, but
need not exceed fifteen feet nor shall it be less than ten feet.

2.

Reversed Corner Lots. The side yard on reversed corner lots shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet.

3.

Zero Lot Line. The zero lot line concept may be applied in developments of ten units or more, and in conformance
with the following:
a.

Side Yard. The one side yard in a zero lot line development shall be a minimum of twenty feet:

b.

Adjacent Properties. No zero lot line unit shall be placed on the peripheral property line of such a
development.

I.

Rear Yards.

The rear yard on a lot shall be equal to the height of the building wall adjacent to the rear yard, but in no case less than fifteen
feet.
49/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

1.

Accessory Buildings and Structures.
a.

A garage or accessory building may be located on a rear property line when the
building is:

(1)

Constructed in one-hour fire resistant materials; and

(2)

Constructed so that all roof drainage is directed to the subject lot : and

(3)

Constructed so that there are no openings on the side of the building which is on the rear property line;
and

(4)
b.

Not abutting an existing or proposed alley.

A garage or accessory building that cannot comply with all of the conditions set forth in subsection 1.1. a. of
this section shall have a rear yard of three feet. Roof eaves on the building may project one foot, and the eaves
shall not be closer than two feet from the rear property line.

c.

A garage or accessory building that abuts and has garage doors opening onto an existing or proposed alley or common
driveway shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley or driveway.

2.

Adjacent Alleys. When abutting an existing or proposed alley, a main building shall be located not less than fifteen
feet from such alley.

3.

Swimming Pools. The substructure of swimming pools shall be located not less than five feet from any rear property
line.

4.

Rear Yard Variation. If a residential unit is designed such that its floor plan is oriented to a side yard or court yard,
the rear yard setback may be reduced to ten feet.

J.

Projections Into Yards.

Architectural features, landscape architectural structures, stairways. chimneys and fire escapes may project into the required
yards and open areas and in no case are less than three feet from the property line.
1.

Porches and Landings. Porches and open-roofed structures attached to the main dwelling may be constructed in
required side or rear yard providing that the following is complied with:
a.

The maximum coverage of the required year by all existing and proposed structures shall not exceed forty
percent; and

b.

Ten feet shall be required between structural supports and the rear property line, and five feet shall be
required between structural supports and the side property line: the eaves of such structures shall be at least
two and one-half feet from a rear or side property line; and

c.

Porches and open-roofed structures as set forth in this subsection shall be constructed, and remain
thereafter, in conformance with the definition of an open patio structure as defined in the Uniform Building
Code.

2.

Eaves. Eaves of all main buildings and accessory buildings must be two and one-half feet from the side property
line.

K.

Building Separation.
1.

Building separation standards are established for the following purposes:
a.

To maintain visual privacy from one unit to another:
50/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

b.

To reduce disruptive noise between the living areas of one unit and bedroom areas of another unit:

c.

To provide usable outdoor areas for each unit; and

d.

To maintain an open, uncrowded image.

Residential Buildings. A principal residential building or building wing of the same structure shall be separated by a
minimum of fifteen feet.

3.

Accessory Buildings. There shall be a minimum separation of seven feet between principal and accessory buildings.
The minimum distance between two or more accessory buildings shall be six feet.

L.

Building Height.
1.

Standard. No building or structure shall be higher than thirty-five feet or two stories. whichever is less, except as
provided below.

2.

Roof Structures. Roof structures for the housing of elevators. stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, architectural features,
recreational equipment, towers, or wireless masts or similar structures may be erected above the standard height
limit; provided that they can be safely erected and maintained.

3.

Averaged Building Height Incentive. The height of a residential building or cluster of buildings may exceed the
standard height limit if the overall height of the structure or group of structures averages no more than 2.50 stories.
The average will be calculated by the following method:

Average

=

Total Residential Building Coverage

Height
(stores)

Total Residential Floor Area

This average may not exceed 2.50 stories.
M.

Open Space.

Usable open space shall be provided in two forms, private and common open space. Private open space shall be directly related
to individual units. Common open space shall be dispersed throughout the development and shall be available to all residents of the
development.
1.

Private Open Space. "Private open space" means and is defined as usable space assigned for the exclusive use of
the occupant of a specific dwelling unit.
a.

b.

2.

Ground Floor Units.
(1)

Area. One hundred square feet per unit,

(2)

Dimensions. The minimum dimension shall be eight feet.

(3)

Enclosure. This space shall be enclosed in a manner to define the privacy of the space;

Above Ground Floor Units.
(1)

Area. Seventy square feet per unit in the form of terraces, balconies or rooftop patios.

(2)

Dimensions. The minimum dimension shall be six feet.

Common Open Space. Common open space means and is defined as usable open space on the site which is
available to all the occupants of the development to be used by all residents. This open space shall be generally
distributed throughout the development and must be reasonably accessible to all the dwelling units.
a.

Area. The area required will be based upon the number of bedrooms per unit as follows:

APARTMENTS Sq. Ft./Unit

51/322

7/11/2019

(1)

Pomona, CA Zoning

One

300

Bedroom
Unit
(2)

Two

400

Bedroom
Unit
(3)

Larger

400+ 100*

Units

* each additional bedroom over 2
b.

Dimensions. A minimum dimension of fifteen feet shall be required of any area that is to be counted as
common open space;

c.

Location. Common open space shall not be located in required front yards, side yards, off-street parking areas
or driveways:

d.

Grade. A grade may not exceed ten percent, except for landscape features such as earthen mounds or berms
that are used to improve the quality and/or function of the space:

e.

Landscaping. A minimum of fifty percent of the common open space shall be appropriately landscaped with
plant materials. Three-fourths of this amount shall be in lawn or turf. The remainder of this space shall be
planted in ground cover, trees, shrubs and provided with a permanent irrigation system. Such landscaping
shall include a minimum of one tree (twenty-four-inch box minimum standard of the trade for such variety
used) for every dwelling unit unless a satisfactory alternate is approved by the planning commission:

f.

Recreation Facilities. A maximum of forty percent of the common open space may be in paved surface
including a swimming pool, walks, patios, terraces, courts and fountains. Recreation buildings or other
communal buildings may cover not more than ten percent of this area. Specialized recreation equipment and
facilities may be required by the planning commission based on the anticipated age and interest of the
occupant: i.e. play equipment for children, shuffleboard for senior citizens.

N.

Walls, Fences, and Landscape Screens.
1.

Corner Cutoff—Intersection Visibility. See Sec. .503-I.2.(a) & (b).

2.

Required Fences or Walls.
a.

All residential development on lots that back onto arterial streets shall have a six-foot-high decorative masonry wall
along the street right-of-way.

b.

All lots next to freeways and railroads shall have a six-foot-high masonry wall along the common property/right-ofway line.

For definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional regulations pertaining to walls and fences in the R-3 zone, see Section
.503-I of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 4118, § 3.)

O.

Property Access and Off-street Parking. (Refer to Section .503-H.)

P.

Signs. (Refer to Section .503-J.)

Q.

Landscaping.
1.

General. All open areas and parking area planters shall be landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs, vines
and ground cover as is appropriate to the purpose of the landscaped area. Plantings shall be dispersed throughout
parking areas.
52/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

Curbs. All landscaped areas shall be separated from driveways and parking areas by continuous six-inch curb.

3.

Existing Trees. When healthy, mature trees exist on a site, every effort shall be made to preserve them and tie them
into the overall landscape design concept.

4.

Plant Maintenance. All landscaped areas shall be serviced with permanent irrigation system. All planters shall be
kept weed-free, fertilized, and pruned as is needed to maintain healthy, attractive plants.

5.

Landscape Plans. A landscaping plan shall be drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals twenty feet. This plan
shall clearly show the location of all plant materials, the irrigation system (meter size, pipe size and valves and head
types). All landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the department of community development. The
following criteria will be used in the review of those plans:
a.

Larger specimens of shrubs and trees shall be used along the site periphery, particularly along setback areas
adjacent to public streets:

b.

Greater intensity of landscaping shall be used along building elevations that lack window, door openings or
other details that provide adequate visual interest:

c.

Trees shall be located so as to screen parking areas and private first floor areas and windows from secondstory units;

d.

In order to provide a crime deterrent, shrubs planted below first floor windows should be of a variety which
has thorns and/or prickly leaves.

R.

Building and Site Design.

When designing a project, the exterior appearance and site design shall: relate with the existing character of the area, enhance
the surrounding vicinity, be compatible with adjacent uses, and maintain a high quality and standard of development. Each project
shall be able to meet all of the following criteria in order to be approved:
1.

Exterior Appearance. The monotony of straight building lines shall be remedied by limiting the size of individual
buildings or units, staggering of units and the use of different building materials;

2.

Relief. Varying relief shall be incorporated in the design of a project as a method of illustrating the theme or
character of a building. Details that create shade and cast shadows shall be used on all elevations of each building;

3.

Height. The scale of the project shall not overwhelm any adjacent buildings or uses. Varying the height of the
roofline helps to reduce the perceived height of a project;

4.

Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be compatible in design and materials with the main building. All
mechanical equipment (including public utility boxes) shall be attractively screened utilizing a combination of
building materials and landscaping;

5.

Compatibility. Buildings shall be designed and oriented to reduce overflow of private rear yards and patio areas.

6.

Architectural Styles. Same as Section .229.7.L

(Ord. No. 3385, § 7.)

(Ord. No. 3988, § 7.)

Secs. .291 to .2947. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3385.
Sec. .300. - "R-4" High density multiple-family residential zone.
This zone will be referred to as the high density multiple-family residential "R-4" zone.)
A.

Intent and Purpose.

This district is designed to provide for the development of high density multiple-family residential structures in the form of
multi-story apartments and condominiums. The densities permitted are intended as an urban living environment that will serve the
needs of residents in the commercial core areas of the city. Developments in this zone are expected to provide high quality designs
which will be compatible with commercial and other residential land uses.
B.

Permitted Uses.
53/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or
enlarged except for the following specific purposes only:
(Ord. No. 4096, § 13.)

1.

Multiple-family residential uses consistent with the density standards of the "R-4" high density multiple-family
residential zone. Multiple-family residential complexes shall comply with the development and operational
standards contained in Section .5809-17;

(Ord. No. 3879, § 4.)

2.

Accessory structures related to such development permitted within this zone, provided that no such accessory
structure shall be used for habitation, and further provided that garage space be used exclusively for the storage of
vehicles of the occupants of such development;

3.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the applicable
development standards of this zone except as follows:
a.

The minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet.

b.

The side and rear yards may be used for off-street parking, subject to the design and landscaping requirements of
Sections .503-H and .503-J.

(Ord. No. 4114, § 4.)

4.

Boardinghouses, lodginghouses, and board and care facilities are permitted subject to approval of a conditional use
permit;

5.

Such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar and which are not specifically listed as permissive
in a less restrictive zone;

(Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

6.

Home occupations, for limitations see Section .530;

7.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3919, § 4.

(Ord. No. 3623, § 4.)

C.

Dwelling Unit Density.

The "R-4" multiple-family zone permits densities from thirty to seventy units per gross acre.
D.

Site Area.

The area for high density multiple-family residential developments shall be forty thousand square feet with a minimum street
frontage of one hundred feet.
E.

Unit Sizes.

Minimum floor area in square feet:

One Bedroom Unit

600 sq. ft.

Two Bedroom Unit

800 sq. ft.

For Each Additional Bedroom over Three

200 sq. ft.

F.

Front Yard.

The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet.
G.

Side Yard.

The side yard on a lot shall be equal to one-quarter the height of the building wall adjacent to the yard, but in no case shall it be
less than ten feet.

54/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

1.
H.

Corner Lots. On corner lots, the side yard shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet.

Rear Yard.

There shall be a rear yard on each lot extending across the full width of the lot, said yard shall have a minimum depth of twentyfive feet.
1.

Accessory Buildings and Structures.
a.

A garage or accessory building may be located on a rear property line when the building is:
(1)

Constructed in one-hour fire resistant materials: and

(2)

Constructed so that all roof drainage is directed to the subject lot: and

(3)

Constructed so that there are no openings on the side of the building which is on the rear property line;
and

(4)
b.

Not abutting an existing or proposed alley.

A garage or accessory building that cannot comply with all of the conditions set forth in subsection H.1.a of
this section shall have a rear yard of three feet. Roof eaves on the building may project one foot, and the eaves
shall not be closer than two feet from the rear project line.

c.

A garage or accessory building that abuts and has garage doors opening onto an existing or proposed alley or
common driveway shall be located not less than twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley or
driveway.

2.

Adjacent Alleys. When abutting an existing or proposed alley, a main building shall be located not less than fifteen
feet from such alley.

3.

Swimming Pools. The substructure of swimming pools shall be located not less than five feet from any rear property
line.

4.

Rear Yard Variation. If a residential unit is designed such that its floor plan is oriented to a side yard or court yard,
the rear yard setback may be reduced to ten feet.

I.

Projections into Yards. Architectural features, landscape architectural structures, stairways, chimneys and fire escapes
may project into the required yards and open areas and in no case are less than three feet from the property line.
1.

Porches and Landings. Porches and open-roofed structures attached to the main dwelling may be constructed in
required side or rear yard providing that the following is complied with:
a.

The maximum coverage of the required yard by all existing and proposed structures shall not exceed forty
percent: and

b.

Ten feet shall be required between structural supports and the rear property line, and five feet shall be
required between structural supports and the side property line : the eaves of such structures shall be at least
two and one-half feet from a rear or side property line: and

c.

Porches and open-roofed structures as set forth in this subsection shall be constructed. and remain
thereafter, in conformance with the definition of an open patio structure as defined in the Uniform Building
Code.

2.
J.

Eaves. Eaves of all main building and accessory buildings must be two and one-half feet from the side property line.

Building Separation.
1.

2.

Building separation standards are established for the following purposes:
a.

To maintain visual privacy from one unit to another:

b.

To reduce disruptive noise between the living areas of one unit and bedroom areas of another unit:

c.

To provide usable outdoor areas for each unit: and

d.

To maintain an open, uncrowded image.

Residential Buildings. A principal residential building or building wing of the same structure shall be separated by a
minimum of fifteen feet. The distance shall be increased by five feet for every story exceeding three.

3.

Accessory Buildings. There shall be a minimum separation of seven feet between principal and accessory buildings.
55/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The minimum distance between two or more accessory buildings shall be six feet.
K.

Walls, Fences and Landscape Screens.
1.

Corner Cutoff—intersection visibility. See Sec. .503-I.2.(a) & (b).

2.

Required Fences or Walls.
a.

All residential developments may be required to construct a six-foot-high decorative masonry wall on the perimeter
of such developments.

For definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional regulations pertaining to walls and fences in the R-4 zone, see Sec. .503-I
of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 4118, § 5.)

L.

Open Space.

Usable open space shall be provided in two forms, private and common open space. Private open space shall be directly related
to individual units. Common open space shall be dispersed throughout the development and shall be available to all residents of the
development.
1.

Private Open Space. "Private open space" means and is defined as usable space assigned for the exclusive use of
the occupant of a specific dwelling unit.
a.

b.

2.

Ground Floor Units.
(1)

Area. One hundred square feet per unit,

(2)

Dimensions. The minimum dimension shall be eight feet,

(3)

Enclosure. This space shall be enclosed in a manner to define the privacy of the space;

Above Ground Floor Units.
(1)

Area. Seventy square feet per unit in the form of terraces, balconies or rooftop patios,

(2)

Dimensions. The minimum dimension shall be six feet.

Common Open Space. "Common open space" means and is defined as usable open space on the site which is
available to all the occupants of the development to be used by all residents. This open space shall be generally
distributed throughout the development and must be reasonably accessible to all the dwelling units.
a.

Area. The area required shall be a minimum of three hundred square feet per unit.

b.

Dimensions. A minimum dimension of fifteen feet shall be required of any area that is to be counted as
common open space.

c.

Location. Common open space shall not be located in required front yards, side yards, off-street parking areas
or driveways.

d.

Grade. A grade in excess of ten percent, except for landscape features such as earthen mounds or berms that
are used to improve the quality and/or function of the space.

e.

Landscaping. A minimum of fifty percent of the common open space shall be appropriately landscaped with
plant materials. Three-fourths of this amount shall be in lawn or turf. The remainder of this space shall be
planted in ground cover, trees, shrubs and provided with a permanent irrigation system. Such landscaping
shall include a minimum of one tree (twenty-four-inch box minimum standard of the trade for such variety
used) for every dwelling unit.

f.

Recreation Facilities. A maximum of forty percent of the common open space may be paved surface including
a swimming pool, walks, patios, terraces, courts and fountains. Recreation buildings or other communal
buildings may cover not more than ten percent of this area. Specialized recreation equipment and facilities
may be required by the planning commission based on the anticipated age and interest of the occupant; i.e.,
play equipment for children, shuffleboard for senior citizens.

M.

Landscaping.
1.

General. All open areas and parking area planters shall be landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs, vines
and ground cover as is appropriate to the purpose of the landscaped area. Plantings shall be dispersed throughout
56/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

parking areas
2.

Curbs. All landscaped areas shall be separated from driveways and parking areas by continuous six-inch curb.

3.

Existing Trees. When healthy, mature trees exist on a site, every effort shall be made to preserve them and tie them
into the overall landscape design concept.

4.

Plant Maintenance. All landscaped areas shall be serviced with permanent irrigation system. All planters shall be
kept weed-free, fertilized, and pruned as is needed to maintain healthy, attractive plants.

5.

Landscape Plans. A landscaping plan shall be drawn at a minimum of one inch equals twenty feet. This plan shall
clearly show the location of all plan materials, the irrigation system (meter size, pipe sizes and valves and head
types). All landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the department of community development. The
following criteria will be used in the review of those plans:
a.

Larger specimens of shrubs and trees shall be used along the site periphery, particularly along setback areas
adjacent to public streets;

b.

Greater intensity of landscaping shall be used along building elevations that lack window, door openings or
other details that provide adequate visual interest;

c.

Trees shall be located so as to screen parking areas and private first floor areas and windows from secondstory units;

d.

In order to provide a crime deterrent, shrubs planted below first floor windows should be of a variety which
has thorns and/or prickly leaves.

N.

Building Height.

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than six stories or seventy-five feet.
O.

Building and Site Design.

When designing a project, the exterior appearance and site design shall: relate with the existing character of the area, enhance
the surrounding vicinity, be compatible with adjacent uses, and maintain a high quality and standard of development. Each project
shall be able to meet all of the following criteria in order to be approved.
1.

Exterior Appearance. The monotony of straight building lines shall be remedied by limiting the size of individual
buildings or units, staggering of units and the use of different building materials;

2.

Relief. Varying relief shall be incorporated in the design of a project as a method of illustrating the theme or
character of a building. Details that create shade and cast shadows shall be used on all elevations of each building;

3.

Height. The scale of the project shall not overwhelm any adjacent buildings or uses. Varying the height of the
roofline helps to reduce the perceived height of a project;

4.

Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be compatible in design and materials with the main building. All
mechanical equipment (including public utility boxes) shall be attractively screened utilizing a combination of
building materials and landscaping;

5.

Compatibility. Buildings shall be designed and oriented to reduce overview of private rear yards and patio areas.

6.

Architectural Styles. Same as Section .229.7.L

(Ord. No. 3988, § 8.)

P.

Property Access and Off-street Parking. (Refer to Section .503-H.)

Q.

Signs. (Refer to Section .503-J.)

(Ord. No. 338, § 8.)

Secs. .301 to .304. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3385.
Secs. .310 to .315. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .316. - "PRD" Planned Residential Development District.
A.

PURPOSE AND INTENT
57/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The purpose and intent of this section is to facilitate methods and patterns of development that will be consistent with the public
interest in the retention of the unique character of certain lands while providing for more flexible development standards and provisions
than are permitted by other residential zone districts and to encourage more creative and imaginative designs for development of
residential areas than are generally possible under conventional zoning regulations. It is further intended to promote more economical
and efficient use of the land while providing a harmonious variety of housing choices, a higher level of recreational facilities, and other
amenities, and the preservation of usable open space and natural scenic qualities of the land.
B.

CONSISTENCY WITH SPECIFIC AREA PLAN

The rezoning of any land to the "PRD" Zone district shall be approved only after the adoption of a specific area plan covering the
subject land, and shall be consistent with such adopted specific area plan. An application for a change of zone to "PRD" and the specific
area plan may be reviewed and approved as joint actions at the same public hearing.
C.

USES PERMITTED

No building or structure shall be designed, erected or structurally altered, and no building or structure or land shall be used except
in conformity with the final development plot plan approved subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit, and in conformance
with the following specific purposes only:
(Ord. No. 4096, § 14.)

1.

Residential uses
(a)

Single family units, detached on individual lot.

(b)

Single family units, attached on individual lots, including condominiums, row or townhouses.

(c)

Multiple family (rental units) attached on the same lot, including duplexes, triplexes and quadruplexes.

(d)

Multiple family (rental units) attached on the same lot in apartment complexes (5 or more units), including high-rise
structures.

(e)

Accessory structures and uses necessary and customarily incidental to the above uses.

(f)

Roominghouse, as defined in Section .062, subject to the granting of a Conditional Use Permit.

(Ord. No. 4051, § 5.)

2.

3.

Recreational uses and facilities
(a)

Permanent open space.

(b)

Private open space (balconies and patios or private interior courts).

(c)

Parks and playgrounds.

(d)

Riding and hiking trails and rest areas.

(e)

Pedestrian walkways.

(f)

Swimming pools.

(g)

Community recreation buildings.

(h)

Country clubs, golf courses.

(i)

Tennis courts and clubs.

(j)

Riding and boarding stables designed primarily for the use of residents and for boarding residents' horses.

(k)

Lakes, streams and fountains.

Accessory uses

These uses may be included in the initial PRD plan and approved by the conditional use permit involving the entire PRD project
or may be added to the PRD at a later date, subject to the approval and issuance of a separate conditional use permit:
(a)

Child day care centers.

(b)

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the
development standards of the applicable specific plan. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

(c)

Private schools.

58/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

4.

(d)

Community television receiving and distribution systems (cable TV).

(e)

Public or governmental facilities designed to serve PRD residents.

Temporary uses
(a)

Building material and construction equipment storage, and construction office and security guard quarters are
permitted during the period and for the construction work covered by an active building permit.

(b)

Model homes and/or apartments and temporary real estate offices for the sale or rental of units within the PRD
only, are permitted during the initial sales period (length of period to be specified as a condition of the conditional
use permit).

(c)

Residential subdivision real estate signs as permitted by Sections 3-45, 3-46, 3-47 of the city code.

(d)

Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and other amusements subject to a public use permit, Section .581.

(Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part).)

5.

Other uses
(a)

Home occupations, for limitations see Section .530.

(b)

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14

(Ord. No. 3623, § 5.)

(Ord. No. 3971, § 9.)

And such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar and consistent with the adopted specific area plan. The decision of
the city planner shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .501-A.
(Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

D.

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1.

Density

The maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre of land within the planned residential development project shall be
determined and governed by the adopted specific area plan covering the subject area.
2.

Minimum lot area

No minimum lot area shall be required; however, an area equal in area to any reduction in lot area below seven thousand two
hundred square feet shall be provided elsewhere within the PRD project in the form of permanent open space and/or recreational
facilities (excluding streets and parking areas).
3.

Required parking
(a)

Single family units

There shall be at least two parking spaces in a private garage, having minimum dimensions of twenty feet by twenty feet,
and two off-street, uncovered, paved parking spaces, for each single family unit. These spaces shall be on the same lot with the
structure which they are intended to serve and may be detached or attached to the dwelling structure.
(b)

Multiple family units

There shall be at least two parking spaces in an enclosed garage for each unit in a multiple family structure. These spaces
may be provided in common structures with parking spaces for several units. Each parking space shall have minimum
dimensions of ten feet by twenty feet, and shall be conveniently placed in relation to the unit they are intended to serve.
(c)

All dwelling types

There shall be at least one-fourth parking space per every dwelling unit within the planned unit development to be reserved
for the use of guest or visitor vehicle parking. These spaces shall be paved and have minimum dimensions of ten feet by twenty
feet. Visitor parking may be uncovered or covered and shall be conveniently placed on or off street but near the units they are
intended to serve.
4.

Standards of living area in each dwelling unit

The following shall be the minimum living area for PRD dwelling units:
59/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(a)

Each attached or detached single family dwelling unit on individual lots:
(1)

Four rooms or less with a maximum of two bedrooms, one thousand one hundred
square feet;

(b)

5.

(2)

Five rooms with a maximum of three bedrooms, one thousand two hundred fifty square feet;

(3)

For every additional room over five, or bedrooms over three, an additional one hundred fifty square feet.

Each dwelling unit in duplex, triplex, quadruplex or multiple family apartment structures (all units on a common lot):
(1)

Three rooms or less with no bedrooms (bachelor apartment), five hundred square feet;

(2)

Four rooms or less with a maximum of one bedroom, seven hundred square feet;

(3)

Five rooms or less with a maximum of two bedrooms, eight hundred square feet;

(4)

For every additional room over five, or bedrooms over two, an additional one hundred fifty square feet.

Street and driveway standards

Local streets and driveways within residential developments shall be paved to at least the following minimum widths:
(a)

Streets and driveways with on-street parking permitted on both sides — minimum paved width thirty-six feet.

(b)

Streets and driveways where on-street parking will be limited to one side only — minimum twenty-eight feet.

(c)

Driveways used primarily for access to garages or carports for more than four dwelling units and with no parking
within the travel way — minimum paved width twenty-four feet.

(d)

Driveways serving four or less dwelling units, and having no parking within the travel way — minimum paved width
twenty feet.

(e)

One-way driveways shall be a minimum paved width of twelve feet, with on-street parking — the minimum width
shall be twenty feet.

(f)
6.

Structural street sections shall be in accordance with Pomona's standards street and highway plan.

The planning commission shall determine the compatibility of the proposed project with the intent and purpose of the
Hillside Ordinance (Sec. .58010) and may at its discretion modify specific provisions of the Hillside Ordinance as part of
the conditional use permit procedure for the PRD project.

E.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3633.

F.

PHASED DEVELOPMENT

If the PRD project is proposed to be constructed in successive stages or phased, the following shall be required:
1.

The plot plans and supportive materials accompanying the conditional use permit shall contain a detailed description of
the project phases and the construction time schedule for each project phase.

2.

During each phase of construction open space and/or recreational facilities shall be developed in phases on a pro rata
share of dwelling units constructed.

G.

LEGAL REQUIREMENTS
1.

Before approval of the final PRD plot plans, the applicant shall evidence a full ownership interest in the land, either in the
form of legal title or the execution of a binding sales agreement.

2.

There shall be covenants, conditions and restrictions attached to and made part of any deeds for open space or
recreational lands within the PRD, limiting any future use of these lands and preserving them as open space and
recreational lands.

3.

There shall be covenants, conditions and restrictions attached to and made part of all deeds conveying ownership rights
to any lot within the PRD relating to and insuring the management and maintenance of common areas, open spaces,
recreational and other facilities, including but not limited to private streets, sewers, pathways and landscaping. Such
covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an assessment for the purposes of care, maintenance and
improvement of the common areas, open spaces, recreational and other facilities shall be made upon each lot within the
PRD and shall establish a method for making the claim and foreclosure including power of sale in the case of
nonpayment of the assessment which shall become a lien upon the lot.

4.

There shall be covenants, conditions and restrictions attached to and made a part of all deeds conveying ownership
60/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

rights to any lot within the PED, prohibiting rooftop TV antennas (unless the planning commission approves an alternate
proposal), and the parking or storage of motorhomes, boats, trailers or other recreational vehicles and any commercial
vehicle with three or more axles and a gross weight exceeding six thousand pounds.
(Ord. No. 3623, § 6.)

5.

No changes, deletions or additions shall be made to the above stated covenants, conditions and restrictions without
approval of the city council.

(Ord. No. 2789 § 1.)

Sec. .320. - "A-P" administrative and professional o ce district intent and purpose.
The administrative and professional office district is intended to provide for the establishment of an integrated medical and professional
district wherein all of the related types of uses and facilities may be located. Multiple family residential structures are permitted in this
district.
The following regulations shall apply in the "A-P" administrative and professional district.
Sec. .321. - Uses permitted.
No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged except for the
following purposes:
A.

RESIDENTIAL USES
1.

Residential use permitted in the "R-2" district subject to the property development standards listed for the uses in
the district in which said uses are first permitted and subject to all other conditions set forth in said district.
Multiple-family residential complexes shall comply with the development and operational standards contained in
Section .5809-17;

(Ord. No. 3385, § 10; Ord. No. 3879, § 5.)

2.

Residential buildings may be used for existing purposes or converted to more intensive residential uses subject to
the property development standards of the "R-2" district when said structures are brought up to all codes and
regulations of the city.

(Ord. No. 3385, § 11.)

3.

Roominghouse, as defined in Section .062, subject to the granting of a Conditional Use Permit.

(Ord. No. 4051, § 6.)

B.

NONRESIDENTIAL USES

Nonresidential uses permitted in this district may be located in an existing residential structure, existing at the time of adoption
of this ordinance, remodeled for said uses and conforming to the minimum standards required by state law and city ordinance.
When residential and nonresidential uses are located within the same building, no expansion beyond the exterior walls of said
building shall be permitted, nor shall additional stories be added, nor shall any separate structure be erected on the same lot.
Nonresidential uses permitted in this district shall, in all other instances, be located in entirely new buildings designed and
constructed for said uses, except, however, whenever buildings, designed for residential uses, have been converted entirely to
nonresidential uses permitted in the "A-P" district, such buildings may be enlarged, providing that all provisions of this ordinance
and other state and city ordinances are complied with.
1.
2.

Administrative and professional offices.

Exhibit halls for commercial and industrial exhibits provided, however, that there be no sale of stock or material from the
floor and provided further, that there be no warehousing or storage either within or on the premises. (Ord. No. 4114, §
3.)
3.

4.

Biological and medical laboratories.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the applicable
61/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

development standards of this zone except as follows:
a.

The minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet.

b.

The side and rear yards may be used for off-street parking, subject to the design and landscaping requirements of
Sections .503-H and .503-J.

(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

5.

Commercial facilities related and incidental to the uses permitted; provided, however, that there be no display or
advertising other than that specifically permitted in Section .503-J-9.

6.

General research not involving the manufacture, fabrication, processing, or sale or projects, either on or off the
premises, providing such research is not obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
noise or other similar causes.

7.

Photographers' studios.

8.

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14

9.

And such other uses as the Planning Manager may determine to be similar and consistent with the adopted specific
plan. The decision of the Planning Manager shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .501A.

(Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4; Ord. No. 3971, § 10.)

C.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3633.

(Ord. No. 2123, § 5; Ord. No. 2360, § 6.)

Sec. .322. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Outdoor advertising.

B.

Commercial uses not specifically listed in Section .321.

C.

Industrial uses.

D.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an addition to any site-built structure.

E.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as accessory living quarters.

(Ord. No. 3070, § 30.)

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 15.)

Sec. .323. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "A-P" district; provided, however, that when
a lot has an area, width or depth less than that required in this district, and was held under separate ownership, or was of record on the
effective date of this ordinance, such lot may be occupied by the uses permitted in Section .321, subject to the provisions below.
A.

LOT AREA

Same as "R-4."
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS

Same as "R-4."
C.

D.

POPULATION DENSITY
1.

When used for residential purposes, same as "R-4."

2.

When used for "A-P" purposes, see Section .321B for existing residences.

YARDS

Same as "R-4" district.
E.

COVERAGE

62/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Same as "R-4."
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

Same as "R-4."
G.

H.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
1.

When used for residential purposes, same as "R-4."

2.

When used for "A-P" purposes, no requirements.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district. (Ord. No. 2498, § 6; Ord. No. 3385, § 12)
2.

When used for A-P purposes, there shall be at least one off- street parking space for every two hundred square feet
of gross floor area or fraction thereof in any building or structure erected or converted within the district.

3.

A six-foot-high solid decorative masonry wall shall be erected along side and/or rear property lines where parking
facilities on a lot in the "A-P" district are provided and where said lot abuts a residential district or use; provided,
however, that said wall shall be reduced to not more than three feet in height in any required front yard. This
requirement of masonry walls shall be waived when written consent is obtained from an adjoining property owner
or adjoining property owners, provided such adjoining property is located within the "A-P" district. (Ord. No. 2535, §
1.)

For definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional regulations pertaining to walls and fences in the A-P zone, see Sec.
.503-I of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 4118, § 6.)

I.

FENCES AND WALLS

For definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional regulations pertaining to walls and fences in the A-P zone, see Sec.
.503-I of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 4118, § 6.)

4.

When a building is used both for an A-P use and residential use, the appropriate parking standards shall apply
separately to each use.

(Ord. No. 2535, § 2.)

J.

ACCESS

There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property
requiring off-street parking. There shall be no vehicular access to residential property from major to secondary highways as shown
on the master plan excepting in cases where lots were of record on the effective date of this ordinance and such access cannot be
provided by way of an alley or service road.
K.

LOADING

Required only for nonresidential uses. For details, see Section .503-L-1, and 2-(a) and (d).
M.

PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE, LENGTH AND THICKNESS OF MARQUEES
1.

Projection and clearance. The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line shall be not less than two
feet. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be
less than twelve feet above the ground or pavement below. A marquee projecting less than two- thirds of the
distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be less than eight feet above tile ground or pavement
below.

2.

Length. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not
exceed twenty-five feet in length along the direction of the street.

3.

Height. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall
not exceed three feet. No sign, light, or decoration shall be attached to or placed upon a marquee except as follows:
63/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(a) A sign stating the name of major use of the building may be suspended below a marquee supported by such
building not more than eighteen inches, provided the sign is not less than eight feet above the grade of the sidewalk
below, and further provided that the length of the sign is erected perpendicular to the wall of the building and
projects over public property not more than six feet nor more than the projection of the marquee when the
marquee projects less than six feet over public property. Such signs shall have a maximum width of not more than
eighteen inches measured parallel with the face of the building, and such signs and marquees shall have a
combined vertical height or thickness of not more than three feet. The maximum area of any such sign shall be not
more than nine square feet.
(b)

A marquee sign, light or decoration in all cases shall be erected with a clearance of eight feet or more above
the sidewalk.

(Ord. No. 2169, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

Sec. .324. - Other requirements.
1.

Landscaping. When used for "A-P" purposes, the front yard shall be landscaped with an appropriate landscape material. Said
yard shall be maintained.

2.

Architectural standards. When used for "A-P" purposes, additions and accessory structures shall be similar in design and
materials to the main building.

3.

Roofing Materials. When used for "A-P" purposes, roofing materials for all buildings shall include:
(a)

Woodshake

(b)

Wood shingle

(c)

Composition asphalt shingle

(d)

Tile/tile-like material

(e)

Rock

(f)

Other similar materials as determined appropriate by the Planning Manager

(g)

Materials not deemed appropriate by the Planning Manager may be permitted subject to approval of a conditional use
permit by the Planning Commission.

4.

Siding Material. Siding materials shall include one or more of the following:
(a)

Wood

(b)

Stucco

(c)

Masonry

(d)

Textured metal siding, with the exception of reflective materials

(e)

Siding materials shall extend from the eaves to the permanent foundation

(f)

Other similar materials as determined appropriate by the Planning Manager

(g)

Materials not deemed appropriate by the Planning Manager may be permitted subject to approval of a conditional use
permit by the Planning Commission.

5.

Grade Siting. Floor elevations shall be located as close to the lot grade level as possible, consistent with grading practice as
specified in the Uniform Building Code.

6.

Foundation. All foundations shall be consistent with requirements of Chapter 29 of the Uniform Building Code.

7.

A list of all exterior building materials shall be submitted with building plans for approval by the City Planner.

(Ord. No. 3988, § 10.)

Secs. .330 to .334. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .340. - "C-1" Neighborhood stores and services commercial district intent and purpose.

64/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The "C-1" district is intended to serve a small neighborhood area needs for limited convenience goods and services only. The stores and
services are intended to fit into the residential pattern of development and not create either architectural or traffic conflicts. The following
regulations are intended to protect the residential environment and shall apply to all uses in the "C-1" neighborhood stores and services
district.
(Ord. No. 1898, § 1.)

Sec. .341. - Uses permitted.
No existing residential structure in this district may be converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that
existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at
the same time.
All sales or storage shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the building regulations of the
city.
Plans and elevations of all buildings shall be based on conformity of buildings to neighborhood environment.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

Retail stores.
1.

Drugstore

2.

Grocery, fruit and vegetable store

3.

Meat market or delicatessen store

4.

Confectionery store, including fountain

5.

Retail tobacco stores as defined by, and subject to, the requirements of Section .5809-21

(Ord. No. 4025, § 3.)

B.

Offices.
1.

C.

Offices, business and professional

Services.
1.

Barber and beauty shops

2.

Clothes cleaning pickup agencies with incidental pressing

3.

Self-service laundries

4.

Dress making or millinery shop

5.

Automobile service stations. (Subject to the obtaining of a conditional use permit in compliance with development
standards, conditions and restrictions set forth in Section .5804 of this ordinance.)

(Ord. No. 2236, § 1; Ord. No. 2497, § 1.)

6.

Shoe repair store

7.

Tailor shop

8.

Alcoholic off-sale establishments, in conjunction with bona fide grocery stores, subject to a conditional use permit
(See Section .5809-4). No on-sale alcoholic establishment shall be permitted.

(Ord. No. 2120, § 1; Ord. No. 3155, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3335 § 2, 1986.)

9.

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14

(Ord. No. 3971, § 11.)

D.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the development
standards of this zone except that the minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)
E.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and other amusements.
65/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

F.

And such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar to those listed above and which are related to the conv
purchasing normally supporting a neighborhood store. Such a use shall not be obnoxious to surrounding property nor be s
in a less restrictive district. The decision of the city planner shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section

(Ord. No. 1898, § 2; Ord. No. 2123, § 6; Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

An existing one family dwelling in this district may be enlarged; see Section 554-E. No existing residential structure in this district may be
converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such
existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time.
(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .342. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Residential uses.

B.

Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses on a lot, parcel of land or in any structure thereon.

C.

Commercial uses expressly listed in a less restrictive district.

D.

Industrial uses.

E.

Public address systems and/or loudspeakers outside of any, buildings.

F.

Expressly prohibited for gasoline service stations:
a.

Automobile painting

b.

Steam cleaning

c.

Repairing, replacing or overhauling of engines, motors, transmissions, driving mechanisms, steering mechanisms,
differential assemblies or any other major automobile part or parts.

d.

Brake drum turning

e.

Body and fender work of any kind

f.

Tire rebuilding or recapping

g.

Conducting any type of rental business

h.

Grease pits.

i.

Any other service station uses which in the opinion of the planning commission are more obnoxious or detrimental to
the welfare of the particular community than the uses herein enumerated in this section.

(Ord. No. 1898, § 3.)

G.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 16.)

Sec. .343. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "C-1" district.
A.

LOT AREA

No requirements.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

Width:

None.
One hundred ten feet-minimum.
C.

D.

POPULATION DENSITY
1.

No dwellings are permitted in this district.

2.

For existing dwellings see Section .341.

YARDS
66/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

1.

Front:
(a)

Each lot shall have a front yard, extending for the full width of the lot, and not less than that required for the
residential district abutting the "C-1" district.

(b)

Where the residential districts on each side are different the most restrictive front yard requirement shall
apply. For corner lots, the yards in residential districts on each side of the "C-1" lot shall determine the yard on
the "C-1" lot which is in the plane of the continuation of the residential frontage. Where the "C-1" district is
bounded by streets, the front yard shall be the same as for the least restrictive adjacent residential district.

2.

Side:
(a)

Where the "C-1" district abuts a residential district there shall be a side yard on the "C-1" lot on the side
abutting the "R" district of not less than ten feet.

(b)

The required side yard may be used for off-street parking or for access to off-street parking provided the walls
required in Section .503-I are erected. In other cases said side yard shall be landscaped and maintained as a
buffer between the commercial residential uses.

No items stored in the required side yard shall be stacked, piled or otherwise placed in such a manner as to be greater
in height than the required masonry wall.
3.

Rear:
(a)

E.

Same as side yard above.

COVERAGE

The maximum coverage of the lot by buildings or structures shall not exceed thirty-three percent of the total lot area, including
easements. In calculating lot area one-half of the width of all abutting alleys may be included in the "C-1" district.
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than one story or twenty feet. For roof structures and
hillside property exceptions, see Section .503-F.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

No requirements.
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 3385, § 13.)

I.

WALLS

A six foot high decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or district boundary line to separate the "C-1"
district and/or uses from abutting residential districts.
For details, definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the C-1 zone,
see Section .503-I. (Ord. No. 4118, § 7.)
J.

ACCESS

There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property
requiring off-street parking. There shall be adequate vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street, service road or alley the
design of which shall be approved by the city engineer to withstand commercial usage.
K.

LOADING

Every commercial building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space. For details, see Section .503L-1, and 2.
L.

MINIMUM SIZE OF BUILDING

No requirements.
67/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

M.

N.

MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SIZE OF DISTRICT (area and dimensions)
1.

Minimum area, one-half acre.

2.

Maximum area, two acres.

3.

Minimum width, one hundred feet.

4.

Minimum depth, one hundred ten feet.

FREQUENCY OF DISTRICT

No neighborhood stores district should be closer than one-half mile from any other commercial district.
O.

PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE, LENGTH AND THICKNESS OF MARQUEES
1.

Projection and Clearance. The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line shall be not less than two
feet. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be
less than twelve feet above the ground or pavement below. A marquee projecting less than two-thirds of the
distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be less than eight feet above the ground or pavement
below.

2.

Length. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not
exceed twenty-five feet in length along the direction of the street.

3.

Height. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall
not exceed three feet. No sign, light, or decoration shall be attached to or placed upon a marquee except as follows:
(a) A sign stating the name of major use of the building may be suspended below a marquee supported by such
building not more than eighteen inches, provided the sign is not less than eight feet above the grade of the sidewalk
below, and further provided that the length of the sign is erected perpendicular to the wall of the building and
projects over public property not more than six feet nor more than the projection of the marquee when the
marquee projects less than six feet over public property. Such signs shall have a maximum width of not more than
eighteen inches measured parallel with the face of the building, and such signs and marquees shall have a
combined vertical height or thickness of not more than three feet. The maximum area of any such sign shall be not
more than nine square feet. (b) A marquee sign, light or decoration in all cases shall be erected with a clearance of
eight feet or more above the sidewalk.

(Ord. No. 2169, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

P.

TRASH FACILITIES. See Section .503-C.

(Ord. No. 3651, § 2; Ord. No. 3737, § 2.)

Q.

ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS. Additions and accessory structures shall be similar in design and materials with the main
building.
1.

Roofing Materials. Roofing materials for all buildings shall include:
(a)

Woodshake

(b)

Wood shingle

(c)

Composition asphalt shingle

(d)

Tile/tile-like material

(e)

Rock

(f)

Other similar materials as determined appropriate by the Planning Manager

(g)

Materials not deemed appropriate by the Planning Manager may be permitted subject to approval of a
conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

2.

Siding Material. Siding materials shall include one or more of the following:
(a)

Wood

(b)

Stucco

(c)

Masonry

(d)

Textured metal siding, with the exception of reflective materials
68/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(e)

Siding materials shall extend from the eaves to the permanent foundation

(f)

Other similar materials as determined appropriate by the Planning Manager

(g)

Materials not deemed appropriate by the Planning Manager may be permitted subject to approval of a
conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

3.

Grade Siting. Floor elevations shall be located as close to the lot grade level as possible, consistent with grading
practice as specified in the Uniform Building Code.

4.

Foundation. All foundations shall be consistent with requirements of Chapter 29 of the Uniform Building Code.

5.

A list of all exterior building materials shall be submitted with building plans for approval by the City Planner.

(Ord. No. 3988, § 11.)

Sec. .344. - Zoning review.
For failure to conform to requirements establishing district, see Section .505-A.
Sec. .350. - "C-2" neighborhood shopping center commercial district intent and purpose.
The "C-2" district is intended to serve as a shopping center for the convenience needs of a neighborhood area composed of a minimum
of one thousand and a maximum of twenty-five hundred families. The size of the center is proposed to be directly related to the quantity of
purchasing power available for the support of those stores that are permitted in this district. The following regulations shall apply in the "C-2"
neighborhood shopping center district.
Sec. .351. - Uses permitted.
No existing residential structure in this district may be converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that
existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at
the same time. All sales and storage shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the building
regulations of the city, excepting, however, that certain outdoor commercial developments such as plant nurseries and eating pavilions may
be permitted when site plans for said developments and the relationships to the total plan for the shopping district have been submitted to
and have been approved by the city planner.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

"C-1" DISTRICT USES

Those uses permitted in the "C-1" district.
B.

RETAIL STORES
0.

Auto parts and accessories (retail sales of new materials only).

1.

Bakery (employing not more than five persons and all goods sold on the premises).

2.

Book or stationery store; except adult bookstores, see Sec. 391A6.

3.

Dairy products store.

4.

Drugstore.

5.

Egg and poultry store (no slaughtering, evisceration, plucking or dressing).

6.

Florist shop.

7.

Gift shop.

8.

Hardware store.

9.

Hobby supply store.

(Ord. No. 1627, § 1.)

(Ord. No. 2846, § 2.)

69/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

10.

Jewelry store.

11.

Alcoholic off-sale establishments, in conjunction with bona fide grocery stores, subject to Conditional Use Permit
(see Section .5809-4). No on-sale alcoholic establishments shall be permitted.

12.
12a.

Locksmith.
*Mail order store (merchandise may be displayed but no warehousing permitted).

(Ord. No. 1627, § 1.)

13.

Meat, fish and seafood store.

14.

Newsstand.

15.

Packaged ice saleshouse (limited to five-ton capacity).

16.

Phonographic equipment and record store.

17.

Plant nursery (commercial greenhouse of not more than one thousand square feet, fertilizer stored in bags).

18.

Supermarket (seventy-five percent of total sales must consist of foods, beverages and drugs).

19.

Variety store.

20.

Wearing apparel or clothing store.

21.

Yardage or notions store.

22.

Paint and wallpaper store.

23.

Photography and camera shop.

24.

Radio and television stores and repairs.

25.

Retail tobacco stores as defined by, and subject to, the requirements of Section .5809-21

26.

Toy store.

(Ord. No. 4025, § 4.)

(Ord. No. 1529, § 4; Ord. No. 1572, § 1.)

27.

Furniture store.

(Ord. No. 2131, § 1.)

C.

OFFICES
1.

Offices, business and professional (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not
commercially created, exchanged, or sold).

2.
D.

Automobile parking lots.

SERVICES
1.

Automobile service stations. (Subject to the obtaining of a conditional use permit and in compliance with
development standards, conditions and restrictions set forth in Section .5804 of this ordinance.)

(Ord. No. 2236, § 2; Ord. No. 2497, § 2.)

2.

Children's dancing school.

3.

Dry cleaning establishment (using not more than one clothes cleaning unit, which shall have a rated capacity not in
excess of forty pounds; using cleaning fluids which are nonexplosive and noninflammable).

4.

Pressing, altering and repairing of wearing apparel.

5.

Restaurant (including drive-through fast food or take-out facilities), tearoom, or cafe; provided, that no dancing,
theatrical performance or entertainment of any nature be maintained or permitted therein, or in connection
therewith, and no liquor or alcoholic beverages shall be sold on the premises. Drive-throughs shall be limited to a
single lane and shall require submittal of a Traffic Impact Study prepared by a registered traffic engineer.

(Ord. No. 3698, § 4.)

6.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the
development standards of this zone except that the minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)
7.

Public utility substation (distribution only) subject to obtaining a public use permit.

8.

Banking institutions.
70/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 1529, § 4; Ord. No. 1572, § 1.)

9.

Reducing salon.

(Reso. No. 1336, 1-13-60.)

10.

Cleaning establishments of a self-service type using only automatic machines with nonflammable cleaning fluids.

11.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3629.

12.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 4114.

(Ord. No. 1807, § 1.)

(Ord. No. 2099, § 1.)

And such other uses as the city planner determine to be similar to those listed above and which are related to the
convenience level of purchasing normally supporting neighborhood shopping centers. The decision of the city planner shall be
final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .501-A.
(Ord. No. 1529, § 4; Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3373, § 1.)

An existing one family dwelling in this district may be enlarged; see Section 554-E. No existing residential structure in this district may be
converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such
existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time. All sales and storage shall be conducted
within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the building regulations of the city, excepting, however, that certain outdoor
commercial developments such as plant nurseries and eating pavilions may be permitted when site plans for said developments and the
relationships to the total plan for the shopping district have been submitted to and have been approved by the city planner.
(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

Sec. .352. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Residential uses.

B.

Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses on a lot, parcel of land or in any structure thereon.

C.

Commercial uses expressly listed in a less restrictive district.

D.

Industrial uses.

E.

Public address systems and/or loud-speakers outside of any buildings.

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 17.)

Sec. .353. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "C-2" district.
A.

LOT AREA

No requirement.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

Width:

None.
2.

Depth:

None.
C.

D.

POPULATION DENSITY
1.

No dwellings are permitted in this district.

2.

For existing dwellings, see Section .351.

YARDS
71/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Same as "C-1" district.
E.

COVERAGE

Same as "C-1" district.
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two stories or forty feet. For roof structure and
hillside property exceptions, see Section .503-F.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

No requirements.
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. 1572, § 2: Ord. No. 3385, § 14.)

I.

WALLS

A six-foot-high decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or district boundary line to separate the "C-2"
district and/or uses from abutting residential districts. For details, definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional
requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the C-2 zone, see Section .503-I. (Ord. No. 4118, § 8.)
J.

ACCESS

Requirements same as "C-1" district.
K.

LOADING

Every commercial building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space. For details see Section .503-L1, and 2.
L.

MINIMUM SIZE OF BUILDING

No requirements.
M.

MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SIZE OF DISTRICT
1.

Minimum area ( Two acres.

2.

Minimum width ( none.

3.

Minimum depth ( none.

(Ord. No. 1531, § 1.)

N.

FREQUENCY OF DISTRICT

The location of "C-2" districts shall be determined by studies of the purchasing power available to support the uses permitted in
the district. Said districts should not, however, be closer than one mile from any other "C-2" district already established. A "C-2"
district may, however, be established abutting or as an expansion of any commercial district other than a "C-1" district or a "C-2"
district.
O.

PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE, LENGTH AND THICKNESS OF MARQUEES.
1.

Projection and Clearance. The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line shall be not less than two
feet. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be
less than twelve feet above the ground or pavement below. A marquee projecting less than two- thirds of the
distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be less than eight feet above the ground or pavement
below.

2.

Length. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not
exceed twenty-five feet in length along the direction of the street.

3.

Height. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall
72/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

not exceed three feet. No sign, light, or decoration shall be attached to or placed upon a marquee except as follows:
(a) A sign stating the name of major use of the building may be suspended below a marquee supported by such
building not more than eighteen inches, provided the sign is not less than eight feet above the grade of the sidewalk
below, and further provided that the length of the sign is erected perpendicular to the wall of the building and
projects over public property not more than six feet nor more than the projection of the marquee when the
marquee projects less than six feet over public property. Such signs shall have a maximum width of not more than
eighteen inches measured parallel with the face of the building, and such signs and marquees shall have a
combined vertical height or thickness of not more than three feet. The maximum area of any such sign shall be not
more than nine square feet. (b) A marquee sign, light or decoration in all cases shall be erected with a clearance of
eight feet or more above the sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 2169, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

P.

Trash Facilities. Each such lot shall be provided with facilities for the storage and collection of trash as follows:
1.

The trash area shall be enclosed by a five-foot high solid masonry, brick or concrete wall except for access way
which shall be enclosed with solid decorative gates of the same height.

2.

There shall be at least one trash facility for every commercial or industrial lot. More may be required subject to
approval by planner.

3.

Location shall be subject to approval by the planner.

4.

Trash areas shall be maintained in a closed manner at all times to prohibit visibility from public right-of-way or
adjacent property.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, all existing uses, buildings and structures in this zone, which do not conform to this
section shall provide a fully enclosed trash enclosure within twelve months of the effective date of this section unless providing such trash
enclosure will eliminate any existing required off-street parking spaces.
(Ord. No. 3651, § 3.)

Sec. .354. - Other conditions to use.
For establishing new districts, see Section .504-C.
Sec. .355. - Failure to conform to requirements establishing district.
For failure to conform to requirements establishing district, see Section .505-B.
Sec. .360. - "C-3" general commercial district intent and purpose.
The "C-3" districts are intended to serve as the central trading areas of the city. The facilities provided for here as those that cannot and
should not be dispersed into the smaller, more intimate shopping areas.
The following regulations shall apply in the "C-3" general commercial district.
Sec. .361. - Uses permitted.
An existing residential building may be converted to commercial uses or may be used partly for residential and partly for commercial
uses providing such building complies with all requirements of the department of building and safety; however, when a building is used for
residential purposes, no commercial expansion shall be permitted beyond the existing exterior walls of said building, nor may any additional
height be added to said building. When any residential building is used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time, no
residential addition may be made to said building.
Any building used partially for residential and nonresidential uses shall have yards immediately surrounding the main building designed
for residential uses and shall not be used for a storage area or a place for parking of vehicles. These yards shall have the following
dimensions:

73/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Single family home:

Front yard, twenty- ve feet;
Side yard, ve feet;
Rear yard, twenty- ve feet.

Multi-family home

Front yard, fteen feet;
Side yard, ve feet;
Rear yard, fteen feet.

(Ord. No. 2478, § 1.)

Except as provided above, no building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected,
structurally altered or enlarged except for the following purposes:
A.

Those uses permitted in the "C-2" district.

B.

RETAIL STORES
1.

Advertising signs and structures.

2.

Antique shops.

3.

Art shops.

4.

Automotive accessory and installation facility.

5.

Bakery, employing not more than ten persons.

6.

Bird stores.

7.

Blueprinting and photocopying establishments.

8.

Dancing academies.

9.

Department stores.

(Ord. No. 3660, § 19.)

16.

10.

Electrical appliance stores.

11.

Employment agencies.

12.

Feed and fuel stores (all within an entirely closed building devoted to retail sales only).

13.

Frozen food lockers (retail only).

14.

Furniture stores.

15.

(Repealed by Ord. No. 2626, § 1.)

(Repealed by Ordinance No. 4114.)
17.

Music, musical instruments, phonographic record store.

18.

Paint and wall paper stores.

19.

Pawnshops.

20.

Pet shops.

21.

Photographic supplies and processing.

22.

Photography and camera shops.

23.

Plumbing supply shops.

24.

Printing shops.

25.

Radio and television store and repair.
74/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

26.

Secondhand goods sold and stored in an enclosed building (no junk yards).

27.

Sporting goods store.

28.

Retail tobacco stores as defined by, and subject to, the requirements of Section .5809-21

29.

Toy store.

30.

Trunk and leather goods stores.

31.

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3878, § 2.)

(Ord. No. 4025, § 5.)

(Ord. No. 1529, § 5; Ord. No. 3714, § 4.)

C.

OFFICE, GROUND OR STORAGE SPACE

1.

Business colleges. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

D.

SERVICES
1.

Auction houses or stores.

2.

Banks and financial institutions.

3.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3629.

4.

Bowling alleys, skating rinks.

5.

Catering establishments.

6.

Cyber cafes as defined by, and subject to, the requirements of Section .5809-19.

(Ord. No. 4010, § 3 (part).)

7.

Dry cleaning establishments using not more than two clothes cleaning units, neither of which shall have a rated
capacity in excess of forty pounds, using cleaning fluid which is nonexplosive and noninflammable at a temperature
below one hundred thirty-eight and one-half degrees Fahrenheit.

8.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3254.

9.

Interior decorating store.

10.

Medical and dental laboratories.

11.

Theaters as defined in Section .062, except adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters and
adult motion picture peep shows, as defined in Sec. .391 A, 7, subject to approval of a conditional use permit as
provided for in Sec. .5809-3.

(Ord. No. 2846, § 3.)

12.

Music conservatories.

13.

Photographers.

14.

Public garages.

15.

Public utility substation (distribution only).

16.

Repair garages, including automobile and truck repair and painting or upholstering (conducted entirely within a
building).

17.

Studios (except motion picture).

18.

Super service stations. (Subject to the obtaining of a conditional use permit and in compliance with development
standards, conditions and restrictions set forth in Section .5804 of this ordinance.)

(Ord. No. 2497, § 3: Ord. No. 2565, § 2.)

19.

Taxidermist.

20.

Tire sales and service.

21.

Trade schools (if not objectionable due to noise, lights, odor, vibration, or dust).

22.

Upholstery shop.

23.

Wedding chapels.

(Ord. No. 4010, § 3 (part).)

75/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

E.

Outdoor advertising subject to conditions set forth in Sections .503-J-(1) and (6).

F.

Subject to conditional use permit (see Section .580),
1.

Rest homes.

2.

Dance halls.

3.

Alcoholic off-sale establishments, subject to a conditional use permit; on-sale establishments in conjunction with
bona fide restaurants, subject to a conditional use permit (See Section .5804-4).

(Ord. No. 2626, § 2; Ord. No. 3335, § 4.)

4.

Skill game centers.

5.

Hotels, motels and apartment hotels subject to the requirements of Section .5809-10.

6.

Automobile Repair Facility. Any such facility or use shall require a conditional use permit. Such facility or use shall

(Ord. No. 2731, § 2.)

(Ord. No. 3254, § 3.)

be subject to the following development standards:
a.

The minimum lot width of an automobile repair facility shall be not less than one hundred feet;

b.

The minimum lot area shall be not less than ten thousand square feet;

c.

Automotive uses shall provide adequate vehicular circulation so as not to create traffic problems;

d.

All work shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building;

e.

All structures shall be sufficiently soundproofed to prevent annoyance or detriment to surrounding properties;

f.

All damaged or wrecked vehicles awaiting repair shall be effectively screened from view from any public street
or highway or adjoining properties by a six foot high wall that shall be constructed of decorative masonry or
other opaque material approved by the city planner;

g.

All activities as described herein shall be confined to the hours between seven a.m. and nine p.m. daily;

h.

Any artificial light shall be designed to reflect away from adjoining properties;

i.

Unless authorized otherwise by a conditional use permit, a reinforced masonry wall six feet in height shall be
maintained along the exterior boundaries of the business, excluding the front yard setback area, those
locations approved for ingress and egress, and areas abutting a street other than an alley;

j.

No damaged or wrecked vehicles shall be stored for purposes other than repair;

k.

Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance;

l.

No vehicles may be stored at the site for purposes of sale (unless the use is also a vehicle sales lot);

m.

Public address systems shall not be allowed if the facility is within five hundred feet of a residential area;

n.

All standard city landscaping and irrigation requirements for parking area must be met;

o.

If applicable, prior to issuing building permits, the applicant shall return to the city planner a hazardous
materials underground storage site assessment/remedial action plan closure certification from the Los
Angeles County Department of Public Works Industrial Waste Planning and Control Waste Management
Division. A copy is to be placed in the building permit packet;

p.

All proposed automotive buildings shall not have bay doors facing a public street unless the alternative is
facing a residential use;

q.

No residential use shall be maintained on the same site with an automobile repair facility;

r.

A valid registration with the California Bureau of Automotive Repair is required for any business that performs,
for compensation, repairs to, maintenance of, or diagnosis of malfunction of any of the following automotive
or motorcycle components:

Air conditioner
Body and frame
Brakes
76/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Clutch
Drive train assembly
Electrical system
Engine
Suspension
Transmission
Steering gear
Exhaust system
Fuel system
Heater system
Glass components
Other automotive or motorcycle components
Auto repair businesses not required to register include:
A business that services only vehicles other than passenger vehicles.
A fleet owner repairing only fleet vehicles.
A business that performs only minor maintenance service to motor vehicles. Minor maintenance includes:
Batteries
Fan belts
Light bulbs
Lubrication
Oil and air filters
Tires (repair and change)
Windshield wiper blades
Other minor accessories
s.

In granting a conditional use permit, the planning commission may impose any other reasonable conditions
that are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including an expiration date for
the conditional use permit.

(Ord. No. 3660, § 20, 21.)

7.

In-patient drug abuse treatment facility.

8.

Used car lots, subject to the development and operational standards contained in Section .5809-16.

(Ord. No. 3704, § 3.)

(Ord. No. 3878, § 3.)

9.

Banquet halls, pursuant to Section. 062, subject to the development standards of this zone except that the minimum site
area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

10.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the development standards of this zone except that the
minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)
77/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

G.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and other amusements subject to a public use permit, Section .581.

(Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part).)

H.

And such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar to those listed above. Such uses shall not include
those specifically listed in a less restricted district. The decision of the city planner shall be final unless a written appeal is
filed pursuant to Section .501-A.

(Ord. No. 1529, § 5; Ord. No. 1561, § 2; Ord. No. 2517, § 1; Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3708, § 2; Ord. No. 3713, § 4; Ord. No. 3723, §
3.)

An existing one family dwelling in this district may be enlarged; see Section 554-E. An existing residential building may be converted to
commercial uses or may be used partly for residential and partly for commercial uses providing such building complies with all requirements
of the department of building and safety; however, when a building is used for residential purposes, no commercial expansion shall be
permitted beyond the existing exterior walls of said building, nor may any additional height be added to said building.
When any residential building is used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time, no residential addition may be
made to said building.
Any building used partially for residential and nonresidential uses shall have yards immediately surrounding the main building designed
for residential uses and shall not be used for a storage area or a place for parking of vehicles. These yards shall have the following
dimensions:
Single family home:
Front yard, twenty-five feet;
Side yard, five feet;
Rear yard, twenty-five feet;
Multi-family home:
Front yard, fifteen feet;
Side yard, five feet;
Rear yard, fifteen feet.
(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .362. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Residential uses, except as provided for in Section .361.

B.

Commercial uses expressly listed in a less restrictive district.

C.

Industrial uses.

D.

Outside sales.

No display, sales or storage of merchandise shall be conducted unless within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity
with the building regulations of the city, except the following:
1.

Sale of vehicles and new accessories to vehicles.

2.

Plant nurseries.

3.

Outdoor eating facilities.

4.

Newsstands.

5.

Service stations and super service stations sales when specifically permitted by other provisions of this ordinance.

6.

Other new or used merchandise, provided that the first twenty-five feet of the particular site from any street frontage be
kept free and clear of any outdoor display, sales or storage, and provided that the outdoor display, sales or storage of
said merchandise shall not exceed a period of forty-eight hours for each permitted display, sales or storage period, and

78/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

further provided that each outdoor activity be conducted under a special commercial outdoor display, sales or storage
permit issued by the city clerk and approved by the city planner. The number of such special outdoor display, sales or
storage permits issued for each business shall be limited to four per calendar year.
(Ord. No. 2324, § 2; Ord. No. 2741, § 1; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

E.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 18.)

Sec. .363. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "C-3" district.
A.

LOT AREA

No requirements.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS

Minimum lot depth: None.
C.

POPULATION DENSITY
1.

D.

No dwellings permitted in this district, except as provided for in Section .361.

YARDS
1.

Commercial:

None required except for loading.
(Ord. No. 3708, § 3.)

E.

COVERAGE

The maximum lot coverage shall not be greater than fifty percent; provided, however, that where the required parking for a use
is provided by the owner within five hundred feet of the use requiring said parking, the coverage may be increased to one hundred
percent of the lot area. Lot coverage may also be increased to one hundred percent for buildings up to two stories, not including any
basement or mezzanine areas, provided said lot is located within a Vehicle Parking District; required parking for those stories in
excess of two must be provided on-site or, off-site within five hundred feet or within a Vehicle Parking District lot.
(Ord. No. 3711, § 2.)

F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two (2) stories or forty (40) feet. For roof
structures and hillside property exceptions, see Section .503-F.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

No requirements except when a residency is located on a lot: see yards.
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 3385, § 15.)

I.

WALLS

A six foot high decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or district boundary line to separate the "C-3"
district and/or uses from abutting residential districts. For details, definition of "decorative masonry wall," and additional
requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the C-3 zone, see Section .503-I. (Ord. No. 4118, § 9.)
J.

ACCESS

Requirements same as "C-2" district.
K.

LOADING
79/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Every commercial building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space. For details, see Sections .503L-1, and 2.
L.

PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE, LENGTH AND THICKNESS OF MARQUEES
1.

Projection and Clearance. The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line shall be not less than two
feet. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be
less than twelve feet above the ground or pavement below. A marquee projecting less than two-thirds of the
distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be less than eight feet above the ground or pavement
below.

2.

Length. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not
exceed twenty-five feet in length along the direction of the street.

3.

Height. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall
not exceed three feet. No sign, light, or decoration shall be attached to or placed upon a marquee except as follows:
(a) A sign stating the name of major use of the building may be suspended below a marquee supported by such
building not more than eighteen inches, provided the sign is not less than eight feet above the grade of the sidewalk
below, and further provided that the length of the sign is erected perpendicular to the wall of the building and
projects over public property not more than six feet nor more than the projection of the marquee when the
marquee projects less than six feet over public property. Such signs shall have a maximum width of not more than
eighteen inches measured parallel with the face of the building, and such signs and marquees shall have a
combined vertical height or thickness of not more than three feet. The maximum area of any such sign shall be not
more than nine square feet. (b) A marquee sign, light or decoration in all cases shall be erected with a clearance of
eight feet or more above the sidewalk.

(Ord. No. 2169, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3529, § 1; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

M.

TRASH FACILITIES. See Section .503-C.

(Ord. No. 3651, § 4; Ord. No. 3737, § 2.)

N.

ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS

Requirements same as "C-1" district.
(Ord. No. 3988, § 13.)

Sec. .365. - Community shopping center commercial district intent and purpose.
The "C-C" district is intended to serve as a shopping center that provides more goods and services than a neighborhood shopping center,
but less than a regional or downtown commercial development. This district permits both soft and hard line goods affording some depth and
comparison shopping, but not to include major department stores or branches.
(Ord. No. 1962, § 1.)

Sec. .366. - Uses permitted.
No existing residential structure in this district may be converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that
existing on the effective date of this ordinance, and no such existing building shall be used for both residential and non-residential purposes
at the same time. All sales and storage shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the building
regulations of the city, excepting, however, that certain outdoor commercial developments such as plant nurseries and eating pavilions may
be permitted when site plans for said developments and the relationships to the total plan for the shopping district have been submitted to
and have been approved by the commission.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

Those uses permitted in the "C-2" district.

B.

Retail stores.
80/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

1.

Art shops.

2.

Electrical appliance store.

3.

Floor covering stores.

4.

Furniture stores.

5.

Health food stores.

6.

Music, musical instruments, phonographic records and equipment.

7.

Pet shops.

8.

Photography, camera shops and studios.

9.

Sporting goods store.

10.

Retail tobacco stores as defined by, and subject to, the requirements of Section .5809-21

11.

Toy stores.

12.

Trunk and leather goods store.

(Ord. No. 4025, § 6.)

C.

Offices.
1.

Offices, business and professional (any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not
commercially created, exchanged, or sold).

D.

Services.
1.

Catering establishments.

2.

Cyber cafes as defined by, and subject to, the requirements of Section .5809-19.

(Ord. No. 4010, § 4 (part).)

3.

Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.

4.

Employment agencies.

5.

Interior decorating stores.

6.

Alcoholic off-sale establishments, subject to a conditional use permit; on-sale establishments in conjunction with
bona fide restaurants, subject to a conditional use permit (See Sections .5804-4).

(Ord. No. 2626, § 3; Ord. No. 3335, § 5.)

7.

Shoe repair.

8.

Studios and schools when related to uses permitted in the "C-C" district.

9.

Roller skating rinks subject to obtaining approval of a conditional use permit as provided in Section .580.

10.

Skill game centers, subject to obtaining approval of conditional use permits, as provided in Section .580.

(Ord. No. 2731, § 3; Ord. No. 4010, § 4 (part).)

11.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the
development standards of this zone except that the minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

E.

And such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar to those listed above and which are related to the
convenience level of purchasing normally supporting a community commercial shopping center. Such uses shall not be
obnoxious to surrounding property nor be specifically listed in a less restrictive district. The decision of the city planner
shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .501-A.

(Ord. No. 1962, § 1: Ord. No. 2571, § 1; Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

An existing one family dwelling in this district may be enlarged; see Section 554-E. No existing residential structure in this district may be
converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that existing on the effective date of this ordinance, and no such
existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time. All sales and storage shall be conducted
within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the building regulations of the city, excepting, however, that certain outdoor
commercial developments such as plant nurseries and eating pavilions may be permitted when site plans for said developments and the
relationships to the total plan for the shopping district have been approved by the commission.

81/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .367. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Residential uses.

B.

Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses on a lot, parcel of land or in any structure thereon.

C.

Commercial uses expressly listed in a less restrictive district.

D.

Industrial uses.

E.

Public address systems and/or loud speakers outside of any buildings.

(Ord. No. 1962, § 1.)

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 19.)

Sec. .368. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "C-C" district:
A.

LOT AREA.

No requirement.
B.

C.

D.

LOT DIMENSIONS.
1.

Width: None.

2.

Depth: None.

POPULATION DENSITY.
1.

No dwellings are permitted in this district.

2.

For existing dwellings see Section .366.

YARDS.
1.

Front.
(a)

Each lot shall have a front yard extending for the full width of the lot abutting the street. Such yard shall have a
depth of not less than fifty feet, except that open canopies may have a front yard of not less than 10 feet
unless abutting a residential district or districts in which case the canopy shall have the same setback as the
most restrictive abutting residential district.

(b)

When a street is the boundary between a "C-C" district and an R-district, the open, canopy shall have the same
front yard setback as that required for the abutting residential district.

2.

Side.
(a)

For the side yards abutting the street side yard shall be the same as for the front yard.

(b)

Where the "C-C" district abuts a residential district and the boundary is not a street, there shall be a side yard
on the "C-C" lot on the side abutting the "R" district of not less than ten (10) feet.

(c)

The required side yard may be used for off-street parking or for access to off-street parking provided the walls
required in Section .503-1 are erected. In other cases said side yard shall be landscaped and maintained as a
buffer between the commercial and residential uses.

No items stored in the required side yard shall be stacked, piled or otherwise placed in such a manner as to be greater
in height than the required masonry wall.
3.

Rear.
(a)

E.

Same as side yard above.

COVERAGE

The maximum coverage of the lot by buildings or structures shall not exceed thirty-three (33%) percent of the total area
including easements.
82/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than two (2) stories or forty (40) feet. For roof
structures and hillside property exceptions, see Section .503-F.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

No requirements.
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 3385, § 16.)

I.

WALLS

A six foot high decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or district boundary line to separate the "C-C"
district and/or uses from abutting residential districts. For details, definition of "decorative masonry wall," and additional
requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the C-C zone, see Section .503-I. (Ord. No. 4118, § 10.)
J.

ACCESS

There shall be vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or alley to off-street parking facilities on the property
requiring off-street parking.
There shall be adequate vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street, service road or alley, the design of which shall
be approved by the City Engineer to withstand commercial usage.
K.

LOADING

Every commercial building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space as provided in Section .502-L1.
L.

MINIMUM SIZE OF BUILDING

No requirements.
M.

N.

MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM SIZE OF DISTRICT (AREA AND DIMENSIONS)
1.

Minimum area, five (5) acres.

2.

Maximum area, no requirement.

3.

Minimum width, none.

4.

Minimum depth, none.

FREQUENCY OF DISTRICT

No "C-C" district should be located closer than two miles to any other "C-C" district.
(Ord. No. 1962, § 1; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

O.

TRASH FACILITIES. See Section .503-C.

(Ord. No. 3651, § 5; Ord. No. 3737, § 2.)

P.

ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS

Requirements same as "C-1" district.
(Ord. No. 3988, § 14.)

Sec. .370. - "C-4" Highway commercial district intent and purpose.
Many uses in the commercial classification do not belong in either the neighborhood centers or the concentrated business districts.
These uses are provided for in the highway commercial district. The district may, therefore, serve many purposes, including the site for
neighborhood shops, the commercial center, and such uses as may properly belong in the city's other commercial centers.

83/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The following regulations shall apply in the "C-4" highway commercial district.
Sec. .371. - Uses permitted.
An existing residential building may be converted to commercial uses or may be used partly for residential and partly for commercial
uses providing such building complies with all requirements of the department of building and safety; however, when a building is used for
residential purposes, no commercial expansion shall be permitted beyond the existing walls of said building, nor shall any additional height
be added to said building.
When any residential building is used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time, no residential addition may be
made to said building.
In any building used partially for residential and nonresidential uses, no areas required for front, rear and side yards shall be used as a
storage area or a place for parking of vehicles.
Except as provided above, no building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected,
structurally altered, or enlarged except for the following purposes:
A.

Those uses permitted in the "C-3" district.

B.

Retail stores.

C.

1.

Bakery (employing not more than ten persons on the premises).

2.

Commercial greenhouse.

3.

Food distribution, when associated with retail sales. (Reso. No. 60-165, 5-31-60).

Services.
1.

Advertising signs and structures.

2.

Laundry and dry cleaning plant including cleaning and pressing using noninflammable and nonexplosive fluids, and
not employing more than ten persons on the premises.

3.

Refrigerated locker.

4.

Tinsmith.

5.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3254.

6.

Tire recapping (with provision that not less than fifty-one percent of the total dollar volume of sales be at retail to
the ultimate consumer.

7.

Wholesaling (with the provision that not less than fifty-one percent of the total dollar volume of sales be at retail to
the ultimate consumer), and warehousing (when in conjunction with a retail business).

8.

Service stations (subject to conditional use permit and the development standards of Section .5804, subsection E).

(Ord. No. 2236, § 3; Ord. No. 2394, § 3: Ord. No. 2497, § 4; Ord. No. 2533, § 1.)

D.

Subject to conditional use permit (see Section .580).
1.

Animal hospitals.

2.

Boxing arenas.

3.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs and other amusements.

4.

Dance halls.

5.

Drive-in theaters.

6.

Mortuaries and funeral parlors.

7.

Mechanical car wash.

8.

Service stations.

9.

Super service station. (In compliance with development standards, conditions and restrictions set forth in Section

(Ord. No. 1561, § 3.)

.5804 of this ordinance).
84/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

10.

Automatic service stations. (Subject to development standards of Section .5804, subsection E).

11.

Massages and/or baths, sauna and the like when they are an accessory use to an athletic club or association which
is facility offering a full range of physical fitness programs including, but not limited to, swimming, basketball,
handball and similar court games and weight lifting.

(Ord. No. 1674, § 4; Ord. No. 2533, § 2: Ord. No. 2565, § 3.)

12.

Skill game centers.

13.

Hotels, motels and apartment hotels subject to the granting of a conditional use permit per the requirements of

(Ord. No. 2731, § 4.)

Section .5809-10.
(Ord. No. 3254, § 5.)

14.

Alcoholic off-sale establishments, subject to a conditional use permit; on-sale establishments in conjunction with
bona fide restaurants, subject to a conditional use permit (See Section .5804-4).

(Ord. No. 3335, § 6.)

15.

Billiard or pool hall. (See Section .5809.7).

16.

In-patient drug abuse treatment facility.

17.

Self-storage facility (Subject to the development standards set forth in Section .5809-12).

18.

Used car lots, subject to the development and operational standards contained in Section .5809-16.

19.

Retail tobacco stores as defined by, and subject to, the requirements of Section .5809-21

20.

Tattoo establishments as defined by, and subject to, the requirements of Section .5809-22.

(Ord. No. 3629, § 2.)

(Ord. No. 3704, § 4.)

(Ord. No. 3756, § 3.)

(Ord. No. 3878, § 4.)

(Ord. No. 4025, § 7.)

(Ord. No. 4052, § 5.)

21.

Banquet halls, pursuant to Section. 062, subject to the development standards of this zone except that the minimum site
area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

22.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the development standards of this zone except that the
minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

E.

Any such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar to those listed above and which are related to
highway use or service. Such uses shall not be obnoxious to surrounding property or be specifically listed in a less
restrictive district. The decision of the city planner shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .501A.

(Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

An existing one family dwelling in this district may be enlarged; see Section 554-E. An existing residential building may be converted to
commercial uses or may be used partly for residential and partly for commercial uses providing such building complies with all requirements
of the department of building and safety; however, when a building is used for residential purposes, no commercial expansion shall be
permitted beyond the existing walls of said building, nor shall any additional height be added to said building.
When any residential building is used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time, no residential addition may be
made to said building.
In any building used partially for residential and nonresidential purposes uses, no areas required for front, rear and side yards shall be
used as a storage area or a place for parking of vehicles.
(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .372. - Uses expressly prohibited.
85/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

A.

Residential uses except as provided for in Section .371.

B.

Industrial uses.

C.

Outside sales.

No display, sales or storage of merchandise shall be conducted unless within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity
with the building regulations of the city, except the following:
1.

Sale of vehicles and new accessories to vehicles.

2.

Plant nurseries.

3.

Outdoor eating facilities.

4.

Newsstands.

5.

Service stations and super service stations sales when specifically permitted by other provisions of this ordinance.

6.

Other new or used merchandise, provided that the first twenty-five feet of the particular site from any street frontage be
kept free and clear of any outdoor display, sales or storage, and provided that the outdoor display, sales or storage of
said merchandise shall not exceed a period of forty-eight hours for each permitted display, sales or storage period, and
further provided that each outdoor activity be conducted under special commercial outdoor display, sales or storage
permit issued by the city clerk and approved by the city planner. The number of such special outdoor display, sales or
storage permits issued for each business shall be limited to four per calendar year.

D.

Theaters as defined in Section .062.

(Ord. No. 2466, § 3; Ord. No. 2741, § 2.)

E.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 20.)
(Ord. No. 2324, § 3; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

Sec. .373. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "C-4" district.
A.

LOT AREA.

No requirement.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS.
1.

Width:

No requirements.
2.

Depth:

Minimum depth, one hundred fifty feet.
C.

POPULATION DENSITY.
1.

D.

No dwellings permitted in this district, except as provided for in Section .371.

Yards.
1.

Commercial:

None required other than when a "C-4" district abuts a residential district.
Where a "C-4" district abuts a residential district the following yards shall be required.
(a)

Front yard:

There shall be a front yard for the full width of the lot or for the first fifty feet of frontage of the "C-4" lot adjacent to a
residential district. Said front yard shall be the same as that required for the abutting residential district.
(b)

Side yard:
86/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

There shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet on that side of the lot in the "C-4" district that abuts a residential
district. Said side yard may be used for parking or for access to parking as per Section. .503-H.
(c)

Rear yard:

Where a "C-4" district rears or sides upon a street which is the boundary between a "C-4" district and a residential
district, there shall be a six foot high masonry wall on the rear or side of the "C-4" property, said wall to be set back not less
than ten feet from the property line. The space between the property line and the wall shall be planted and maintained.
2.

Residential:

Yards shall be maintained for residential buildings even though said buildings and/or lots are used for residential and
nonresidential uses at the same time. Yard requirements shall be based on those minimum standards which first appear in this
zoning ordinance, e.g.: "R-1" district yard areas shall be required for single-family dwellings, "R-2" district yard areas shall be
required for two-family dwellings, etc. In no cases shall required yard areas stated above be used for nonresidential off-street
parking or open storage.
E.

COVERAGE

Same as "C-3"; provided, however, that the yard provisions of Section .373-D shall apply where abutting all residential districts.
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than six stories or seventy-five feet. For roof structures
and hillside property exceptions, see Section .503-F.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

No requirements, except when a residency is located on a lot: See yards.
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 3385, § 17.)

I.

WALLS

A six foot high decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or district boundary line to separate the "C-4"
district and/or uses from abutting residential districts. For details, definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional
requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the C-4 zone, see Section .503-I. (Ord. No. 4118, § 11.)
J.

ACCESS

Requirements same as "C-2" district.
K.

LOADING

Every commercial building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space. For details, see Sections .503L-1 and 2.
L.

PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE, LENGTH AND THICKNESS OF MARQUEES
(1)

Projection and clearance. The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line shall be not less than two
feet. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be
less than twelve feet above the ground or pavement below. A marquee projecting less than two-thirds of the
distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be less than eight feet above the ground or pavement
below.

(2)

Length. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not
exceed twenty-five feet in length along the direction of the street.

(3)

Height. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall
not exceed three feet. No sign, light, or decoration shall be attached to or placed upon a marquee except as follows:
(a) A sign stating the name of major use of the building may be suspended below a marquee supported by such
87/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

building not more than eighteen inches, provided the sign is not less than eight feet above the grade of the sidewalk
below, and further provided that the length of the sign is erected perpendicular to the wall of the building and
projects over public property not more than six feet nor more than the projection of the marquee when the
marquee projects less than six feet over public property. Such signs shall have a maximum width of not more than
eighteen inches measured parallel with the face of the building, and such signs and marquees shall have a
combined vertical height or thickness of not more than three feet. The maximum area of any such sign shall be not
more than nine square feet. (b) A marquee sign, light or decoration in all cases shall be erected with a clearance of
eight feet or more above the sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 2169, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

M.

TRASH FACILITIES. See Section .503-C.

(Ord. No. 3651, § 6; Ord. No. 3737, § 2.)

N.

ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS

Requirements same as "C-1" district.
(Ord. No. 3988, § 15.)

Sec. .380 to .383. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .390. - "C-IND" commercial and industrial district intent and purpose.
The "C-IND" commercial and industrial district is intended to provide for retail and wholesale sales, light manufacturing and warehousing
distributing and storage. And to provide a close relationship between warehousing, distribution and retail sales.
The following regulations shall apply in the "C-IND" commercial and industrial district.
Sec. .391. - Uses permitted.
No existing residential structure in this district may be converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that
existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at
the same time.
All sales, storage and manufacturing operations shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the
building regulations of the city.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

Commercial
1.

Restaurants. On-sale alcoholic establishments in conjunction with bona fide restaurants, subject to a conditional
use permit (See Section .5809-4). No off-sale alcoholic establishments shall be permitted.

(Ord. No. 3335, § 8.)

2.

Automobile service stations and super service stations. First revision of first five pages as directed by council on
August 26, 1986. (Subject to development standards, conditions and restrictions set forth in Section .5804 of this
ordinance.)

(Ord. No. 2236, § 4.)

3.

Drugstores.

4.

Grocery stores.

5.

Super markets.

6.

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3873, § 2 (part).)

7.

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3873, § 2 (part).)

8.

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3873, § 5.)
88/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

9.

Self-storage facility (Subject to the development standards set forth in Section .5809-12).

(Ord. No. 3756, § 4.)

B.

Offices, ground or storage spaces

Same as those specifically permitted in the "C-3" general commercial district.
C.

Services

Same as those specifically permitted in the "C-3" general commercial district, Section .361-D, (paragraph "D" only) excluding
those uses permitted in the "C-1" and "C-2" districts. In addition, group care facilities are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section .5809-14.
(Ord. No. 3971, § 12.)

D.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 4114.
E.

Manufacturing

Same as the uses permitted in the "M-1" light industrial district, Section .411 (paragraphs "B," "C," "D" only, excluding trucking
facilities).
(Ord. No. 2937, § 2.)

F.

Homeless shelters subject to the following criteria:
1.

2.

The facility shall conform to all property development standards of the land use district in which it is located.

A minimum separation of three hundred feet shall be required from a proposed homeless shelter and another such
homeless shelter or between any group care facility listed in Section .231.F, or between any single family residential
district. Existing shelters established within a religious facility shall not be included in the minimum separation
requirements. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)
3.

The duration of stay for patrons of homeless shelters shall be limited to a maximum of six months.

4.

Homeless shelters shall not contain more than thirty beds nor be designed to serve more than thirty persons unless
approved otherwise by the planning commission.

5.

Homeless shelters shall provide one parking space for every four beds. Parking standards for other uses on the site
shall be provided per the requirements of Section .503-H of the Municipal Code.

(Ord. No. 3660, § 9.)

G.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs and other amusements subject to a public use permit, Section .581.

(Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part).)

H.

Subject to Conditional Use Permit. (See Section .580.)

1.

Fortunetellers, subject to the following standards:
a.

Such use may not be located within 300 feet of a religious facility, park, school or residential use.

b.

Such use shall not operate before 9 a.m. or after 10 p.m. (Ord. No. 3621, Section 10.)

2.

Automobile Repair Facility. Any such facility or use shall require a conditional use permit. Such facility or use shall

(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

be subject to the development standards under Section .361.F.6.
(Ord. No. 3660, § 22.)

3.

Used car lots, subject to the development and operational standards contained in Section .5809-16.

4.

Bus Transportation Station. Any such facility used for the maintenance and storage of buses for transportation

(Ord. No. 3878, § 6.)

purposes shall require a conditional use permit.
(Ord. No. 3967, § 2.)

5.

Banquet halls, pursuant to Section. 062, subject to the development standards of this zone except that the minimum site
area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

6.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the development standards of this zone except that the
89/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)
I.

Billiard or pool hall.

(Ord. No. 3629, § 3 (part).)

J.

And such other uses which the city planner may determine to be similar to those listed above and which are related to
the uses permitted in the commercial-industrial (C-IND) district. Such uses shall not include those specifically listed in a
less restrictive district. The decision of the city planner shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section
.501-A.

(Ord. No. 2123, § 8; Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3480, §§ 13, 14, 15; Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part); Ord No. 3621, § 9; Ord. No. 3629, § 3 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

An existing one family dwelling in this district may be enlarged; see Section 554-E. No existing residential structure in this district may be
converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such
existing building shall be used for both residential and non-residential purposes at the same time.
(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .392. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Residential uses, except as permitted in M-1 district.

B.

Any combination of residential and nonresidential uses on a lot, parcel of land or in any structure thereon.

C.

Commercial uses not specifically listed in paragraphs A, B and C of this section.

D.

Industrial uses not listed in the "M-1" light industrial district.

E.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 21.)

Sec. .393. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "C-IND" district.
A.

LOT AREA

No requirements.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS

No requirements.
C.

D.

POPULATION DENSITY
1.

No dwellings are permitted in this district.

2.

For existing dwellings, see Section .391.

YARDS
1.

Front:

None required.
2.

Side:

None required, except where abutting a residential district, when a minimum side yard of ten feet shall be required.
3.

Rear:

None required, except for loading, see Section .503-L-l and 2.
E.

COVERAGE

Same as "C-3" district.
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

90/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than six stories or seventy-five feet. For roof structures
and hillside property exceptions, see Section .503-F.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

No requirements.
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 3385. § 21.)

I.

WALLS

A six foot high decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or district boundary line to separate the "C-IND"
district and/or uses from abutting residential districts. For details, definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional
requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the C-IND zone, see Section .503-I. (Ord. No. 4118, § 12.)
K.

ACCESS

Requirements same as "C-2" district.
L.

LOADING
1.

M.

When used for commercial and industrial use, see Sections .503-L-l, and .503-L-2.

PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE, LENGTH AND THICKNESS OF MARQUEES
(1)

Projection and clearance. The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line shall be not less than two
feet. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be
less than twelve feet above the ground or pavement below. A marquee projecting less than two-thirds of the
distance from the property line to the curb line shall not be less than eight feet above the ground or pavement
below.

(2)

Length. A marquee projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the curb line shall not
exceed twenty-five feet in length along the direction of the street.

(3)

Height. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall
not exceed three feet. No sign, light, or decoration shall be attached to or placed upon a marquee except as follows:
(a) A sign stating the name of major use of the building may be suspended below a marquee supported by such
building not more than eighteen inches, provided the sign is not less than eight feet above the grade of the sidewalk
below, and further provided that the length of the sign is erected perpendicular to the wall of the building and
projects over public property not more than six feet nor more than the projection of the marquee when the
marquee projects less than six feet over public property. Such signs shall have a maximum width of not more than
eighteen inches measured parallel with the face of the building, and such signs and marquees shall have a
combined vertical height or thickness of not more than three feet. The maximum area of any such sign shall be not
more than nine square feet. (b) A marquee sign, light or decoration in all cases shall be erected with a clearance of
eight feet or more above the sidewalk.

(Ord. No. 2169, § 1 (part).)

N.

TRASH FACILITIES. See Section .503-C.

(Ord. No. 3651, § 7; Ord. No. 3737, § 2.)

O.

ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS

Requirements same as "C-1" district.
(Ord. No. 3988, § 16.)

Sec. .395. - "M" Special industrial zone.
This zone is intended to provide for and encourage the development of light industrial uses, laboratories, research and development
plants, and administrative office buildings and their related facilities.
91/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 2788 § 2 (part).)

Sec. .396. - Permitted buildings, structures and uses.
The following buildings, structures and uses, either singly or in combination, are permitted in the "M" zone. The following uses, except
the raising of agricultural crop, shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building, except as herein otherwise provided:
(a)

Light manufacturing, research, assembly, testing and repair of components, devices, equipment and systems, and parts
and components, such as, but not limited to:

Electronic, guidance or radio systems.
Coils, tubes, semi-conductors.
Communication guidance and control systems.
Data processing.
Metering instruments.
Optical devices equipment and systems.
Phonographs and audio units.
Radar, infra-red and ultra-violet equipment and systems.
Scientific and mechanical instruments.
Television and radio equipment.
Testing equipment.
Graphic arts equipment.
Photographic equipment.
(b)

Light manufacturing, including:
1.

Assembly, compounding, fabricating, packaging, processing, or treating of articles or merchandise, such as, but not
limited to:

Baked goods.
Candy.
Cosmetics.
Drugs.
Electrical products.
Fluorescent products.
Garments.
Perfume.
Toiletries.
Toys.
2.

Assembly, compounding, fabricating, packaging, processing, or treating of articles or merchandise from previously
prepared materials, such as, but not limited to:

Cellophane.
92/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Glass.
Light metals.
Paints (not employing a boiling process).
Paper.
Plastics or synthetics.
Precious or semi-precious stones.
Textiles.
(c)

Scientific research laboratories and facilities, developmental laboratories and facilities and testing laboratories and
facilities, such as, but not limited to:

Biochemical.
Film.
Medical or dental.
Metallurgy.
Physical and chemical.
X-ray.
Pharmaceuticals.
(d)

General warehousing where all storage of merchandise, materials or equipment is within a totally enclosed building. The
total land area devoted to general warehousing shall be limited to a maximum of three percent of the total land area in
the "M" district.

(e)

Rubber products fabrication from finished rubber.

(f)

Regional or home offices of industries and public utilities.

(g)

Blueprinting, photostating, photo engraving.

(h)

Printing, publishing of books, periodicals and newspapers and book-binding.

(i)

Glass edging, beveling, blowing and decorative manufacturing.

(j)

Public buildings necessary to serve the area.

(k)

Raising of agricultural crops.

(l)

General office uses of an independent nature, not related to a primary industrial activity, and subject to the off-street
parking requirements of subsection 399-i-1.

(Ord. No. 3049, § 2.)

(m)

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, that are to be located in multi-use industrial parks , subject to the
approval of a conditional use permit and to the development standards of this zone. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

(n)

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14

(o)

And such other uses which the Planning Manager may determine to be comparable in nature and not limited to a less
restrictive district. The decision of the city planner shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .501A.

(Ord. No. 2788, § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3049, § 1, 2; Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4; Ord. No. 3971, § 13.)

Sec. .397. - Accessory uses.

93/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The following accessory uses are permitted only where they are integrated with and clearly incidental to a primary permitted use. All
uses shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building, with the exception of f, g and h:
(a)

Administrative, professional and education offices.

(b)

Development of prototypes required in research and development laboratories.

(c)

Dwelling, single, where used exclusively by a caretaker of a permitted industrial use and his family.

(d)

Employee cafeterias, employee coffee shops or auditoriums. On-sale alcoholic establishments in conjunction with bona
fide employee eating areas, subject to a conditional use permit (See Section .5809-4). No off-sale alcoholic establishments
shall be permitted.

(Ord. No. 3335, § 9.)

(e)

Exhibition of products produced on the premises or available for wholesale distribution.

(f)

Gasoline pumps to serve only owner's own vehicles.

(g)

Outdoor off-street parking or parking structures.

(h)

Outdoor storage subject to the standards set forth in Section .399-o.

(Ord. No. 2788 § 2 (part).)

Sec. .398. - Uses expressly prohibited.
(a)

Residential buildings (except caretaker's or watchmen's quarters).

(b)

Retail commercial uses (except for such uses as are utilized to operate and maintain employee facilities including, but not
limited to, employee cafeterias and/or restaurants, whether maintained by one owner or jointly by two or more owners for
their respective employees).

(c)

Storage of materials, supplies or products in open, unenclosed areas.

(d)

Billboards or advertising structures.
(e)

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, not located within a multi-use industrial park. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

(f)

Gas stations (except facilities for the owner's own vehicles).

(g)

Any use which is not explicitly permitted under Section .396 or such use which is not in conformance with the intended
provision of Section .395 "M" Special Industrial Zone.

(Ord. No. 3049, § 3.)

(h)

Any use which is a nuisance or detrimental to the general public safety or welfare.

(Ord. No. 2788 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 3049, § 3; Ord. No. 3236, § 3)

(i)

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 22.)

Sec. .399. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards apply:
(a)

LOT AREA

The minimum lot area shall be forty thousand square feet.
(b)

LOT WIDTH

The minimum lot width shall be one hundred fifty feet.
(c)

LOT DEPTH

The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred fifty feet.
(d)

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than seventy-five feet.
94/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(e)

FRONT YARD
The minimum front yard or any side or rear yard abutting a street shall be sixty feet on a major or secondary street

and twenty feet on all other streets.
(f)

SIDE YARD

The minimum interior side yard shall be ten feet except as required in subsection .399-h.
(g)

REAR YARD

The minimum interior rear yard shall be twenty feet except as required in subsection .399-h.
(h)

Other yard setbacks when an "M" zone is adjacent to an "R" zone or an "A" zone.
(1)

Whenever a lot or parcel of land in the "M" zone abuts a lot or parcel of land in an "R" or "A" district, or abuts any
street or alley which separates an "M" district from any "R" or "A" zone, there shall be a required building setback of
sixty feet from such lot or parcel of land in the "R" or "A" zone, street, or alley.

(2)
(i)

In all cases, the setback shall equal or be greater than the height of the building.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 3385. § 22.)

(j)

OFF-STREET LOADING
(1)

The requirements of subsection .503-L-2 shall be complied with.

(2)

Loading space shall be permitted in required interior side yards and in rear yards not abutting a street, but shall not
be permitted in any required front yard or side yard facing a street.

(k)

(3)

Loading spaces shall be in addition to off-street parking spaces.

(4)

Direct loading from public streets shall not be permitted.

LANDSCAPING
(l)

All open areas not paved or covered shall be landscaped and maintained with ground cover, trees and/or shrubs,
and shall include a minimum total area equal to twenty percent of the total parcel to be developed. Landscaping
plans shall be submitted to the city park department for a special landscaping permit.

(2)

Tree planting schedule:

There shall be a minimum of eight trees, planted and maintained, per acre of development; trees to be selected from an
approved list of trees prepared by the Pomona park department.
(3)

Parking areas shall be landscaped to the standards of subsection .503-T.

(4)

Repealed by Ord. No. 2906.

(5)

An adequate irrigation system shall be installed to insure a continuous maintenance of the landscaping and
planting required by this section.

(l)

WALLS
(1)

When a lot or parcel of land in an "R" zone backs to, or sides to an "M" zone, or backs to a street that separates such
districts from an "M" zone, or is separated from an "M" zone by an alley, a six-foot-high decorative masonry wall
shall be constructed along the property line separating the "R" from the "M" zone or along the street or alley rightof-way line.

For details, definition of "decorative masonry wall" and additional requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the M zone, see
Section .503-I.
(Ord. No. 4118, § 15.)

(2)

When required yards adjacent to streets are used for off-street parking as set forth in subsection j-2 above, there
shall be a three-foot-high decorative wall constructed where the off-street parking area abuts the area of
landscaping.
95/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(m)

STANDARDS OF OPERATION
(1)

No portion of any lot or parcel shall be used in such a way as to create a nuisance to adjacent sites, such as, but not
limited to, vibration, sound, electro-mechanical disturbance and radiation, electro-magnetic disturbance, radiation,
air or water pollution, dust, emission of odorous, toxic or noxious matter.

The applicant should be aware that his proposed operation shall have adequate controls, measures, or devices provided to
insure and protect against the emission of odor, dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, vibrations, or heat beyond the exterior limits of
the premises.
(2)
(n)

All lighting is to be shielded and confined within property lines.

STORAGE

All outdoor storage of materials, supplies, or projects, as an accessory use to the primary use, shall be enclosed by a solid
concrete or masonry wall, having a minimum height of six feet. All general warehousing uses shall be conducted within a totally
enclosed building.
(o)

BUILDING PROVISIONS
(1)

The exterior walls of all buildings shall be constructed of a minimum of two skins at least one inch from the exterior
surface of the exterior skin to the exterior surface of the interior skin or of masonry block, brick, reinforced
concrete, or tilt-up concrete slab construction.

(2)

No building or structure of any kind or type shall be moved into the "M" zone, nor shall any portable building be
permitted to be placed in this zone, except when used in constructing a building.

(p)

TELEPHONE AND ELECTRICAL SERVICES

All utility services shall be placed underground in a manner as prescribed by the department of public works.
(Ord. No. 2788 § 2 (part); Ord. No. 2906, §§ 1, 2: Ord. No. 3049, § 4; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

(q)

TRASH FACILITIES. See Section .503-C.

(Ord. No. 3651, § 7; Ord. No. 3737, § 2.)

(r)

ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS. Additions and accessory structures shall be similar in design and materials to the main
building.
1.

Roofing Materials. Roofing materials for all buildings shall include:
(a)

Woodshake

(b)

Wood shingle

(c)

Composition asphalt shingle

(d)

Tile/tile-like material

(e)

Rock

(f)

Other similar materials as determined appropriate by the Planning Manager

(g)

Materials not deemed appropriate by the Planning Manager may be permitted subject to approval of a
conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

2.

Siding Material. Siding materials shall include one or more of the following:
(a)

Wood

(b)

Stucco

(c)

Masonry

(d)

Textured metal siding, with the exception of reflective materials

(e)

Siding materials shall extend from the eaves to the permanent foundation

(f)

Other similar materials as determined appropriate by the Planning Manager

(g)

Materials not deemed appropriate by the Planning Manager may be permitted subject to approval of a
conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

3.

Grade Siting. Floor elevations shall be located as close to the lot grade level as possible, consistent with grading
96/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

practice as specified in the Uniform Building Code.
4.

Foundation. All foundations shall be consistent with requirements of Chapter 29 of the Uniform Building Code.

5.

A list of all exterior building materials shall be submitted with building plans for approval by the City Planner.

(Ord. No. 3988, § 17.)

Secs. .402 to .406. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .410. - "M-1" Light industrial district intent and purpose.
The light industrial district ("M-1") is intended to provide for the development of industrial uses which include fabrication, manufacturing,
assembly or processing of materials that are in a processed form and which do not in their maintenance, assembly, manufacture or plant
operation create smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot or lighting to any degree which might be termed obnoxious or offensive to
persons residing in or conducting business in either this or any other zoning district of the city.
The following regulations shall apply in the "M-l" light industrial district.
Sec. .411. - Uses permitted.
No existing residential structure in this district may be converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that
existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at
the same time.
All manufacturing operations shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the building
regulations of the city.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

COMMERCIAL
1.

Bakery

2.

Banks

3.

Automobile service stations and super service stations. (Subject to development standards, conditions and
restrictions set forth in Section .5804 of this ordinance.)

(Ord. No. 2236, § 7.)

4.

Automatic service stations. (Subject to a conditional use permit and the development standards of Section .5804,
subsection E.)

(Ord. No. 2394, § 4.)

5.

Outdoor advertising devices. (See Section .503-j.)

6.

Restaurants. On-sale alcoholic establishments in conjunction with bona fide restaurants, subject to a conditional
use permit (See Section .5809-4). No off-sale alcoholic establishments shall be permitted.

(Ord. No. 2626, § 4; Ord. No. 3335, § 11.)

7.

Stable or riding academy

8.

Veterinarian animal hospitals

9.

Auto and truck agencies

10.

Recreational equipment display (Res. 60-164, 5-31-60)

11.

Kennels, provided that such operations shall comply with the following standards:
a.

A conditional use permit is granted pursuant to Section .580 of this ordinance.

b.

Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. the operation shall be conducted within a totally enclosed
building.

c.

The building sections of the kennels shall be insulated with a sound-proofing material.
97/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

d.

All open run areas shall be screened from abutting properties with a buffer strip of landscaping materials or a
six foot high solid fence where deemed necessary by the planning commission at the time of consideration of
the conditional use permit.

A conditional use permit granted to permit a kennel may be revoked by the council if it is found that any of the terms of the
conditional use permit have been violated. Any person who alleges that the terms of such conditional use permit have been
violated may initiate hearings before the commission and the council to determine whether or not the terms of the conditional
use permit have been violated and therefore should be revoked. The procedure provided for this shall be as follows:
1.

Upon receipt of the verified complaint, the commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing
thereon which shall not be less than fifteen days nor more than forty days thereafter.

2.

The commission shall hold one public hearing upon the matter, shall hear all evidence presented by both
the complainant and the owner, and shall report its recommendations to the council.

3.

The council, after receipt of the commission's report and recommendation, may hear the evidence of
both the complainant and the owner and may either approve or reject the report and findings of the
commission, and, thereafter, may either grant the complainant's request and revoke the conditional use
permit for a kennel, deny the complainant's request and leave the conditional use permit for a kennel in
full force and effect, or may grant to the owner a period of time not to exceed thirty days to correct any
violation of the terms of the conditional use permit if it is found that any violations exist. If the latter
course is followed and additional time is granted to the owner to correct any violations, and the
complainant or any other complainant reports that violations upon such premises still exist after the
time limit specified by order of the council, such complainant may file a verified complaint with the city
clerk without paying any filing fee, and the council may at its next meeting make an order for the owner
to show cause why the conditional use permit for the kennel should not be revoked. If the owner cannot
thereafter at any time designated by the council present satisfactory evidence to the council showing
good and valid reason why such conditional use permit should not be revoked, the council may revoke
such permit without any further notice.

Notices shall be given of the time and place of all hearings which shall be held pursuant to the provisions of this subsection
by the planning director to the owner and current business licensee of such kennel, as shown on the records of the city clerk,
and to the complainant, at least ten days prior to the date for which hearing is to be held. Such notices shall be by certified mail
and shall be deemed given when deposited in a United States Post Office box, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to the
owner and to the current business licensee as shown on the records of the city clerk, and to the complainant at the address
shown, respectively, for each upon the application for the conditional use permit and the complaint, or any other address which
either the owner or the complainant have filed in writing with the planning department to which notices may be sent. In addition
to the above notices, the owner and current business licensee as shown in the records of the office of the city clerk, shall also be
notified of the commencement of such proceedings by posting the subject property with a notice upon a card at least one
square foot in area with a heading of letters at least one-half inch high, which shall provide "NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF
PROCEEDINGS TO DETERMINE WHETHER OR NOT THE CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT FOR A KENNEL FOR THIS PROPERTY SHOULD
BE REVOKED." Such notice shall also state the name of the complainant, the nature of the violations complained of, the day, time
and place at which the hearing will be held by the commission concerning the matter.
12.

Offices.

(Ord. No. 1814, § 1; Ord. No. 2198, § 2.)

13.

Hotels, motels and apartment hotels subject to the granting of a conditional use permit per the requirements of
Section .5809-10.

(Ord. No. 3034, § 1; Ord. No. 3254, § 7.)

14.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the
development standards of this zone except that the minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 3226,
§ 4; Ord. No. 3622, § 2; Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

15.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and other amusements subject to a public use permit, Section .581.
98/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 3618, § 2 (part).)

16.

Fortunetellers, subject to the granting of a conditional use permit per Section .580 and the following standards:
a.

Such use may not be located within 300 feet of a religious facility, park, school or residential zone.

b.

Such use shall not operate before 9 a.m. or after 10 p.m. (Ord. No. 3621, Section 11.)

(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

17.

Automotive accessory and installation facility.

18.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3798, § 1 (part).

19.

Self-storage facility (Subject to the development standards set forth in Section .5809-12)

20.

Adult-Oriented Business (Subject to the development standards set forth in Section .5809-5 and Chapter 14.5 of the

(Ord. No. 3660, § 23.)

(Ord. No. 3756, § 5.)

Pomona City Code, Ordinance No. 3873).
(Ord. No. 3913, § 1.)

21.

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14

(Ord. No. 3971, § 14.)

22.

Banquet halls, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the development
standards of this zone except that the minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

23.

Public assembly uses, pursuant to Section .062, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and to the
development standards of this zone except that the minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

B.

MANUFACTURING
1.

2.

Automotive:
(a)

Automotive assembly.

(b)

Automotive rebuilding.

(c)

Automotive reconditioning.

(d)

Battery manufacture.

(e)

Body and fender works.

(f)

Painting.

(g)

Truck repairing and overhauling.

(h)

Upholstering.

Machinery and shops (excluding punch presses over twenty tons, drop hammers).
(a)

Automatic screw machines.

(b)

Blacksmith shops.

(c)

Cabinet or carpenter shops.

(d)

Machine shops.

(e)

Sheet metal shops.

3.

Boat building and repairs (except ship building).

4.

Storage yards, when said yards are entirely enclosed within fences and walls as required in Section .503-I-3-(b).
(a)

Builders materials.

(b)

Contractors storage yard.

(c)

Draying and freight yard.

(d)

Feed and fuel yard.

(e)

Lumber yards.

(f)

Machinery rental.

(g)

Motion picture studio storage.
99/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(h)
(i)
5.

Public utility service yards.
Transportation equipment yard and storage space for transit.

Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of products such as:
(a)

Bakery goods.

(b)

Candy.

(c)

Cosmetics.

(d)

Dairy products.

(e)

Drugs.

(f)

Food products, including meat and meat products processed to prepare them for refrigeration if they are in
connection with refrigerated food locker services, excluding however, fish, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the
rendering of fats.

(Ord. No. 2152, § 2.)

6.

(g)

Perfumes.

(h)

Toiletries.

Manufacturing, compounding, assembly, or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously
prepared materials.
(a)

Bone.

(b)

Canvas.

(c)

Cellophane.

(d)

Cloth.

(e)

Cork.

(f)

Feathers.

(g)

Felt.

(h)

Fibre.

(i)

Fur.

(j)

Glass.

(k)

Hair.

(l)

Horns.

(m)

Leather.

(n)

Metals.

(o)

Paints not employing a boiling process.

(p)

Paper.

(q)

Plaster.

(r)

Plastics or synthetics.

(s)

Precious or semi-precious stones or metals.

(t)

Shells.

(u)

Textiles.

(v)

Tobacco.

(w)

Wood.

(x)

Yarns.

7.

Ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and fired in kilns only using electricity of gas.

8.

Manufacturing and maintenance of electric or neon signs.

9.

Novelties.

10.

Toys.
100/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

11.

Rubber and metal stamps.

12.

Repair garages.

13.

Retail lumber yards (including incidental millwork but not including planing mill).

14.

Wholesaling and warehousing (including wholesaling and warehousing of meats or meat products).

15.

Distributing plants.

16.

Garments.

17.

Bottling plants.

18.

Shoes.

19.

Textiles.

20.

Stone monument works.

21.

Refrigerated food locker services and related incidental uses, including processing of meat and meat products in

(Ord. No. 2152, § 3.)

connection with refrigerated food locker services.
(Ord. No. 2152, § 1.)

22.

Trucking facilities as defined in Section .062 subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit and the
development standards contained in Section .5809-6, except where such facilities are accessory to and incidental to
a use permitted in the M-l zone district, serving only said permitted use and located on the same premises with said
permitted use.

(Ord. No. 2937, § 1.)

C.

D.

E.

PROCESSING
1.

Blueprinting and photocopying.

2.

Carpet and rug cleaning plants.

3.

Cleaning and dyeing plants.

4.

Creamery.

5.

Laboratory (experimental, motion picture, testing).

6.

Laundries.

7.

Tire retreading, recapping, rebuilding.

FABRICATING
1.

Assembly of electrical and electronic equipment.

2.

Rubber, fabrication of products made from finished rubber.

3.

Light metals.

FOUNDRY OPERATIONS, using specified types of furnaces and fulfilling all of the following standards of operation for
furnaces and related operations listed below:
1.

All such foundry operations described herein shall be an incidental use to uses allowed in the M-1, light industrial
district. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to allow related uses to said foundry operations, such as
forging or drop hammer operations, but only such types of related operations as are specified in the subsection
below.

2.

All furnaces used in connection with foundry operations shall consist of one or more of the following types, but
shall not comprise more than a total of three in number; provided, that a maximum number of two such furnaces
shall be in operation at any one time: Gas fired reverberatory, gas fired crucible, or electric induction melting. Each
furnace described shall have a maximum melting capacity not to exceed one thousand pounds.

3.

All furnaces shall be subject to the performance standards and regulations established as of this date or in the
future, by the Los Angeles County air pollution control district.

4.

Refined or ingot metals only shall be used in the operation of said furnaces. Only rejected or imperfect castings,
gates and risers shall be reused. The melting, alloying, refining and reclaiming with contaminated scrap metals shall
101/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

be prohibited.
5.

The manufacturing of any oil baked, dry sand cores and molds, or resin type cores and molds, used in the making of
castings, shall be prohibited.

6.

All equipment used in the cleaning, buffing, and grinding of castings, and their dust control equipment, shall be
subject to the performance standards and regulations established as of this date or in the future, by the Los
Angeles County air pollution control district.

(Ord. No. 1529, § 6.)

F.

PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION SUBSTATIONS.

(Ord. No. 1529, § 6.)

G.

RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS, Limited Use.

Upon receiving a conditional use permit from the city council, one dwelling designed to be used or used in connection with any
industrial establishment may be erected. Such dwelling shall be occupied by the owner or lessee of such industrial establishment
and his family or an employee or such owner or lessee, and his family, subject to any requirements or restrictions necessary for
public health, safety and welfare. Minor alterations and expansions may be permitted on existing residential buildings.
(Ord. No. 1529, § 6.)

H.

And such other uses which the city planner may determine to be comparable in nature and not limited to a less
restrictive district. The decision of the city planner shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .501A.

(Ord. No. 1529, § 6; Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4.)

An existing one family dwelling in this district may be enlarged; see Section 554-E. No existing residential structure in this district may be
converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such
existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time.
(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .412. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Residential uses, see Section .411.

B.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3633.

C.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3622.

D.

Commercial and industrial uses not specifically listed in Section .411.

(Ord. No. 2305, § 1; Ord. No. 3226, § 6.)

E.

Medical marijuana dispensaries. (Ord. No. 4096, § 23)

Sec. .413. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "M-1" district.
A.

LOT AREA

No requirements.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS

No requirements.
C.

D.

POPULATION DENSITY
1.

No dwellings are permitted in this district other than for a caretaker and his family.

2.

For existing dwellings, see Section .411.

YARDS:
1.

Front yard:
102/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet.
(Ord. No. 3385. § 24.)

2.

Side yard:

None required, except when abutting a residential district (other than an R-l district, in which case, see Section .413-D-4.
below) when a minimum side yard of twenty percent of the width of the lot shall be required. However, said yard shall not be
less than ten feet, but need not exceed fifty feet. Said yard may be used for off-street parking or the open storage of materials
provided the wall requirements as stated in Section .503-1 are complied with.
3.

Rear yard:

None required, except when abutting a residential district (other than an R-l district, in which case, see Section .413-D-4,
below), when a minimum rear yard of twenty percent of the depth of the lot shall be required. However, said yard shall not be
less than ten feet, but need not exceed fifty feet. Said yard may be used for off-street parking or the open storage of materials
provided the wall requirements as stated in Section .503-1 are complied with.
(Ord. No. 1569, § 1.)

4.

Yards required when adjacent to an "R-1" district.

Whenever a lot or parcel of land in the "M-l" district abuts a lot or parcel of land in an "R-l" district or abuts any street or
alley which separates an "M-1" district from any "R-l" district, there shall be a required building setback of sixty feet from such
residential lot, parcel of land, street or alley; furthermore, except when a residential lot, parcel of land, street or alley backs to
said "M-l" district, a yard, appropriately landscaped with plant material and maintained, shall be required adjacent to such
residential lot or parcel of land or street within the area of setback required above; such yard shall have a uniform depth of a
minimum of twenty feet. The remaining area of building setback may be used for automobile parking or for the open storage of
materials, provided a solid masonry wall is erected along the boundary of the area of landscaping, located a minimum distance
of twenty feet from the aforementioned residential lot or parcel of land or street; said wall shall have a height of two and onehalf feet when such area is used for automobile parking, or a height of six feet when such area is used for the open storage of
materials: providing, however, in the latter case, no materials shall be stored higher than such six-foot high solid masonry wall.
No wall shall be required in the abovementioned area of setback unless such area of setback is used for automobile parking or
for the open storage of materials; and providing further, that the entire sixty feet of building setback is landscaped with plant
material and maintained.
When a lot or parcel of land in the "R-l" district backs to or is separated by an alley from a lot or parcel of land in the "M-l"
district, an area of landscaping shall not be required; however, a six-foot high solid masonry wall shall be constructed along the
property line separating the "R-l" district from the "M-l" district or along the alley right of way line on the "M-1" side of said alley:
materials may not be stored higher than said six-foot high wall. In addition to the requirements stated above, a building setback
of one hundred feet shall be required from the south boundary of Harrison Avenue, between Garey Avenue and the westerly
boundary of the "M-l" district, between Harrison Avenue and Bonita Avenue.
5.

Landscaped setbacks along certain streets: (a) Further, in addition to the requirements stated above, a minimum
building setback of twenty feet shall be required in the M-l zoning district from the western Pomona city limits
boundary to Garey Avenue along the south side of Bonita Avenue, and such setback shall be appropriately
landscaped with plant material and shall be maintained by the person who is occupying the premises, or in the
event of his failure, the owner of the property after buildings have been erected upon said land or when the
property is otherwise developed. (b) A further minimum landscaped setback of fifteen feet shall also be required in
the M-l zoning district from Franklin Avenue to Philadelphia Street along the east side of Reservoir Street, and such
setback shall also be appropriately landscaped with plant material and shall be maintained by the person who is
occupying the premises, or in the event of his failure, the owner of the property, after buildings have been erected
upon said land or when the property is otherwise developed, and a six-foot high solid masonry wall shall be erected
along the interior line of the landscaped setback area whenever said landscaped setback area abuts an area which
is used for open storage. A minimum fifty-seven-inch high solid masonry wall shall be erected along the interior line

103/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

of the landscaped setback area, whenever said landscaped setback area abuts an area which is used for off-street
parking facilities. No wall shall be required if all the area between the street right-of-way and the building is
landscaped and maintained as provided above.
E.

COVERAGE

No requirement.
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than six stories or seventy-five feet. For exceptions,
see Section .503-F for roof structures and hillside property.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS

No requirement. No buildings are permitted in the yard areas stated above.
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 2945. § 1 (part): Ord. No. 3385. § 25.)

I.

WALLS

A six-foot high decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or district boundary line to separate the "M-1"
district and/or uses from abutting residential districts, except as required in Section .413-D-4 above. For details, definition of
"decorative masonry wall" and additional requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the M-1 zone, see Section .503-I. (Ord. No.
4118, § 13.)
J.

ACCESS

Requirements same as "C-2" district.
K.

LOADING

Every commercial and industrial buildings hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space. For detail see
section .503-L-1 and 2.
And further in addition to the requirements stated above, a minimum building setback of twenty feet shall be required in the M1 zoning district from the western Pomona city limits boundary to Garey Avenue along the south side of Bonita Avenue, and such
setback shall be appropriately landscaped with plant material and shall be maintained by the person who is occupying the premises,
or in the event of his failure, the owner of the property, after buildings have been erected upon said land or when the property is
otherwise developed.
(Ord. No. 2058, § 1; Ord. No. 2084, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

L.

TRASH FACILITIES. See Section .503-C.

(Ord. No. 3651, § 9; Ord. No. 3737, § 2.)

M.

ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS

Requirements same as "M" district.
(Ord. No. 3988, § 18.)

Sec. .415. - Other requirements.
All plants permitted in the "M-1" district shall be subject to the performance standards and regulations established by the Los Angeles
county air pollution control district.
All types of manufacturing processes allowed in this district shall conform to standards and accepted practices in the respective industry,
in the erection, operation, and maintenance of such plant.

104/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. .420. - "M-2" general industrial district intent and purpose.
The "M-2" general industrial district is intended to provide for the establishment of certain industrial uses considered by the council to be
essential to the development of a balanced economic base for the city.
The following regulations shall apply in the "M-2" general industrial district.
Sec. .421. - Uses permitted.
No existing residential structure in this district may be converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that
existing on the effective date of this ordinance and no such existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at
the same time.
All manufacturing operations shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the building
regulations of the city.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

Uses permitted in the "M-1" light manufacturing district.
1.

Adult-Oriented Business (Subject to the development standards set forth in Section .5809-5 and Chapter 14.5 of the
Pomona City Code, Ordinance No. 3873).

(Ord. No. 3913, § 2.)

B.

Other manufacturing uses may be permitted in this zoning district subject to obtaining a conditional use permit from the
planning commission, after a full and complete description of the processes of industrial operation is made. The decision
of the planning commission shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .560G1.

(Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part).)

C.

Where any doubt or uncertainty exists as to the proper zoning district classification of an industrial use, the planning
commission shall determine such, based on the following conditions:
1.

That field investigations have disclosed that the subject use and its operation are compatible with the uses
permitted in the area wherein it is proposed to be located; and

2.

That the subject use is similar to one or more uses permitted in the district within which it is proposed to be
located; and

3.

That the subject use will not cause substantial injury to the values of property in the neighborhood within which it is
proposed to be located; and

4.

That the subject use will be so designed, located and operated that the public health, safety and general welfare will
be protected. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to
Section .560G1.

(Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part).)

E.

RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS, LIMITED USE.

Upon receiving a conditional use permit from the city council, one dwelling designed to be used or used in connection with any
industrial establishment may be erected. Such dwelling shall be occupied by the owner or lessee of such industrial establishment
and his family, or an employee of such owner or lessee, and his family, subject to any requirements or restrictions necessary for
public health, safety and welfare. Minor alterations and expansions may be permitted on existing residential buildings.
An existing one family dwelling in this district may be enlarged; see Section 554-E. No existing residential structure in this district
may be converted to any more intensive residential use or to any other use than that existing on the effective date of this ordinance
and no such existing building shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes at the same time.
(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .422. - Uses expressly prohibited.
105/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

A.

Residential uses, except as permitted above.

B.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3633.

C.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3622.

D.

Commercial uses not specifically listed in Section .411-A.

E.

Industrial uses as follows:
1.

Chlorine gas, manufacture of.

2.

Coal, the distillation of coal or coal tar, the manufacture of any coal product.

3.

Coke oven.

4.

Creosoting plant.

5.

Fish smoking, curing or canning.

6.

Hydrocyanic acid, the manufacture of any product of hydrocyanic acid.

7.

Petroleum refinery.

8.

Phenol manufacture.

9.

Potash manufacture.

10.

Rock crusher.

11.

Rubber reclaiming plant.

12.

Size or glue manufacture.

13.

Smelter.

14.

Stock feeding pens.

15.

Tar distillation or tar products manufacture.

(Ord. No. 2305, § 2; Ord. No. 3226, § 7.)

F.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 24.)

Sec. .423. - Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and/or structures in the "M-2" district.
A.

LOT AREA

No requirements.
B.

LOT DIMENSIONS

No requirements.
C.

D.

POPULATION DENSITY
1.

No dwellings are permitted in this district other than for a caretaker and his family.

2.

For existing dwellings, see Section .421.

YARDS

Same as "M-1" district.
E.

COVERAGE

No requirements.
F.

BUILDING HEIGHT

No building or structure erected in this district shall have a height greater than one hundred feet. For exceptions, see Section
.503-F for roof structures and hillside property.
G.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
106/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

No requirements.
H.

OFF-STREET PARKING

Refer to Section .503-H for parking requirements in this district.
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1 (part): Ord. No. 3385, § 26.)

I.

WALLS

A six-foot-high decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or district boundary line to separate the "M-2"
district and/or uses from abutting residential districts, except as required in Section .423-D. For details, definition of "decorative
masonry wall" and additional requirements pertaining to walls and fences in the M-2 zone, see Section .503-I. (Ord. No. 4118, § 14.)
J.
K.

ACCESS
LOADING

Every commercial and industrial building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space. For details, see
Section .503-L-1 and 2.
(Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

L.

TRASH FACILITIES. See Section .503-C.

(Ord. No. 3651, § 10; Ord. No. 3737, § 2.)

M.

ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS

Requirements same as "M-1" district.
(Ord. No. 3988, § 19.)

Sec. .425. - Other requirements.
All plants permitted in the "M-2" district shall be subject to the performance standards and regulations established by the Los Angeles
County air pollution control district.
Secs. .430 to .434. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .435. - "F" the fairgrounds zoning district intent and purpose.
The fairgrounds zoning district is intended to provide for the use of the public fairgrounds in a manner so as to not create smoke, gas,
odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot or lighting or other nuisance in any degree which might be termed obnoxious or offensive to persons
residing in or near the Fairplex and is intended to allow a range of public entertainment, exhibition, commercial, conference, equine, and
other events and uses on a year-round basis as previously permitted by Ordinance No. 2450. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the
uses, structures and events permitted and conditionally permitted in the F zoning district are subject to the application of all applicable city
building permit and grading permit review, and that no temporary use permit shall be required for permitted uses under Section .436 hereof.
The City's design review process shall apply to conditionally permitted uses under Section .437 hereof.
(Ord. No. 4012, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .436. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except as provided herein.
1.

The following fair related uses shall be permitted within this zone without any permit except for building and grading
permits as applicable:
a.)

Child Care.

b.)

Commercial uses related to other permitted uses in structures less than 30,000 sq. ft.

c.)

Consumer Shows.
107/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

d.)

Drag Racing.

e.)

Exhibitions.

f.)

Fairs and Festivals.

g.)

Filming and photographic shoots.

h.)

Financial Services.

i.)

Fireworks Displays.

j.)

Food Service including banquets, catering and concessions.

k.)

Horse Exhibition, Sales, Racing, Wagering including Satellite Wagering.

l.)

Live Entertainment.

m.)

Livestock, Pet and other animal exhibitions, training and sales.

n.)

Meetings and Conferences.

o.)

Outdoor Recreation including but limited to camping, picnics, rallies, social events and sporting events.

p.)

Religious, educational, charitable, community and political activities.

q.)

Testing and demonstration of mechanical equipment and devices to the extent that such uses do not violate the
City's noise ordinance.

2.

r.)

Trade Shows.

s.)

Business Support services for permitted uses.

t.)

Facility and Vehicle maintenance for permitted uses.

The following fair related structures may be maintained, altered, expanded or erected within this zone without any
permits except for building and grading permits as applicable:
a.)

Auditoriums and Meeting Halls.

b.)

Banks and ATMs.

c.)

Bars and drinking facilities.

d.)

Campgrounds.

e.)

Caretaker and/or employee residential quarters.

f.)

Child Care Centers.

g.)

Community and Cultural Centers.

h.)

Concert and Performing Art Theaters, both indoor and outdoor.

i.)

Drag Racing Facility.

j.)

Equestrian Facilities including horse race tracks, equine hospitals, off-track wagering facilities, paddocks, sales
pavilions, show rings, trails and water quality systems.

k.)

Exhibit Buildings.

l.)

Governmental Buildings and sponsored uses.

m.)

Grandstand/Suite Complex.

n.)

Libraries and Museums.

o.)

Livestock Stables.

p.)

Offices for Administrative purposes.

q.)

Off-Street Parking.

r.)

Outdoor Public Address Systems except as restricted by Section .437.1(a.).

s.)

Parking Structures.

t.)

Pipeline and Utility Lines.

u.)

Public Safety Facilities.

v.)

Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks.

w.)

Restaurants.
108/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

x.)

Signs and signage, onsite only.

y.)

Trade & Conference Centers.

z.)

Tents and Temporary Structures.

aa.)

Warehouses.

(Ord. No. 4012, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .437. - Uses permitted by conditional use permit.
1.

2.

The following uses shall be permitted only upon the granting of a conditional use permit:
a)

Use of outdoor public address systems between 10 P.M.to 9 A.M. at times other than during the regular fair season.

b)

Convention Centers.

c)

Sports Arenas.

d)

Wireless Communication Facilities (subject to Section .5809-15 of the Zoning Ordinance.

e)

Hotels and motels.

f)

Heliports.

g)

Amateur/ham radio antenna greater than 35 ft. in height.

h)

Commercial/Retail developments in excess of 30,000 sq. ft.

i)

Residential developments except for caretaker/employee quarters.

j)

Other uses not specifically listed.

Before approving any such conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall make the findings required in Section .580
of the Zoning Ordinance.

3.

The fairgrounds delineated for conditional use permit applications shall include all buildings and parking areas used by the
subject use and the amount of permit fee to be determined by this area.

4.

The conditionally permitted use listed above shall also comply with the requirements of the provisions of the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) guidelines, as applicable.

(Ord. No. 4012, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .437.5. - Uses expressly prohibited.
(a)

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 25.)

Sec. .438. - Design review compliance.
For all conditionally permitted uses listed in Section .437 that involve the physical development of permanent structures, said structures
shall be subject to site design and architectural review and approval by the Community Development Director prior to the issuance of any
building permit for said structure or use.
(Ord. No. 4012, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .439. - Amortization period.
The uses presently existing at the fairgrounds that are not allowed by right under Sections .435. through .438. shall be given a time
period of six months from the adoption of these sections which establish the "F" zoning district to apply for a conditional use permit to
continue operation. If no conditional use permit is applied for within this time or the conditional use permit is denied, the planning
commission shall hold public hearings to determine an equitable amortization period for such uses.
(Ord. No. 2450, § 1 (part).)

Sec. .440. - "S" supplemental use overlay district intent and purpose.
This district is intended to encourage orderly and harmonious development in areas where special attention is needed.
109/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 3717, § 8 (part).)

Sec. .441. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged except for any use permitted which does not intensify the legally existing use in the
zone to which this supplemental use district is added, and providing that a conditional use permit is first obtained, according to the
procedure of Section .580.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following instances:
A.

The development or rebuilding of a one-story single family dwelling upon a vacant lot in those districts which allow such
use by right.

B.

The structural alteration or enlargement of up to 50 percent of the original gross floor area of a one-story single family
dwelling upon a lot where only one dwelling exists.

(Ord. No. 1858 § 1; Ord. No. 3580, § 1; Ord. No. 3636, § 3.)

Sec. .442. - Uses expressly prohibited.
Same as those uses that are expressly prohibited in the base district of said overlay district.
(Ord. No. 3717, § 8 (part).)

Sec. .443. - Property development standards.
Property in the supplemental use overlay district shall be subject to the development standards set forth in the base district(s) to which
this supplemental use overlay district is added.
(Ord. No. 3717, § 8 (part).)

Sec. .444. - Industrial/commercial overlay district.
A.

Purpose. The industrial/commercial overlay district is established to provide for:
1.

Conditionally permitted development of commercial uses within an industrial zone area, incidental and not detrimental
to the M-1 (light industrial) zone.

B.

2.

To allow industrial properties with freeway visibility and access to be used for regional commercial purposes.

3.

To foster reuse of abandoned or underutilized industrial buildings.

4.

To allow commercial uses that service industrial areas within M-1 zoned properties along an arterial roadway.

Definitions.

Shopping Mall—A retail center with multiple retail units with public entrances from a common area.
C.

Application. The industrial/commercial overlay district may be applied to all M-1 (light industrial) and M (special industrial)
zoned properties located within specific locations depending on the type of commercial uses proposed. The sites adjacent to
State Route 71 will be allowed to have regional commercial uses. Areas within the M-1 and M zones that are located on an
arterial roadway may have commercial uses that provide services to employees and visitors of those areas.

The provisions of this section take precedence over the regulations of the M-1 and M districts in which the property is classified.
D.

E.

Findings. Approval of the application of the overlay zone is subject to the following findings:
1.

Conformance with the general plan;

2.

The proposed uses will be compatible with surrounding industrial uses;

3.

For regional commercial uses, the project must have access to a freeway;

4.

For commercial serving industrial uses, the project must have access to an arterial roadway.

Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses. All new projects within a commercial/industrial overlay zone area require
approval of a conditional use permit. The following table list uses requiring a conditional use permit for specific consideration
110/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

of the use:
Table 1.
Conditionally Permitted Uses

Regional Commercial Conditionally Permitted Uses

Commercial Serving Industrial Conditionally Permitted Uses

Alcohol, on-sale in conjunction with a bona de restaurant

Alcohol, on-sale in conjunction with a bona de restaurant

Automobile service stations

Single retail uses with over 10,000 square of oor area

Shopping malls with over 20,000 square feet of oor area
Automobile service stations

Automobile service stations

Theaters
Mini storage
Food courts
Retail uses exceeding 20,000 square feet of oor area
Outdoor sales from kiosks

All sales and storage of merchandise shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building constructed in conformity with the
building regulations of the city
F.

Uses Expressly Prohibited. The following uses shall be prohibited in the industrial/commercial overlay zone:
1.

Residential uses;

2.

Places of assembly;

3.

Swap shops and meets;

4.

Outdoor display and sale of merchandise except those associated with nursery or sidewalk sales as permitted under a
temporary use permit, code Section .583;

G.

5.

Sale of used merchandise;

6.

Vehicle sales—new and used;

7.

Car washes;

8.

Laundromats;

9.

Pawn shops;

10.

Manufacturing uses permitted in any industrial zone;

11.

Auto repair shops;

12.

Off-sale of alcohol;

Development Standards and Restrictions.
1.

Location.
a)

Regional Commercial Uses. The industrial/commercial overlay zone for regional commercial uses is limited to
locations within the M-1 zone with access to a primary or secondary freeway. The overlay zone may be applied to
only those properties adjacent to the 71 Freeway and with direct access to Mission Boulevard.

b)

Commercial Serving Industrial Uses. The industrial/commercial overlay zone for commercial serving industrial uses
is limited to M-1 and M-zoned areas that are adjacent to arterial roadways.
111/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

3.

Site Size.
a)

Regional Commercial Uses. Minimum size of regional-commercial sites is ten acres.

b)

Commercial-Serving Industrial Use. None.

Lease Agreement. Lease agreements are required for shopping mall uses. A minimum term of six months is required for
each lease agreement.

4.

Minimum floor area of all retail units within a shopping mall is four hundred square feet of floor area.

5.

Required submittals for all proposed projects:

6.

a)

Parking study—to provide proof that off-street parking provided meets demand;

b)

Master sign plan;

c)

Architectural elevations;

d)

Master site plan;

e)

Conceptual landscape plan;

f)

Permitted land use plan.

Landscaping. Fifteen percent of the site is required to be landscaped, including the six percent required in parking areas
per Section .503-H.B7a of the Zoning Ordinance.

7.

Outdoor Kiosks. Outdoor kiosks for the sales and display of merchandise may be allowed with a conditional use permit
provided the kiosks are within the courtyard of a building and not visible from a public right-of-way.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 2.)

Sec. .450. - (Civic) Civic supplementary use district intent and purpose.
This district is intended to provide for the orderly and harmonious development of properties adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of
the Civic Center or other public or quasi-public properties by setting forth property development standards and use restrictions in addition to
those specified in the zone district to which this "Civic" supplemental use district has been added.
(Ord. No. 1990, § 1; Ord. No. 2077, § 1.)

Sec. .451. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged except for any use permitted which does not intensify the legally existing use of
land in the zone to which the "Civic" supplemental use district is added and providing that a conditional use permit is first obtained,
according to the procedure of Section .580-C, except that in all residential zones one single family house per lot is permitted and in all
nonresidential zones a one thousand (1,000) square foot office building is permitted on each lot without the required conditional use permit.
Notwithstanding the above, all the other property development standards of the civic supplemental use district and the zone district to which
the civic district has been added must be met.
(Ord. No. 3636, § 4.)

Sec. .452. - Uses expressly prohibited.
Those uses are expressly prohibited which are expressly prohibited in the district to which the "Civic," supplemental use district is added
and the following:
a.

Outdoor advertising signs and structures.

b.

Commercial use of open land, such as used car lots, repair facilities, and tire recapping.

c.

Sale and display of used or second hand merchandise unless in a totally enclosed building.

(Ord. No. 1990, § 1.)

d.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an addition to any site-built structure.

e.

Mobile homes/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as accessory living quarters.

(Ord. No. 3070, § 32.)

112/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

f.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 26.)

Sec. .453. - Property development standards.
Property in the "civic" supplemental use district shall be subject to the development standards set forth in the district to which the "civic"
supplemental use district is added and the following:
a.

All utilities shall be placed underground.

b.

All building setback areas shall be landscaped so as to compliment the landscaping of the adjacent public facility. The
superintendent of parks shall approve each landscaping plan in order to assure compliance with this provision. Such
other conditions or requirements may also be required, in addition to those set forth above, which the planning
commission or city council may deem to be in the public welfare and interest.

(Ord. No. 1990, § 1.)

Sec. .454. - Nonconforming uses.
The uses specifically prohibited by Section .452 which are in actual use at the time the "civic" supplemental use is super-imposed upon
any zoning district shall be nonconforming uses, and shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance concerning nonconforming uses.
(Ord. No. 2011, § 2.)

Sec. .455. - Addition, enlargement or structural alteration.
The addition, enlargement, or structural alteration of any building in a zone upon which a "civic" supplemental use district is
superimposed shall be subject to the conditional use provisions of Section .580C.
(Ord. No. 2011, § 2.)

Sec. .456. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .456.5. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .457 to 464. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .470. - Redevelopment supplementary use district intent and purpose.
The express intent of this zoning district is to facilitate specific developments within a redevelopment project area in conformance with
the goals and policies established by the redevelopment plan as approved and adopted by the city. In that a full review and analysis of the
particular redevelopment plan is an integral part of the redevelopment process, the approved plan shall be deemed to control the focus and
development standards applied to each particular project within the redevelopment supplementary use zone. Inherent in this is the
application of project-specific development standards so that the adopted intent of the redevelopment plan may be realized.
(Ord. No. 2521, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3266, § 1 (part).)

Sec. .471. - Application of redevelopment supplementary use district.
Through the amendment to the zoning text procedure (Section .5-70) the city council, upon recommendation of the planning commission
and the redevelopment agency, may establish the "Redevelopment Supplementary Use District Overlay" to any land within any
redevelopment project area. This supplemental use district shall be applied on a development-specific basis and not applied indiscriminately
to an entire project area, unless a review of the entire project area determines that such entire coverage will be of benefit to achieving the
goals of the project area.
(Ord. No. 2521, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3266, § 1 (part).)

Sec. .472. - Supplemental uses permitted.
113/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

A.

Development of mixed use structure on a single parcel notwithstanding the specific underlying zoning district.

B.

Mixed land uses within the geographical or functional scope of a specific project. Such mixed land uses are not limited to
being located on a single parcel of land, but must be a component of an overall development proposal.

C.

Residential uses in commercially zoned districts subject to the following:

Such residential development may include, but is not limited to; attached or detached single family units, multiple family units,
highrise apartments, or mixed use facilities.
The R-4 zoning district shall be the analytical guideline for review of all multiple family residential projects proposed under the
authority of this zoning district, unless other applicable zoning overlay districts, such as the Highrise Zone are proposed to be applied to
the project. In the case where multiple overlay zones are applied, those factors unique to each overlay shall be applied in conjunction
with the R-4 development standards.
When the proposed project fails to satisfy development standards set forth in the R-4 zoning district, the noncompliance shall be
reviewed against the intent and focus of the project as established by the redevelopment plan. Upon satisfactory demonstration that the
noncomplying development factor will not be injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the city, and that such a standard is in
compliance with the redevelopment plan, the noncomplying standard shall be adopted as the controlling standard for the specific
project proposed.
(Ord. No. 2521, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3266, § 1 (part).)

Sec. .473. - Findings for conditional use permit approval.
A.

Elevations, plot plans, landscape plans and other information related to a proposed development in the Redevelopment
Supplemental Use District shall be reviewed by the redevelopment agency and the planning commission at the time of
conditional use permit consideration. Before approving such conditional use permit the planning commission shall make the
following findings:
1.

The proposed development is in conformance with the redevelopment plan adopted by the city.

2.

Any project specific development standards are not injurious or detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the city.

3.

That the development, as proposed, will be of benefit to the city, both as to present and future residents.

(Ord. No. 2521, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3266, § I (part).)

Sec. .474. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3266.
Sec. .480. - Residential-Manufactured Housing Development Zone (R-MHD).
There is hereby created a Residential-Manufactured Housing Development Zone, (R-MHD). This zone may be applied to those areas
designated by the General Plan for residential uses and shall further be consistent with the density limitations of the various General Plan
residential categories.
If the R-MHD Zone is to be applied to any undeveloped property it shall be effective for one year. After such time the zoning shall revert
back to the zone from which it was changed, with the exception that one year extensions may be granted after review by the Planning
Commission and approval of the City Council.
The property development standards contained in Subsection .483 shall apply to all Manufactured Housing Developments established
after the date of adoption of this ordinance.
Any manufactured housing development established and in use prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance shall be allowed to
continue with NON-CONFORMING USE RIGHTS being applied to the standards contained in Sections .481, .482, and .483. Any expansion,
addition, or renovation shall be subject to all the applicable standards in Sections .481, .482, and .483.
Section .484 Noticing Requirements, Section .485 Impact Report, .486 Relocation Plan, and .487 Notice of Public Hearing shall in
accordance with state law apply to all manufactured housing developments in existence regardless to their time of establishment.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1 (part).)

114/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. .481. - Intent and purpose.
The regulations as set forth in this section are intended to provide for the orderly development of manufactured housing developments
and to provide for their harmonious relationship with properties in the immediate vicinity. The standards contained in this section are set
forth to be the minimum. Upon reviewing an application for establishing or enlarging a manufactured housing development the Planning
Commission may establish conditions or requirements in addition to or in excess of, those minimum requirements set forth in this ordinance
when such additional requirements are deemed to be in the public welfare and interest.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 1 (part).)

Sec. .482. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the following purposes:
A.

MANUFACTURED HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS SUBJECT TO OBTAINING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.

B.

MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT SALES—The sales of manufactured housing units for the purpose of locating those
units in the manufactured housing development, provided a business license is first obtained from the office of the City
Clerk.

C.

Group care facilities subject to the provisions of Section .5809-14

D.

And such other uses as the Planning Manager may determine to be similar and which are not specifically listed in a less
restrictive zoning district. The decision of the Planning Manager shall be final unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant
to Section .501-A.

(Ord. No. 3137, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3713, § 4; Ord. No. 3971, § 16.)

Sec. .482.5. - Uses expressly prohibited.
A.

Medical marijuana dispensaries.

(Ord. No. 4096, § 27.)

Sec. .483. - Property development standards.
Manufactured housing shall be in accordance with the following minimum standards:
A.

LOCATION—When considering the approval of a manufactured housing development site based on its general impact on
the immediate vicinity and terrain, the Planning Commission shall consider the following criteria:
1.

Hillside Areas. Sites that present excessive exposure of convention metal exteriorated manufactured housing units
due to hillside locations when viewed from lower elevations or sites near the base of developable hillside areas
where the view is from above, shall not be considered suitable for manufactured housing development and may be
denied for this reason by the Planning Commission. However, manufactured housing units utilizing an exterior
finishing treatment as specified in Sec. .229.3-M-4, and of which the design is approved by the Planning
Commission, will be considered when in the opinion of the Planning Commission the visual effect will not be
substantially different from conventional residential development.

2.

Views. Views and vistas that are of community-wide benefit shall not be obstructed or dominated by a
manufactured housing development.

3.

Landscaping. Whenever the Planning Commission approves a manufactured housing development as described in
1 and 2, the Planning Commission may require additional trees and other screening type landscape.

B.

MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT AREA—Manufactured Housing Developments shall be developed on a parcel of land not less
than fifteen (15) acres in area.

C.

SITE SETBACKS—The setback from the manufactured housing development property lines shall be as follows:
1.

Front Yard. For all manufactured housing developments having street frontage, the setback along all street
frontages shall be the front yard requirement of the zone in which it is situated, but in no case less than fifteen (15)
115/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

feet. However, if the park is adjacent to a residential district with a more restrictive front yard, the park shall follow
the setback of the adjacent zoning district.
2.

Interior Property Lines. A ten (10) foot yard setback is required where an interior property line abuts the
manufactured housing development from single family residences or zoning districts (except when use is a flood
control channel or a railroad or freeway right-of-way). When the manufactured housing development abuts other
than single family zoning districts, no setback is required.

3.

Encroachment. In no case shall any structure other than a permitted fence or wall be located within any interior
property line setback area.

D.

PERIMETER WALLS—Along all interior property boundary lines a six (6) foot high solid decorative masonry wall shall be
erected and maintained, but shall not extend into required street frontage yards. To the rear of all street frontage yard
setbacks a six foot high solid decorative masonry wall shall be erected and maintained. Approved entry roadway or
walkway openings into said development are permitted as an exception to the above. When an existing six (6) foot high
solid masonry wall or building exists on the subject property line or street frontage setback lines, the Planning
Commission may accept these walls in place of those required above.

E.

LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
1.

Setbacks. All required development setback areas shall be permanently landscaped and maintained with ground
cover, trees, and shrubs. The landscape areas shall be irrigated and planted to the approval of the city planner.

2.

Street Trees. Permanent landscaping, including ground cover, shrubs, trees and irrigation shall be provided along
the roadways and throughout the development to create a desirable effect as well as sufficient shade and screen.
The trees shall be planted and irrigated by the developer as approved by the city planner.

3.

Living Unit Lots. All open areas on individual living unit lots shall be landscaped and maintained by the unit owner
unless otherwise specified.

4.

Open Space. All required open space areas shall be permanently landscaped and maintained with ground cover,
trees and shrubs. The landscaped areas shall be irrigated and planted to the approval of the City Planner.

5.

Minimum Tree Size. All trees used for landscaping shall be at least fifteen (15) gallon size trees.

6.

Landscaping Plan Approval. Prior to issuance of a building permit the Building Division shall ascertain that
landscaping plans have been submitted to, and approved by, the City Planner.

7.

Maintenance. Any failure to maintain the required landscaped areas per the approved plan shall be, and the same
is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance endangering the health, safety and general welfare of the
public and a detriment to the surrounding community. The manufactured housing development owner shall be
responsible for all areas, with the exception of the areas contained on each individual living unit lot. The
maintenance of each living unit lot shall be the responsibility of the occupant of the living unit.

F.

ACCESS REQUIREMENTS—There shall be provided at least two vehicular access points to all manufactured housing
developments. One access shall be designated as permanent; the other may be for emergency only, if so approved by
the Planning Commission. The permanent access shall be required to connect directly with a major or secondary
highway, or connect on a local street at a point within three hundred (300) feet of an intersection with such local street
and a major or secondary highway, if approved by the City Traffic Engineer. A major or secondary highway is a street as
set forth on the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways Map.

G.

RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE AREAS - Manufactured Housing Developments shall have certain areas set aside for recreation
and open space. "Open space" is defined as space such as recreational areas, park yard setback, walkways, and landscaped
areas available to all residents of the manufactured housing development. Areas used for streets, lot yards, storage, parking,
laundry and trash receptacles shall not be considered as open space. Recreation and open space shall be provided as follows:
1.

Adult Standards. In an adult only manufactured housing development, or in the adult section of a manufactured
housing development, five hundred (500) square feet per individual lot shall be set aside for recreation and open
space. A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of each five hundred (500) square feet is to be used exclusively
for recreation.

2.

Family Standards. In a family manufactured housing development, or in the family section of a manufactured
116/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

housing development, eight hundred (800) square feet per individual lot shall be set aside for recreation and open
space. A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of each eight hundred (800) square feet to be used exclusively
for recreation.
3.

Adult/Family Standards. Developments that combine family and adult sections shall provide separate recreation
areas for each section based on their respective formula.

4.

Location. Recreation areas shall be designed to have a usable shape and shall have at least one-half (½) of their
periphery on a manufactured housing development roadway frontage.

5.
H.

Recreation Facilities. Recreation facilities shall include recreation equipment suitable for the needs of the residents.

INTERIOR ROADWAYS
1.

Design. Roadways shall be designed so that each living unit lot shall front upon a roadway within the development,
and provide convenient and reasonable traffic circulation. The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove
the design of such roadway pattern.

2.

Standards. All roadways shall have a required minimum width of thirty (30) feet. If parallel parking is to be
permitted, the street shall be widened three (3) feet on each side where parking occurs. Where parking occurs a
four (4) foot wide sidewalk shall be installed. All roadways shall be graded and surfaced their entire width to the
structural standards for a local residential street as approved by the City Engineer. Adequate street drainage shall
be provided to the approval of the City Engineer.

3.

Parking Prohibited. Roadways within a manufactured housing development shall not be used for automobile
parking at any time, unless designed to accommodate auto parking and pedestrian traffic.

4.

Street Improvements. The interior roadways shall be improved as follows: curbs, gutters, street lighting on
ornamental standards, and landscaping.

I.

INTERNAL LIGHTING—The premises shall be adequately lighted by lights as follows:
1.

2.

Location.
a.

Along interior roads and their intersections;

b.

At all guest parking areas;

c.

Within all recreation areas;

d.

At all trash depots;

e.

Around all buildings containing public facilities;

f.

Along all interior walkways.

Light Intensity. The general area or tract of land containing the manufactured housing development shall be lighted
to provide an average of .25 average horizontal foot candles throughout the development.

3.

Light Standard Height. Freestanding lighting shall be in keeping with the residential character and shall not exceed a
height of twelve (12) feet.

J.

GUEST PARKING—In addition to the automobile parking area on the living unit lot, there shall be established and
maintained within each manufactured housing development well distributed parking areas for guests. The minimum
number of such parking spaces within the development shall be equal to one (1) for every two (2) living unit lots, or
fraction thereof, within the development.

K.

WALKWAYS—Sufficient walkways shall be provided to insure the convenient and safe movement of pedestrian traffic
throughout the development. Walkways serving utility buildings, recreational areas and other general areas shall be a
minimum of four (4) feet in width. Walkways must be surfaced to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

L.

UTILITIES—Each living unit's lot shall be provided with underground facilities for sanitary sewers, water, telephone and
electric service and provisions for making connections thereto. All water and sanitary sewer services shall be subject to
use and installation standards of the City of Pomona. Fire hydrants shall be installed in conjunction with the utilities per
the requirements of both the Pomona Fire Department and the Pomona Water Department.

M.

T.V. ANTENNAE—Individual television antennae shall be prohibited. A single central television tower is permitted
provided said tower does not exceed the height limitation of the zoning district in which the development is located. Said
tower shall serve every living unit lot through underground cable.
117/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

N.

STORAGE—A minimum of one and five-tenths (1.5) percent of the gross manufactured housing development's total area sha
for storage of travel trailers. Such area shall be paved to the satisfaction of the City Planner and enclosed by a six (6) foot hig
decorative masonry wall with a solid gate. The required storage shall be in addition to that required for vehicular parking or
Said area shall be lighted adequately, provided with yard drains for adequate drainage, and shall have electrical outlets and
located in such manner to provide convenient access.

O.

STRUCTURE HEIGHT—No building or structure shall exceed one (1) story or twenty (20) feet in height.

P.

TRASH COLLECTION DEPOT—One (1) trash collection depot to contain a minimum of one (1) three (3) cubic yard trash bin
for every ten (10) living unit lots is required. All such areas shall be situated adjacent to interior roadways in such manner
as to provide convenient use by all park occupants and easy receptacle removal by the refuse collector. All trash depots
shall be screened on three (3) sides by a five (5) foot high masonry wall and screened from public view by a solid gate.
Each trash depot shall be lighted adequately and shall have a hose bibb located within the depot.

Q.

PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS—Public address systems or loudspeakers shall not be permitted if audible outside the
boundaries of the manufactured housing unit development.

R.

DENSITY—Maximum density for a manufactured housing development shall not exceed ten (10) lots per net acre.

S.

MANUFACTURED HOUSING LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

Minimum lot area: three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750) square feet;

2.

Minimum lot width: fifty (50) feet;

3.

Minimum lot depth for all units: seventy-five (75) feet;

4.

Optional Lot Dimension—up to twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of living unit lots may be designed to
accommodate single wide manufactured housing units. The minimum lot width to accommodate single wide
manufactured living units shall be thirty- five (35) feet.

T.

LIVING UNIT LOT YARDS
1.

Front. Each living unit lot shall have a minimum front yard of ten (10) feet in depth. If the unit is sited on an angle,
the front yard may average ten (10) feet but in no case shall the living unit be placed within five (5) feet of the front
lot line.

2.

Side. Four (4) feet.

3.

Rear. Each living unit shall have a minimum rear yard of five (5) feet in depth. If the unit is sited on an angle, the rear
yard may average five (5) feet, but in no case shall the living unit be placed within three (3) feet of the rear lot line.

U.

PARKING—Two (2) spaces in a carport or a garage shall be required on each living unit lot. In the case of a parallel
parking design each space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet. In the case of a tandem parking design
each space shall be a minimum of twelve (12) by twenty (20) feet.

V.

LIVING UNIT PLACEMENT
1.

Foundation. Each living unit shall be placed on the lot so that the unit rests at grade.

2.

Stabilizing System. A stabilizing system designed to increase the stability and seismic safety characteristics of the
unit shall be required. Said stabilizing system shall be approved by the Building Official prior to the siting of the
living unit.

3.

Permanent lot marking. The boundaries of each lot shall be clearly and permanently marked, so that each lot can be
readily determined at all times.

W.

ACCESSORY—BUILDINGS AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1.

Design. The design of the living unit accessory structures shall be consistent with that of the living unit.

2.

Materials. The construction materials shall be the same as, or comparable to the exterior finishing materials of the
living unit.

3.

Commercial Use. No structure shall be erected or expanded for commercial purposes except those permitted by
the Conditional Use Permit.

4.

Administration or Recreation Building. Any such building shall be architecturally attractive and compatible with
living units, and shall be subject to approval of the Planning Commission.

118/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

X.

ANNUAL RESIDENT REPORT—Each manufactured housing development owner, or their representative, shall submit an annu
report no later than January 15th of each new year to the City Planner containing the following:

Y.

1.

Name of manufactured housing development;

2.

Address of development;

3.

Contact telephone number;

4.

Total living unit lots/spaces in development;

5.

Number of living unit lots/spaces occupied on January 1 of the new year;

6.

Number of living units occupied by permanent residents on January 1 of the new year;

7.

Number of permanent residents residing in the development;

8.

Number of living units billed directly to the electric power company;

9.

Number of renters occupying living units.

RELOCATED UNIT INCLUSIONS—Each manufactured housing development shall have not less than ten percent (10%) of
the total number of unit or 15 lots, whichever is greater, available to any individual with a previously purchased
manufactured housing unit having been built in conformance with the "National Mobilehome Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974," and having been determined by the representative(s) of the development to be eligible for
inclusion into the development. These lots shall remain available until all other lots have been rented to individual
manufactured housing unit owners. The criteria used by the manufactured housing developments management to
determine unit eligibility shall be submitted to, and approved by, the City Planner prior to the granting of the Conditional
Use Permit for the development.

(Ord. No. 3137, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3625, § 2 (part).)

Sec. .484. - Noticing requirements.
The requirements set forth in this section are intended to insure that both the unit owner and the tenants receive the proper noticing
regarding any proposed Change of Use, Change of Zone, or Conversion to condominium ownership that affects their manufactured housing
development.
The requirements of this section are to be initiated for any proposed act that requires a City permit and shall remain enforceable
throughout the period set forth in this section.

Noticing—These requirements conform to, and serve to facilitate the requirements set forth in the following sections of State law:
1.

The Subdivision Map Act—Division 2;

2.

The Civil Code of the State of California—Chapter 2.5;

3.

The Government Code of the State of California Title 7.
A.

CHANGE OF USE OR ZONE—The requirements of this section shall be applicable to any applicant who proposes
either a Change of Zone or a Change of Use that will affect a Manufactured Housing Development.

A Change of Use is defined as changing from a Manufactured Housing Development to any other type of land use.
A Change of Zone is defined as changing the property's existing zoning district designation to that of any other zoning district
designation.
The owner of a manufactured housing development or representative authorized to act on his behalf shall give:
1.

At least fifteen (15) days written notice shall be given to all unit owners and tenants that the applicant will be
appearing before the Planning Commission to request a Change of Use or Change of Zone of the
Manufactured Housing Development.

2.

Each prospective unit owner or tenant shall be given written notice prior to the inception of tenancy that the
applicant is requesting a Change of Use or Change of Zone.

3.

At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing on the application with the Planning Commission the
applicant shall provide a copy of the Impact Report and Relocation Plan to all unit owners and tenants of the
119/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

manufactured housing development.
4.

Within thirty (30) days of the final action of the Planning Commission or City Council written notice to all unit
owners and tenants of the approval or disapproval of the Change of Use or Change of Zone shall be given.

5.

Each prospective unit owner or tenant shall be given written notice prior to the inception of tenancy that the
request for Change of Use or Change of Zone has been granted.

6.

At least six (6) months written notice shall be given to all unit owners to terminate tenancy after the approval
of a Change of Use or Change of Zone.

B.

CONVERSION—The requirements of this section shall be applicable to any applicant who proposes to convert a
manufactured housing development to condominium ownership, as defined in the Subdivision Map Act. The
noticing shall be initiated according to this section whenever a tentative tract map or tentative parcel map must be
filed for the proposed conversion.

The owner of a manufactured housing development or representative authorized to act on his behalf shall give:
1.

At least sixty (60) days written notice shall be given to all unit owners, tenants and prospective owners and
tenants that the applicant will be filing a tentative map with the Planning Commission.

2.

At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing on the tentative map by the Planning Commission the
applicant shall provide a copy of the Impact Report and Relocation Plan to all unit owners and tenants of the
manufactured housing development.

3.

At least fifteen (15) days written notice to all unit owners, tenants and prospective unit owners and tenants
that the applicant will be appearing before the Planning Commission to request an extension to the approved
tentative map.

4.

Within ten (10) days of the submittal of the Department of Real Estate's Public Report by the applicant, written
notice shall be given to all unit owners, tenants and prospective unit owners and tenants of such application
and that the Public Report will be available for inspection upon request.

5.

Within ten (10) days of the action by City Council, written notice shall be given to all unit owners, tenants and
prospective unit owners and tenants that the Final Map was approved or disapproved. Written notice shall be
given to all unit owners informing them of their exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her
respective unit lot upon the same terms and conditions that such unit lot will be initially offered to the general
public or terms more favorable to the unit owner. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety (90)
days from the date of issuance of the Public Report by the California Department of Real Estate, unless the
unit owner gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right.

6.

At least six (6) months written notice shall be given to all unit owners informing them of the manufactured
housing development owner's intention to convert the development and terminate the rental tenancy of the
unit owner.

C.

NOTICE FORMAT—All required notices as set forth in this ordinance shall conform to an established format
approved by the City Planner. Said formats shall be made available through the Community Development
Department as part of the application process.

(Ord. No. 3137, § 1 (part).)

Sec. .485. - Impact report.
The Impact Report shall be prepared with the intent to assist the Planning Commission in their review and evaluation of the application.
This report shall be an assessment of the characteristics of the affected manufactured housing development. The Impact Report does not
replace or preclude the requirement of an Environmental Impact Report document.
A.

CHANGE OF USE, CHANGE OF ZONE, OR CONVERSION—Prior to the change of a manufactured housing development to
another use, or at the time of filing a tentative or parcel map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of the
manufactured housing development to another use, the applicant shall file a report on the impact of the
120/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

change/conversion upon the displaced unit owners and tenants of the manufactured housing development to be
converted.
B.

IMPACT REPORT—
1.

The Impact Report shall outline specific information concerning the characteristics of the existing development
including, but not limited to, the following:
a.

names and addresses of all unit owners and tenants;

b.

map of the manufactured housing development which identifies all unit lots by number;

c.

rental rate history of the development for the previous three (3) years;

d.

monthly vacancy rate of the development for the past three (3) years;

e.

makeup of living unit households including family size, length of residence, and age of tenants;

f.

number of living unit households that qualify as low or moderate income and the percentage of those in
relation to the total resident population.

2.

The applicant shall make a copy of the report available to each unit owner and tenant of the manufactured housing
development at least fifteen 15) days prior to the public hearing on the application by the Planning Commission.

3.

The Planning Commission shall review the Impact Report prior to giving approval and utilize it to evaluate the
Relocation Plan. During this process the Planning Commission shall consider the following:
a.

The extent to which displacement of unit owners and tenants may cause undue hardship or be detrimental to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the City.

b.

The role that the manufactured housing development plays in the existing housing market will be determined.
Particular emphasis will be placed on the evaluation of rent structures to determine how the existing
manufactured housing development may be serving low and moderate income households. Criteria to
determine low and moderate income households used by the City of Pomona will be used in the evaluation.

c.

If the Planning Commission determines that vacancies in the development have been increased for the
purpose of preparing the development for change/conversion, the application may be disapproved. In
evaluation of the current vacancy level the increase in rental rates for each unit lot and the average monthly
vacancy rates for the development over the preceding three years shall be considered.

(Ord. No. 3137 § 1 (part).)

Sec. .486. - Relocation Plan.
The Relocation Plan shall be prepared with the intent that it provides mitigation measures to any problems described in the Impact
Report that relate to the relocation of the displaced living units. The relocation plan shall be considered by the Planning Commission prior to
giving approval and shall be adopted concurrently with the approval of the application.
A.

RELOCATION PLAN—
1.

The Relocation Plan shall:
a.

identify adequate affordable relocation sites based upon the existing structure of development;

b.

identify and document the cost of moving the living units;

c.

provide a phase-out schedule outlining the time and sequence required for relocation;

d.

provide an assistance plan outlining the types of assistance which may include financial assistance to be made
available to unit owners;

e.
2.

identify any provisions as deemed necessary to protect the investment and welfare of the unit owner.

A copy of the relocation plan shall be provided to each unit owner and tenant at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing on the application by the Planning Commission.

(Ord. No. 3137, § 1 (part).)

Sec. .487. - Notice of public hearing.
121/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Notice of the public hearing for Change of Use or Change of Zone and Conversion shall be given by the City in the following manner and
shall contain the date, time and place of hearing, a general description of the property, and a general description of the item being
considered.
A.

Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than ten (10) days prior to date of
hearing.

B.

Notices for the public hearing shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days before the hearing to:
1.

owners of property within radius of four hundred (400) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property as shown on
the latest available assessment roll of the County;

2.

All existing unit owners and tenants of the property proposed for change/conversion; and

3.

The applicant.

(Ord. No. 3137, § 1 (part).)

Sec. .490. - "SP" speci c plan district.
A.

Purpose and intent.

This district is intended to provide a base designation to further implement the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan with
respect to specific areas and uses which by their unique character require a more comprehensive and intense evaluation and planning
effort. This district will apply to land only after the adoption of a Specific Plan by the city council, pursuant to Government Code Section
65450 et seq.
B.

Zoning map designation.

The specific plan district shall be designated on the City of Pomona Zoning Map by the symbol "SP" followed by a prefix of letters or
numbers to designate the Specific Plan (e.g. SP-PR for Phillips Ranch Specific Plan). The rezoning of any land to a Specific Plan designation
shall be approved only after the adoption of a Specific Plan area covering the subject land and shall be consistent with such adopted
Specific Plan area.
C.

Development standards/permitted uses.

Development standards and permitted uses shall be established by the adopted Specific Plan covering the subject area. Where the
adopted Specific Plan is silent regarding certain development standards, the city planner shall determine the applicability of similar
development standards established in the Zoning Ordinance. When a use is not specifically listed in the permitted uses section of the
Specific Plan covering the subject area, it shall be assumed that such use is hereby expressly prohibited unless a determination of
similarity is approved per Section .501-A of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3717, § 9.)

PART III.
Sec. .500. - General provisions, intent and purpose.
The following general provisions which deal with procedure and standards are intended to bring related matters under simplified
headings subject to the references found to the body of the ordinance.
Sec. .501. - Uses permitted.
No building or structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be designed, erected, structurally altered or enlarged
except for the purpose permitted in the district in which such building or land is located and then only after applying for and securing all
permits and licenses required by law and ordinance. If any use is omitted from the list of those specified as permissible in each of the various
districts herein designated, or if ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent
of this ordinance, it shall be the duty of the commission to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning said use and by resolution of record set
forth its findings and the reasons for designating a specific classification for such use.
122/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 3223, § 2.)

Sec. 501-A. - Uses not listed.
It is recognized that in the development of a comprehensive zoning ordinance, not all uses of land can be listed, nor can all future uses
be anticipated. Therefore, when in this ordinance it is stated "and such other uses as the city planner may determine to be similar in
permitting an unlisted use," the city planner shall first make a finding that the following conditions exist:
A.

The proposed use shall meet the intent of, and be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan;

B.

The proposed use shall meet the stated purpose and general intent of the district in which the use is proposed to be
located;

C.

The proposed use shall not adversely impact the public health, safety and general welfare of the city's residents; and

D.

The proposed use shall share characteristics common with, and not be of greater intensity, density or generate more
environmental impact, than those uses listed in the land use district in which it is to be located.

The decision of the city planner shall be made within three (3) business days of the filing of an application for a Determination of
Similarity and shall be final, unless a written appeal is filed with the planning division within 10 days after the written decision by the city
planner. The appeal shall be considered by the planning commission as a consent item. The decision of the planning commission shall be
final, unless appealed. The applicant may appeal the planning commission decision to the city council. A member of the city council may seek
an appeal of the planning commission decision. Any councilmember who seeks a review before the city council must request and obtain a
majority vote of the city council in order to set the appeal for a public hearing.
(Ord. No. 3713, § 3.)

Sec. .502. - Uses expressly prohibited.
Certain uses of land and of buildings and structures are hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people
of the city and are for said reason expressly prohibited. Said uses are defined in each district.
Sec. .503. - Property development standards.
.503-A. LOT AREA.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be hereafter erected or located on a lot unless such building, structure or
enlargement conforms with the area regulations of the district in which it is located.
1.

Every individual parcel of land existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall be deemed to be one (1) lot, and not
more than one (1) main building shall be permitted on said parcel of land unless all regulations herein established are
complied with or a subdivision tract map or a record of survey map is recorded with the recorder of the county, and is
filed with and approved by the commission and council, or where a subparceling map is approved by the city engineer
and the director of planning.

2.

No parcel of land held under separate ownership at the time of the effective date of this ordinance may be reduced in
any manner below the minimum standards established by this ordinance for the district within which the lot is located.

3.

No lot area may be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces will be smaller than prescribed by this
ordinance nor may the occupancy be increased in any manner except in conformity with the regulations herein
established.

4.

No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance may be considered as providing a yard or open space for
any other building, nor may any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard
or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected.

5.

No parking area, parking space, or loading space which is provided for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this ordinance shall hereafter be relinquished or reduced in any manner below the requirements established in this
ordinance, unless equivalent facilities are provided elsewhere, the location of which is approved by the commission.
123/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

6.

In blocks where more than forty (40) percent of the frontage in said block is already subdivided to lot area standards less th
prescribed by the requirements of this ordinance for the district within which said lots are located and when lots with an are
or larger are divided or subdivided, adjustments may be made in the newly defined lot areas to accommodate the area requ
that directly serve said lots. In no case, however, may the affected lots be reduced by an amount in excess of ten (10) percen
required lot area in the zoning district in which the subject lots are located, and then only after review and approval by the c
site plan which defines the proposed development.

.503-B. LOT DIMENSIONS
1.

Every lot shall have a minimum width and/or depth not less than that prescribed in the district under consideration.

2.

Where a lot has a minimum width and/or depth less than that prescribed by this ordinance, and said lot was of record
under one (1) ownership at the effective date of this ordinance, said lot may be used subject to the provisions of Section
.050.

(Ord. No. 1529 § 7; Ord. No. 1716 § 8.)

.503-C. RECYCLING AND SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS
A.

Purpose and Intent.
1.

Ensure the provision of adequate locations and compatible surrounding land uses for the collection, separation,
processing and shipping of recyclable materials including but not limited to newspapers, plastic, glass and aluminum;

2.

Regulate the location of recycling and trash containers and enclosures in order to provide adequate, convenient space
for the collection, storage, and loading of recycled materials as a part of new multifamily residential, commercial,
industrial, institutional and publicly owned development projects;

B.

3.

Increase the recycling of reusable materials consistent with statewide goals to reduce solid waste disposal;

4.

Decrease the impact of the consumption of renewable and nonrenewable resources on the environment; and

5.

Reduce litter.

Definitions.
1.

"Commercial waste" means waste which originates in retail or private sector service establishments (e.g., financial and
insurance offices, retail establishments, theaters, etc.).

2.

"Heavy industrial waste" means waste derived from industrial or manufacturing operations such as ship building,
construction, and demolition operations.

3.

"Light industrial waste" means waste derived from research and development facilities and light manufacturing
operations such as semiconductor and computer manufacturers.

4.

"Recyclable materials" means any one or more of the following categories of materials collected and recycled or salvaged
from within the City of Pomona:

Paper

Metals

Plastics

Newspaper

Aluminum

PET—Soda bottles

Junk Mail

Tin cans

HDPE—Milk jugs, colored plastic jugs,

Envelopes
Computer paper
Cereal boxes
Telephone books
Magazines
Cardboard

Glass
Clear
Brown
Green

detergent bottles
Film plastics—Clear grocery store
bags/vegetable bags
Other hard plastics (HDPE and PET
have a 1 or a 2 triangle on the bottom
of the bottle)

Beverage Containers
124/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

All glass, plastic, aluminum
California redemption beverage containers

5.

"Residential waste" means waste materials generated in single-family and multifamily households.

6.

Retail/service. This term refers to the waste generated in wholesale, retail, or service establishments. Examples include
offices, markets, stores and other such business institutions.

7.

"Solid waste" means any nonliquid, nongaseous waste. Includes agricultural, residential, and commercial waste.

8.

"Development project" means any of the following:
(A)

A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial, industrial, or institutional building, marina, or
residential building having two or more dwelling units, where solid waste is collected and loaded.

(B)

Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility
used for collecting and loading solid waste.

9.
C.

"Recycling area (areas for recycling)" means space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials.

General Provisions. General recycling and solid waste requirements as defined herein shall apply to new development projects
requiring a building permit and any modification which adds twenty-five (25) percent or more to the existing gross floor area
in all zones as follows:

Zoning District

Applicability

Residential

two or more multifamily dwellings

Commercial

All development

Industrial

All development

Speci c plan areas and publicly owned land

All development

D.

Materials, Construction, Design and Location.
1.

The walls of each recycling and trash enclosure shall be constructed of solid masonry material with an exterior surface
finish compatible with the main structure(s).

2.

Each recycling and trash enclosure shall have decorative, solid, heavy gauge metal gates. The gate shall incorporate a
locking device during closing hours of industrial or commercial uses.

3.

Each recycling and trash enclosure shall be six (6) feet in height.

4.

Each recycling and trash enclosure shall be designed to allow walk-in access without having to open the main enclosure
gate for residential projects.

E.

5.

Maintenance of each recycling and trash enclosure shall be the responsibility of the property owner.

6.

The recycling collection area shall be located within the trash enclosure area.

7.

If feasible, the trash enclosure area shall be located adjacent to a building.

Instructional Signs. Signs shall be conspicuously posted on each recycling and trash enclosure giving instructions on the use of
the recycling bins and containers.

F.

Landscaping. The perimeter of the recycling and trash enclosure shall be planted, if feasible, with drought resistant
landscaping, including a combination of shrubs and/or climbing evergreen vines.

G.

Lighting. All trash collection areas shall be well lit with a minimum one foot candle, subject to approval of the city planner or
designee.

H.
I.

Setbacks. Recycling or trash enclosures shall be prohibited in any front or street side yard setback.
Use of Parking Spaces. Recycling or trash enclosures shall not be located in any required parking space, except as provided in
125/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

this section.
J.

Existing Trash Enclosures. If an existing development project has a trash enclosure, the required recycling containers shall be
located inside such trash enclosure. If it is not feasible to locate the required recycling containers within the trash enclosure,
such recycling containers shall be located adjacent to the trash enclosure and shall be appropriately screened, subject to
approval by the city planner or designee.

K.

Nonresidential Uses and Projects. Nonresidential uses and projects within all zones of the city shall provide exterior trash and
recyclable material storage areas as herein specified. The following are minimum exterior trash and recycling storage
requirements. The following requirements shall apply:
1.

Dimensions of the storage area shall accommodate containers consistent with current methods of collection. The
exterior storage area shall not be located within any required front yard, street side yard, any required parking and
landscaped areas, or any other area required by the Pomona City Code to be constructed or maintained unencumbered
according to fire and other applicable building and public safety codes. The storage area shall be accessible to all
occupants and haulers. In all cases where a lot or premises is served by an alley, all exterior storage areas shall be
directly accessible to such alley. If the exterior storage area is located outside or on the exterior of any structure it shall
be screened with a six (6) foot high solid wood, metal or masonry enclosure. A sign identifying each exterior trash and
recycling storage area shall be displayed. Each sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall be posted on
the exterior of the storage area adjacent to the access point.

2.

Any new development projects or any modifications to existing developments located in the Central Business District
(CBD) area which add twenty-five (25) percent or more to the gross floor area shall be required to be in compliance with
this section. The owner(s) of a property which has an existing "off-site" trash enclosure prior to the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this subsection shall be required to make any and all necessary modifications to the "off-site" trash
enclosure in order to be in compliance with the provisions stated herein.

3.

There shall be at least one (1) trash facility for every commercial or industrial lot, except as permitted above. Additional
trash facilities may be required, subject to approval by the city planner or designee.

L.

Residential Projects. Multiple-family residential projects within all zones of the city shall provide trash and recycling storage
areas as follows:
1.

Dimensions of the storage area shall accommodate containers consistent with current methods of collection. Exterior
storage area shall not be located in any required front yard, street side yard, any required parking and landscaped areas,
or any other area required by the Pomona City Code to be constructed or maintained unencumbered according to fire
and other applicable building and public safety codes. The storage area shall be accessible to residents and haulers. If
the exterior storage area is located outside or on the exterior of any structure/building, the storage area for five (5) or
more dwelling units shall be screened with a six (6) foot high solid material (wood, masonry, etc.) enclosure. In all cases
where a lot or premises is served by an alley, all exterior storage areas shall be directly accessible to such alley. One sign
identifying each exterior trash and recycling storage area shall be displayed. Each sign shall not exceed four (4) square
feet in area and shall be posted on the exterior of the storage area adjacent to the access point.

2.

A minimum of one (1) recycling and one (1) solid waste disposal container shall be provided for every fifteen (15) units.

3.

Trash and recycling storage areas shall be located a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the residential unit(s)
they serve.

4.

Projects with two (2) and three (3) dwellings on a lot need not provide a trash enclosure but must provide trash
containers for both recyclable and solid waste disposal, subject to approval of the public works department.

M.

Severability. All provisions of this subsection are severable and, if for any reason any sentence, paragraph, or section of this
subsection shall be held invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of the subsection.

(Ord. No. 3737, § 3.)

.503-D YARDS
In the "A" district, the several single-family "R" districts, and the "AP" district, each lot shall have a minimum front, side, and rear yard.
Said yards shall be not less than those prescribed within the district in which said lot is located with the following exceptions:
(a)

Front:
126/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(1)

Where lots comprising fifty (50) percent or more of the frontage on one side of the street between intersecting or inter
developed with a front yard either greater or lesser in depth than that prescribed herein, the average of such existing f
establish the front yard for the remaining lots in the block frontage; provided, however, that in no case shall said front
fifteen (15) feet. Distances over forty (40) feet from the front property line shall be included as forty (40) feet in calculat

In no case shall a main residential building in the R-1-7500, R-1-7200, and R-1-6000 zone districts be set back a distance
greater than forty (40) feet from any front property line, unless provision is made for a future street or street widening, alleys or
alley widening, in which case the distance shall be not more than forty (40) feet from the future property line as determined by
the master plan of highways. Deed restrictions existing on the effective date, if requiring a greater setback than forty (40) feet,
shall take precedence over this section.
(Ord. No. 1901, § 1.)

(2)

On key lots the minimum front yard shall be the average of the front yard for the adjoining interior lot and the side
yard required for the reversed corner lot. When buildings on the adjoining interior lot may be closer to the property
line than the distance prescribed for such front yard by this ordinance, the location of the existing building shall
determine the front yard on said interior lot, but in no case shall the key lot front yard be less than fifteen (15) feet.

(3)

Irrespective of the foregoing provisions of this ordinance, any lot having a grade or slope of more than twenty-five
(25) percent, measured from the curb line to a point midway between the side lot lines and a distance of fifty (50)
feet from the front lot line, may have a front yard which is not less than fifty (50) percent of the depth required in
which said lot is located, and a private garage may be erected in said front yard when said garage is located not less
than five (5) feet from the front lot line; and further provided, that said garage shall have no doors or other
openings equipped in such a manner that when open or being opened will project beyond said front lot line.

(4)

Where the entire frontage in a residential block is designed and developed as a unit the front yard requirements
may be varied by not more than five (5) feet in either direction; provided, that the average front yard for the entire
frontage is not less than that required in the district.

(b)

Side:
(1)

On corner lots, side yard abutting the side street shall be twenty (20) percent of the width of the lot, but need not
exceed fifteen (15) feet nor shall it be less than ten (10) feet.

(2)

On a reversed corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than one-half (½) of the distance
required for front yards on interior lots on the street upon which the reversed corner lot sides; provided, however,
that this side yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Private garages located in the side yard shall be at least
eighteen (18) feet from property line on the side street.

(3)

Every main building shall be set back not less than five feet from the toe or top of the slope after grading. For slopes
over fifty feet in vertical height, the setback shall be a minimum of ten feet. Where the vertical distance between the
top and toe of the slope of twelve feet or greater and where the side yard setback is less than two-fifths of the
height at the adjacent slope, a slough wall shall be constructed to the approval and standards of the public works
department at the toe of the slope.

(Ord. No. 2252, § 1 (part): Ord. No. 2566, § 1.)

(4)

An accessory building located seventy-five (75) feet or less from the front property line shall have the same side
yard as that required for the main building, regardless of whether said accessory building is attached to the main
building.

(5)

A garage or accessory building (except those with a dwelling occupancy) may be located on a side property line
when said building is:
(a)

Located seventy-five (75) feet or more from the front property line; and

(b)

Constructed of one (1) hour fire resistant material; and

(c)

Constructed so that all roof drainage is taken care of on the subject lot; and

(d)

Constructed so that there are no openings on the side of the building which is on the side property line; and

(e)

Not abutting an existing or proposed alley.

127/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

If a garage or accessory building (except those with a dwelling occupancy) cannot comply with all of the conditions set forth
in this subsection above, a side yard of three (3) feet shall be required. Roof eaves on the building may project into the required
side yard for a distance not to exceed one (1) foot, and the eaves shall not be closer than two (2) feet from the side property line.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 8.)

(6)

When a garage or accessory building (except those with a dwelling occupancy) abuts and has garage doors opening
onto an existing or proposed alley, said garage or accessory building shall be located not less than twenty-five (25)
feet from the side of the alley opposite the subject property.

(7)

A private garage, or carport where permitted, regardless of the side yard setback, may be attached to the main
building providing that such private garage or carport is situated on the rear half of the lot or a minimum of 75 feet
from the front lot line, and providing that all requirements for property development standards of this ordinance
are complied with. When a private garage or carport is located on the lot, as set forth above, no future use of such
private garage or carport shall be for dwelling occupancy, such as living quarters or residential use.

(Ord. No. 1643, § 2.)

(7.5)

No private garage or carport shall be used for dwelling occupancy such as living quarters or residential use.

(Ord. No. 3154, § 1.)

(8)

Where an accessory building (with a dwelling occupancy) is detached, a part of, or is over an accessory building or
garage, the entire structure shall be considered a main building and no portion of said building shall be closer to
any property line than is permitted for any other main building on the subject lot.

(9)

When abutting an existing or proposed alley, a main building shall be located not less than thirty (30) feet from the
side of the alley opposite the subject property.

(10)

The substructure of swimming pools shall be located not less than five feet from any side property line.

(Ord. No. 1549, § 8: Ord. No. 3385, § 31.)

(c)

Rear:
(1)

A garage or accessory building (except those with a dwelling occupancy), including temporary structures, may be
located on a rear property line when the building is:

(Ord. No. 3988, § 9.)

(a)

Constructed of one (1) hour fire resistant materials; and

(b)

Constructed so that all roof drainage is taken care of on the subject lot; and

(c)

Constructed so that there are no openings on the side of the building which is on the rear property line; and

(d)

Not abutting an existing or proposed alley.

If a garage or accessory building (except those with a dwelling occupancy) cannot comply with all of the conditions set forth in this
subsection above, a rear yard of three (3) feet shall be required. Roof eaves on the building may project into the required rear yard for a
distance not to exceed one (1) foot, and the eaves shall not be closer than two (2) feet from the rear property line.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 9.)

(2)

Paragraphs (6), (7) and (8) of Section .503-D-(b) side yards above also apply to the rear yard requirements.

(Ord. No. 1549, § 10; Ord. No. 1643, § 3.)

(3)

In hillside areas, every main building shall be set back not less than twenty-five feet from the toe or top of a slope
after grading. Said setback shall be increased in five-feet increments for every ten feet difference in vertical
elevation so as not to be less than the amounts set forth in the following table:

Vertical Elevation of Slope in or Abutting Rear Yard

Minimum Level Yard Set- back Area Required

0 feet to 10 feet

25 feet

Over 10 feet to 20 feet

30 feet

128/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Over 20 feet to 30 feet

35 feet

Over 30 feet

40 feet

The maximum rear yard setback requirement under this section need not exceed forty feet.
(Ord. No. 2252, § 1 (part).)

(4)

Swimming pools, same as side yard, see Section .503-D-l-(b)-(10).

(5)

When abutting a dedicated alley, the required rear yard shall be measured from the centerline of the alley;
provided, however, that no residential building shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from any rear property
line.

(Ord. No. 1591, § 1.)

(6)

Porches and open roofed structures attached to the main dwelling may be constructed in required rear yards
providing that the following is complied with:
(a)

The maximum coverage of the lot by all existing and proposed structures shall not exceed that permitted by
the zoning district in which the lot is located.

(b)

The maximum coverage of the required rear yard by all existing and proposed structures shall not exceed fifty
(50%) percent.

(c)

Ten (10) feet shall be required between structural supports and the repair property line, and five (5) feet shall
be required between structural supports and the side property line. Eaves and other similar architectural
features may extend into the space between the structural supports and the rear or side property lines a
maximum distance of two and one-half (2½) feet.

(d)

Porches and open-roofed structures as set forth in this subsection shall be constructed, and remain
thereafter, open a minimum of seventy-five percent, on two or more sides.

(Ord. No. 1741, § 1.)

(d)

Repealed by Ordinance No. 4114.

(e)

Exceptions, projections into yards:
(1)

A porte-cochere may be placed over a driveway in a side yard provided such structure is not more than one story in
height, is unenclosed on at least three sides and is entirely open except for the necessary supporting columns, and
provided a regular garage is available, also such porte-cochere shall be subject to (6) below.

(2)

Cornices, belt courses, sills, or other similar architectural features, and chimneys may project into a required front
yard not more than four feet, and may extend into a required side yard or required rear yard no more than four
inches for each one foot of the width of such required side yard or required rear yard, provided, however, that said
projection shall be not closer than three feet and four inches from any side or rear property line.

(Ord. No. 1741, § 2.)

(3)

Fire escapes may extend or project into any yard not more than four feet.

(4)

Open, unenclosed stairways or balconies not covered by a roof or canopy may extend or project into a required
front yard not more than thirty inches.

(5)

Uncovered porches, platforms or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building
may extend into any front yard a distance of not more than six feet, and such features may not extend into a court
more than twenty percent of the width of said court and in no case more than six feet, and may extend into any
side or rear yard not more than three feet: provided, however, that an open work railing, nor more than thirty
inches in height, may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place. Open work fences,
hedges, landscape architectural features including patios, open air grills and similar features, or guard railings for
safety protection around depressed ramps, not more than three and one-half feet in height, may be located in any
front, side or rear yard.

(6)

In the several single-family residential "R-1" and "A-P" districts the following shall be required:
129/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(a)

Eaves of all main buildings and eaves of all accessory buildings that are located less than seventy-five feet
from the front property line, may project into a required side yard a distance not greater than two and onehalf feet, and in no case shall such eaves be less than two and one-half feet from the side property line.

(b)

Eaves of all main buildings and eaves of all accessory buildings may project into a required front yard not
more than four feet.

(c)

Eaves of all main buildings may project into a required rear yard not more than four inches for each one foot
of width of such required rear yard, provided, however, that such projection shall be not closer than seven and
one-half feet from any rear property line.

(d)

Eaves of all main buildings and eaves of all accessory buildings may project into a passageway or other open
space not more than two and one-half feet. Chimneys and other similar architectural features may project into
a passageway or other open spaces not more than two and one-half feet.

(Ord. No. 1741, § 3: Ord. No. 3385, § 32.)

(7)

See Section .503-D-1-(c)-(1).

(Ord. No. 3385. § 30.)

.503-E. COVERAGE
All buildings hereafter designed or erected and existing buildings which may be reconstructed, altered, moved or maintained, or
enlarged, shall not exceed the maximum building coverage regulations of the district in which they may be located.
.503-F. BUILDING HEIGHT LIMIT—EXCEPTIONS
All buildings hereafter designed or erected and existing buildings which may be reconstructed, altered, moved or maintained, or
enlarged, shall comply with the height regulations of the district in which they may be located, with the following exceptions:
1.

Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, church steeples, roof signs,
flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, silos, water tanks or wireless masts or similar structures may be erected above the
height limits herein prescribed: provided, that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of
the surrounding conditions and circumstances, but no penthouse or roof structures, or any space above the height limit
shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space.

2.

On property located in downhill slopes having a twenty-five percent or greater slope (measured in the general direction
of the side lot lines) an additional story may be construed on the main building: providing, however, that the ceiling of
the lowest story shall be not more than two feet above the curb level, measured at the center of the lot frontage.

.503-G. MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
1.

In the "A" district, the several "R-l" districts and the "T" districts (when used for single-family residential purposes), the
minimum distance between buildings shall be as follows:
a.

Minimum distances involving main building and accessory building without a dwelling occupancy.
(1)

Seven feet shall be required between a main building and an accessory building (except those with a dwelling
occupancy) unless said buildings have a common wall. Where vehicular access to a garage falls more than
twenty-five percent within the area defined by a projection of the side lines of another building, twenty-five
feet (for turning radius) shall be required between the buildings in the projected area.

(2)

Six feet shall be required between accessory buildings (except those with a dwelling occupancy) unless said
buildings have a common wall.

(3)

In the R-I-E district, thirty-five feet shall be required between the exterior walls of main buildings and/or
dwelling units.

b.

The minimum distances between a main building and an accessory building with a dwelling occupancy or two or
more accessory buildings with dwelling occupancy and the minimum dimensions of courts created by such
buildings shall be as follows:
(1)

Ten feet shall he required for any space between such buildings except when such space is a court.
130/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(2)

Ten feet shall be required when there is no access to a dwelling occupancy from a court.

(3)

Fifteen feet shall be required when there is access to one dwelling occupancy from a court.

(4)

Twenty feet shall be required when there is access to more than one dwelling occupancy from a court.

(5)

Seven feet shall be required between an accessory building with a dwelling occupancy and an accessory
building without a dwelling occupancy.

2.

Space between buildings for structures over two stories in height:

Space between buildings (court) shall be increased by two and one-half feet for each story of building height above the second
story for each building.
(Ord. No. 1930, § 5: Ord. No. 3385, § 33.)

.503-H. OFF-STREET PARKING
Purpose and Intent. These regulations are established to ensure that sufficient off-street parking facilities are provided and are properly
designed and located in order to meet the parking needs created by specific uses and to protect the public safety and welfare.
A.

Regulations for Off-street Parking.
1.

Off-street parking shall be provided according to the provisions of this chapter for:
a.

Any new building constructed.

b.

Any new use established.

c.

Any addition to, or enlargement of, an existing building or use and for any change in the use of a building
which would result in the requirement for additional off-street parking, provided, however, that the additional
parking shall be required only for such addition, enlargement or change of use and not for the entire building
or use. When the addition to, or enlargement of an existing building or use expands the original area by
twenty-five percent or more and the existing parking area does not conform to the development standards for
parking lots required by this section, the entire parking lot shall be brought into conformance with this
chapter.

d.

Single-family residential dwelling unit(s) enlarged or increased in floor area by fifty percent (50%) or more shall
provide off-street parking in conformance with this chapter;

(Ord. No. 3661, § 3.)

2.

The required off-street parking shall be provided on the same site as the building or use for which the parking is
required, except parking provided within 500 feet of the use or parking within a Vehicle Parking District lot per
Section .363-E;

(Ord. No. 3711, § 3.)

3.

All off-street parking required by this chapter shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter for the duration of use;

4.

Required off-street parking areas shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of vehicles and shall not be
used for the sale, lease, display, repair or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers, mobile homes, merchandise
or equipment, or for any other use, unless specifically authorized by another provision of this code.

(Ord. No. 3661 § 4.)

B.

Development Standards.

The following standards for off-street parking shall apply:
1.

Size of Parking Spaces. The width and length of required parking spaces shall be as follows:

Type

Dimensions

Covered Parking (Carports and Garages)

10 feet by 20 feet per space inside dimension

131/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Open Parking

9½ feet by 18 feet

Parallel Parking

10 feet by 25 feet

Compact Parking

8 feet by 16 feet

Handicapped Parking

14 feet by 18 feet

(Ord. No. 3661, § 5.)

2.

Compact Car Parking. For any use that provides more than ten open parking spaces, a maximum of twenty-five
percent of the spaces in excess of ten may be compact spaces. All compact spaces shall be clearly marked:
"Compact cars only";

3.

Handicapped Parking. Automobile parking spaces for the handicapped shall be provided for all nonresidential uses
in accordance with the following:

Total Parking in Lot

Required Minimum Number of Handicapped Accessible
Spaces

1 to 25

1

25 to 50

2

51 to 75

3

76to 100

4

101 to 150

5

151 to 200

6

201 to 300

7

301 to 400

8

401 to 500

9

501 to 1000

2 percent of total 20 plus 1 for each100 over 1000

In addition, all requirements of the Federal Accessibility Guidelines shall be met.
(Ord. No. 3661, § 6.)

4.

Tandem Parking. Tandem parking spaces shall not be permitted unless otherwise approved by the planning
commission;

5.

Location of Spaces. No parking spaces may be developed in any required front or side yard setback when the yard
fronts onto a public street or highway;

6.

Paving. All parking spaces and driveways shall be paved and maintained with asphaltic concrete or other
nonimpervious surface approved by the director of community development;

7.

Landscaping.
132/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

a.

A minimum of six percent of the total off-street parking area shall be landscaped with at least one fifteen-gallon m
five parking stalls (which may be clustered or grouped) and appropriate shrubs and ground cover. Setback areas
by other sections of this code shall not be considered part of the required parking lot landscaping.

b.

A minimum of a ten-foot-wide planter area shall be provided between the parking area and all property lines
adjacent to a public street.

c.

All landscaping shall be protected with a minimum six-inch PCC curb.

d.

All landscaping shall be continuously maintained free of weeds, debris, litter, or temporary signage.

e.

All landscaped areas shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system.

(Ord. No. 3661, § 7.)

8.

Screening. Open off-street parking area shall be screened from view from public streets and adjacent more
restrictive land use. Screening may consist of one or any combination of the following methods:
a.

Walls. Low profile walls, not exceeding three feet in height, shall consist of concrete, stone, or decorative
masonry materials,

b.

Fences, Open. A tubular steel or wrought iron fence not to exceed three feet in height shall be combined with
plant materials to form an opaque screen.

c.

Planting. Plant materials, when used as a screen, shall consist of compact evergreen plants. They shall be of a
kind, or used in such a manner, so as to provide screening. They shall have a minimum height of two feet
within eighteen months after initial installation.

d.

9.

Berms. Berms, including grass or plant materials;

Parking Lot Striping. All parking stalls shall be clearly outlined with striping, and all aisles, approach lanes, and
turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines as necessary to provide for safe traffic
movement;

10.

Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be designed and installed so that light and glare
is not directed onto residential use areas or adjacent public right-of-way;

11.

Noise. Parking lot areas, including driveways and loading areas, used for primary circulation and for frequent idling
of vehicles' engines shall be designed and located to minimize the impact of noise on adjacent properties;

12.

Maintenance. Parking lots, including landscaped areas, driveways and loading areas shall be maintained free of
refuse, debris or other accumulated matter and shall be kept in good repair at all times;

13.

Safety Features. Parking lots shall meet the following standards:
a.

Safety barriers, protective bumpers or curbing, concrete wheel stops and directional markings shall be
provided to assure pedestrian/vehicular safety, efficient utilization, protection of landscaping, and to prevent
encroachment onto adjoining public or private property. In lieu of concrete wheel stops, a three-foot
landscaped planter, with a six-inch-high concrete curb, may be utilized. This shall not be construed to allow
any parking spaces to encroach into any required setback area or the additional landscape to be considered as
part of the six percent landscape requirement.

b.

Visibility of pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists shall be assured when entering individual parking spaces,
when circulating within a parking facility, and when entering or leaving a parking facility.

c.

Internal circulation patterns, and the location and traffic direction of all access drives, shall be designed and
133/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

maintained in accordance with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety;
14.

Aisle Width. The minimum aisle width shall be as follows:

Angle of Parking (In Degrees)

Width of Aisle
One-way

Two-way

0-45

16

20

46-60

20

20

61-90

25

25

C.

Single-Family Residential Standards.
1.

Dwelling Unit Parking. For each residence where there shall be a minimum of two covered parking spaces located
within a garage with ingress from and egress to a street, alley, or highway. Additional covered parking may be
located within a garage or carport;

2.

Location of Parking Spaces.
a.

Garages, whether attached or detached, shall conform to the same front setback requirements as main
structures.

b.
3.

Carports, when permitted, shall be located no closer than seventy-five feet from the front property line;

Driveways.
a.

Each single-family dwelling shall provide a paved driveway continuous from the street or other public right-ofway providing access to the property, to the garage, and/or carport. Each driveway shall have an overhead
clearance of ten feet and shall have a minimum width of ten feet.

4.

Second dwelling units shall provide one open or covered parking space per the development standards contained
in this section.

(Ord. No. 3804, § 2.)

D.

Multifamily Residential Standards.

Dwelling unit parking shall be maintained for the exclusive use of the tenants for the units for which they were provided.
1.

"R-2" and "R-3" Multiple Family Zones.
a.

Covered Parking. There shall be at least two parking spaces in a private garage, having minimum interior
dimensions of twenty feet by twenty feet for every dwelling unit. These spaces shall be within one hundred
feet to the structure they are intended to serve;

b.

Guest Parking. There shall be one guest parking space for every four dwelling units. These spaces shall be
dispersed throughout the development site. All guest parking spaces shall be provided with permanent signs
identifying them as guest parking spaces and shall be maintained at all times for guest parking. Permanent
signs shall also be provided to direct visitors to the guest parking spaces.

2.

"R-4" Multiple Family Zone.
a.

In the "R-4" multiple family zone, the following minimum parking requirements shall be provided:

Bachelor Unit:

One space for each unit.

One Bedroom:

One and one-half spaces for each unit.

Two Bedroom:

Two spaces for each unit
134/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

For each additional bedroom, one-half space per unit shall be provided.
At least one space shown above shall be provided within a garage or carport;
b.

Guest Parking. There shall be one guest parking space for every four dwelling units. All guest parking spaces
shall be provided with permanent signs identifying them as guest parking spaces and shall be maintained at all
times for guest parking. Permanent signs shall also be provided to direct visitors to the guest parking spaces.

3.

Physically Handicapped Parking. For each dwelling unit required to be designed to accommodate the physically
handicapped or required to be made adaptable for the physically handicapped, the required covered parking shall
be designed to permit use by the physically handicapped as required by Part 2, Title 24, California Administrative
Code.

4.

Driveways. The minimum width of driveways shall be as follows:

Number of Units

Width (In Feet)

1—15 Dwelling Units

20

16 or more Dwelling Units

25

Each driveway shall have an overhead clearance of at least eight feet. Driveways that provide access to garages or parking
spaces laid out at ninety degrees to its center line shall be as follows:

Garages or parking on one side:

twenty- ve feet

Garages on both sides:

thirty feet

Driveways that function as parking area aisles shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet wide.
E.

Mobile Home Park Standards.
1.

Dwelling Unit Parking. For each mobile home where there shall be a minimum of two covered parking spaces which
may be on tandem.

2.

Guest Parking. There shall be one guest parking space for every two dwelling units. These spaces shall be dispersed
throughout the development site. All guest parking spaces shall be provided with permanent signs identifying them
as guest parking spaces and shall be maintained at all times for guest parking. Permanent signs shall be provided to
direct visitors to the guest parking spaces.

3.

Recreation Vehicle Parking. There shall be one parking space designed for parking of recreation vehicle parking for
every five dwelling units.

F.

Commercial, Institutional, Recreational and Industrial Use Standards.

For each of the uses specified below there shall be a minimum number of open parking spaces computed according to the use
and parking space standards set forth herein. For mixed uses, the total parking space requirement shall be the sum of the number
of spaces required for the individual uses computed separately. Whenever the computation of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this chapter results in a fraction, the next whole number shall be the number of spaces required for the use.
1.

Uses

Number of Spaces

135/322

7/11/2019

a.

Pomona, CA Zoning

Animal care

One space for each three hundred fty square feet of gross oor area

facilities,
including
kennels and
animal
hospitals
b.

Automotive

One space for each three hundred square feet of gross oor area (Ord. No. 3661, § 8.)

services,
including fullservice and
self-service
stations,
automobile
repair, public
garages and
car washes
c.

Automobile

One space for each three hundred fty square feet of gross oor area or a minimum of three spaces,

sales, rentals

whichever is greater (Ord. No. 3661, § 9; Ord. No. 3878, § 7.)

and leasing
d.

Board and

One space for each bed or sleeping room (board and care homes and roominghouses); one space

care homes,

for each three beds (group home care facilities and in-patient drug treatment facilities) (Ord. No.

group home

3661, § 10; Ord. No. 3704, § 6; Ord. No. 3787, § 9; Ord. No. 4051, § 7.)

care facilities,
and in-patient
drug
treatment
facilities, and
roominghouse
e.

Child care

One space for each employee plus one space for each ve children

facilities

136/322

7/11/2019

f.

Pomona, CA Zoning

Clubs (civic

One space for every thirty- ve (35) square feet of assembly area (Ord. No. 3597, § 2; Ord. No. 3661, §

and private),

11; Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

banquet halls,
dance halls,
night clubs,
religious
facilities,
theaters and
auditoriums,
pursuant to
Section .062
g.

Convalescent

One space for each bed (Ord. No. 3661, § 12.)

hospital
sanitarium
h.

Convention

The number of parking spaces may be provided in accordance with Section .503-H.F.4 (Parking

centers and

Study) (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

conference
centers,
pursuant to
Section .062
i.

Educational

Elementary (kindergarten through eighth grade): 1.5 spaces per classroom; High School (ninth

institution

through twelfth grade): .2 spaces per student plus 1 space per employee; Trade School: 1 space per
student; College: ½ spaces per student plus 1 space per employee (Ord. No. 3619, § 2 (part); Ord. No.
3661, § 13.)

j.

Hospitals

Three spaces for each 1.5 patient beds (Ord. No. 3661, § 14.)

k.

Hotels and

One space for each guest room, plus two spaces for the resident manager or owner (Ord. No. 3661,

motels

§ 15.)

Libraries,

One space for each three hundred square feet of gross oor area (Ord. No. 3661, § 16.)

l.

museums,
and art
galleries
m.

Manufacturing

One space for each ve hundred square feet of gross oor area

industrial and
wholesale
uses

137/322

7/11/2019

n.

Pomona, CA Zoning

Mini-storage

one (1) space for every two hundred and fty (250) square feet of o ce facilities but not less than six

warehouse

spaces, plus two spaces for the resident owner or manager. (Ord. No. 3661, § 17; Ord. No. 3942, § 2.)

facilities
o.

O ce

One space for each two hundred fty square feet of gross oor area (Ord. No. 3661, § 19.)

—Medical

One space for each two hundred square feet of gross oor area (Ord. No. 3661, § 19.)

associated
p.

Recreational

One space per two hundred square feet of gross oor area (Ord. No. 3661, § 19; Ord. No. 4010, § 5.)

buildings and
facilities,
games of skill
including
video game
arcades and
billiard
parlors, and
cyber cafes
q.

Restaurants,

One space for each one hundred square feet of gross oor area, with a minimum of ten spaces (Ord.

cocktail bars,

No. 3661, § 20; Ord. No. 3698, § 6.)

and all other
places where
food or
beverages are
served
including
drive-through,
fast food, or
take-out
facilities
r.

Research and

One space for each three hundred square feet of gross oor area

development
uses
s.

Retail sales

One space for each two hundred fty square feet of gross oor area, but not less than two spaces

and services

per unit

138/322

7/11/2019

t.

Pomona, CA Zoning

Shopping

The number of parking spaces may be provided in accordance with Section 503-H.F.4 in lieu of

centers and

providing the number of parking spaces required by this subsection

other retail
uses with over
fty thousand
feet of gross
oor area
u.

Warehousing

One space for each one thousand feet of gross oor area (Ord. No. 3661, § 21.)

(not including
mini-storage
for personal
use)
v.

Uses not

Where the parking requirements for a use are not speci cally contained herein, the Community

otherwise

Development Director shall determine the parking requirements based upon the most similar use

speci ed in

speci ed herein (Ord. No. 3661, § 22.)

this
subsection

2.

Drive-through Windows. For any use that provides drive-through window service to occupants of vehicles there
shall be a queuing line of not less than one hundred feet in length and twelve feet in width. The queuing line shall
not block any parking space or any portion of a traffic lane.

3.

Driveways. The minimum width of driveways shall be twenty-five feet.

4.

Parking Study.
a.

A parking study in accordance with this chapter herein shall be submitted to the planning director for review
and approval by the planning commission. When in the opinion of the planning director or the planning
commission the proposed development does not adequately provide for on-site parking needs or may
adversely affect off-site traffic patterns, as they exist or as they are outlined in the general plan;

b.

The parking study, including a parking plan drawn to scale shall be prepared by a registered traffic engineer.
The study and plan shall identify and describe all individual uses proposed to utilize the proposed parking and
shall show the recommended number and layout of the parking spaces including:
(1)

Spaces for the handicapped,

(2)

Aisles, circulation patterns,

(3)

Landscaped areas,

(4)

Identification signs and such other information as the planning director may deem necessary to
adequately and completely describe the plan,

(5)
5.

The plan shall include the basis for the recommended number of parking spaces proposed.

The planning commission shall approve, deny, or conditionally approve the plan. The plan shall be approved as
submitted or with conditions if the following findings are made:
a.

The parking plan proposed will adequately provide for the parking needs of the development;

b.

The parking plan proposed will not adversely affect traffic patterns, as they exist or as they are outlined in the
general plan; and

c.

The parking plan will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, but will be consistent
therewith.
139/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

6.

Properties located within a Vehicle Parking District.
a.

"Vehicle parking district lots (VPD lots)," as defined herein, shall mean those parking lots, properties and
facilities established pursuant to the Vehicle Parking District Law of 1943 and those pertinent provisions of the
Pomona City Code.

b.

Properties located within the boundaries of a vehicle parking district shall be presumed to have sufficient offstreet parking available for uses permitted by applicable zoning and permitted to develop to the standards set
forth in Section .363.E.

c.

The presumption set forth in subsection 6b of this section shall be subject to a public hearing before the board
of commissioners of the vehicle parking district when a proposed use requires a conditional use permit. After
said hearing, the board of commissioners of the vehicle parking district shall have the authority to make
findings in contradiction to the presumption set forth in Subsection 6b above. Said public hearing shall be duly
noticed by mail to the owner and tenant of the affected property and noticed by mail to all owners and/or
tenants of properties within 300 feet of the affected property and published pursuant to Government Code
Section 6061.

d.

The decision of the board of commissioners of the vehicle parking district, resulting from a public hearing
conducted pursuant to subsection 6c above, may be appealed to the city council by the owner/tenant of the
affected property or by the owner or tenant of any property. Any appeal must be reviewed by the city council
within thirty (30) days from the date of filing a "Request for Review of Board of Parking Place Commissioners
Decision." The appeal must be reviewed in a public hearing duly noticed as set forth in subsection 6c above.
Upon review, the city council may uphold, overturn or otherwise modify the decision of the board of
commissioners of the vehicle parking district.

e.

All existing conforming or nonconforming uses, which are located within the boundaries of a vehicle parking
district, are presumed, as of the date of the enactment of this ordinance, to have sufficient off-street parking
and are further presumed to have met the off-street parking requirements for such use as established in this
section.

f.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code or any other law, there shall be no requirement to record
with the county recorder's office any document setting forth compliance with the parking requirements set
forth under this code.

g.

In the event of a partial or total destruction of a conforming or nonconforming existing use, the owner/tenant
upon repair, remodel or reconstruction of the property and premises for property located within the
boundaries of a vehicle parking district shall be presumed to have adequate off-street parking; provided, that
the repair, remodel or reconstruction does not increase the area of the premises or does not involve a use
which, if located outside vehicle parking district boundaries, would require additional off-street parking than
that required for the prior use at the property and premises. All increases in building area and/or use changes
which increase the parking requirements from a prior use as set forth in this subsection shall be subject to the
review and public hearing and appeal process established by this section.

h.

The presumption set forth in subsection 6b above shall be subject to the maintenance of all assessments and
parking levies when due and payable. Should said payments not be current, parking rights may be suspended
and the use of the property may be determined to be nonconforming and, thus, subject to revocation of
business license and/or land use entitlement.

(Ord. No. 3385, § 34; Ord. No. 3711, § 4.)

.503-I FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS.
Intent and purpose.
This section is intended to regulate the location, height, materials, and appearance of fences, hedges and walls so as to permit the
maximum of the property, and the maximum safety for persons using the sidewalks and streets related thereto, and to enhancement city
aesthetics.
1.

Definitions.
140/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Arbor. A structure that is freestanding or connected to a fence or wall that has a roof and walls that are substantially open.
Decorative masonry wall. A wall constructed of masonry material other than plain concrete block that has a decorative surface
treatment such as split-faced block or stucco covering or that is constructed using patterned blocks, or constructed of river rock or
similar rock material fitted together with mortar, or that has other similar surface treatment or construction technique that provides
an overall decorative appearance to the satisfaction of the Planning Manager.

Fence, open. Any structural device forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that not less than fifty percent of the
vertical surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. This shall include
wire mesh, steel mesh, chain link, louvered, stake and other similar materials. Planting shall be regulated to maintain the required
open areas in said fence structure.

Fence, solid. Any structural device forming a physical barrier that is constructed so that more than fifty percent of the vertical
surface is closed to prevent the passage of light, air and vision through the fence and that is constructed of solid materials, such as
wood, chain-link with screening inserts, vinyl, or composite material, that form a barrier.

Hedge. A plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure.
Historic district. Any historic district listed on a local, state or national historic register.
Historic fences and walls. Any fence or wall that was constructed during the period of significance of the historic district in which
it is located, or that was constructed during the period of significance of the historic landmark property on which it is located or that
is more than 50 years old.

Historic landmark. Any improvement or natural feature listed on a local, state or national register.
Junk material. Any worn-out, cast-off, or discarded articles or materials including, but not limited to, garage doors, windows,
corrugated metal, inoperable motor vehicles and parts, construction material, household wastes including discarded appliances, and
yard debris.

Nonconforming fences and walls. Any fence or wall legally existing as of the effective date of the ordinance enacting this section
and as a result of said ordinance that does not meet height, location, material or other applicable restrictions of this section.

Retaining wall. A properly engineered, where required, wall built or designed to hold the soil on the up-hillside from slumping,
sliding or falling.

Security Fencing:
Barbed Wire is a strand of twisted wire armed with barbs or sharp points.
Coiled Barbed Wire is a strand of barbed wire that is used in a coiled looping form.
Razor Wire is a continuous coil of stainless steel ribbon with razor type barbs.
Concertina fencing is a type of razor wire or barbed wire in which pairs of loops are clipped together in a coil configuration.
141/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

Protection of intersection visibility.
(a)

The following regulations shall apply to the intersection of streets: There shall be a corner cut-off on all lots formed
by intersecting streets. The corner cut-off and visibility provisions shall be determined as set forth by Pomona City
Code Section 46-12 and shall be as follows:
Corner cutoff for intersecting streets without curbs

Corner cutoff for intersecting streets with curbs

The height limit of any objects, be they signs, plants, walls, fences, etc., in the corner cutoff area shall be three feet
measured from the flow line of the adjacent gutter. (With an eight-inch curb, there would be a height limit of two feet four inches
above sidewalk or parking level.) This limit does not apply to utility poles, trees trimmed at the drip line to eight feet above the
intersection, traffic safety devices and other devices as described in Pomona City Code Section 46-12.
(b)

The following regulations shall apply to the intersection of a street with an alley in all "R," "A-P," "C," "C-IND" and "M"
zones:

There shall be a corner cut-off on all lots which abut an alley where the alley intersects a street. This corner cut-off shall be
determined by points located on and measured ten feet from the intersection of the property line along the street and the
property line along the alley.
No obstruction of any nature shall be permitted in this corner cut-off area which limits the visibility of persons.

142/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

3.

Permitted fences, hedges and walls:

The following regulations shall apply to "R," "A-P," and all "C," and "M" zones, except as set forth for corner cut-off areas in
Section 2 of this ordinance. (The following provisions shall also apply to all Specific Plan areas where the Specific Plan is silent
regarding these regulations.):
(a)

Fences, hedges and walls not to exceed six feet in height shall be permitted on or within all rear and side property
lines, and to the rear of all front yard setback lines.

(b)

No open fence over four feet in height, or retaining wall over four feet in height as measured from the outside of
the wall, nor any wall, solid fence or hedge over three feet in height shall be permitted in any required front yard. It
is not the intent of this subsection to regulate the placing of plant material parallel to and immediately abutting the
exterior walls of buildings that are adjacent to the front yard setback line. If two or more retaining walls are
constructed in a front yard with a separation of three feet or less between the faces of the structures, the height of
the respective structures shall be combined to determine the total retaining wall height as measured from the
outside portion of the wall. If the retaining walls are separated by a horizontal distance greater than three feet, the
heights of the retaining walls shall be calculated separately.

(c)

Fences around tennis, badminton, basketball or volleyball courts and similar play areas may be up to 12 feet in
height provided that they are located within the rear half of the lot and that all parts of the fence which exceed six
feet above the finished surface of the court shall be open, mesh, chain-link type fencing. Such fences shall be
permitted on a property line, or within 10 feet of a property line, subject to the obtaining of a conditional use
permit, which may be granted on the finding that such an enclosure will not constitute a nuisance to an abutting
property.

(d)

A fence so constructed that no less than 75 percent of the surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air
and vision and not exceeding six feet in height shall be permitted in the required front yard within the all zones
except Single-Family Residential and Open Space zones and Single-Family Districts and Mixed Use Districts within
the Downtown Pomona Specific Plan area consistent with all other requirements of this section.

(e)

Fences and walls in any "M" Manufacturing zone, or within an Industrial Mixed Use district (MU-LI) within the
Downtown Pomona Specific Plan area, shall not exceed eight feet in height in rear and side yards to the rear of the
front yard setback.

4.

Required fences and walls:

The following standards shall apply to property at the time of the erection of any main building or where an existing main
building is enlarged more than 50 percent of the original floor area, or rebuilt involving more than 50 percent of the original floor
area, or moved onto said property:
(a)

In the "R" zones (The following provisions shall also apply to all residential land use districts within Specific Plan
areas).

In all areas, a six foot high fence or wall shall be constructed at the tops of slopes when all of the following conditions apply:
(1)

Where the top of the slope is a property line between adjoining lots held under separate ownerships;
143/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(b)

(2)

Where the difference in vertical elevation between the top and the toe of the slope is six feet or more; and

(3)

Where the grade of the slope between the property line and the toe of said slope is two to one (2:1) or greater.

In the "C-1," "C-2," "C-3," "C-4," "C-C," "A-P," "C-IND," "M," "M-1," and "M-2" Zones (The following provisions shall also
apply to all commercial, industrial and commercial and industrial mixed use districts within Specific Plan areas).

A six foot high solid decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the side and rear property lines where such property
lines are boundaries separating commercial and industrial zones and/or uses from abutting residential zones as follows:
(1)

Where the zone boundary is at a rear lot line, which is not on a street, the wall shall be on that line;

(2)

Where the zone boundary is a side lot line, the required wall shall be on and parallel to the lot line. The wall
shall be reduced in height to three feet within the area defined by a line which is the prolongation of the front
yard required in the abutting residential zone;

(3)

Where the zone boundary is a street, the wall constructed along the street shall be set back from the property
line a distance of five feet; the space between the wall and the property line is to be landscaped and
maintained;

(4)

Where the zone boundary is an alley, the wall shall be on the property line along the alley.

A three foot high solid decorative masonry wall shall be erected on the commercial or industrial property parallel to and five
feet from the front property line where a street is a boundary separating commercial and industrial zones and/or uses from
abutting residential zones. The area between the wall and City right-of-way shall be landscaped and maintained.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to set aside or reduce the requirements established for security fencing by local,
state or federal law, or by safety requirements of the Board of Education.
(c)

Outdoor Storage Areas/Yards.

A six foot high solid decorative masonry wall shall be erected along the street frontage and along the district boundaries
between an outdoor storage area, where permitted by the zone in which is located, and any residential zone. However,
providing if yard setback areas are required, the wall shall be along the setback line. In addition to the above walls, there shall be
a six foot high fence or wall enclosing the storage yard on all of its other property lines.
(d)

Public Assembly Uses

A six foot high solid decorative masonry wall shall be constructed on the property line of any site containing a public
assembly use, pursuant to Section .062, that abuts a residential district or use. Said wall need not be constructed within the
required front yard or any side yard facing a public street unless necessary to screen an off-street parking area visible from a
public street; in such case, a maximum three foot high wall shall be provided. If abutting a required landscape area, said wall
shall be placed on the interior line of such landscaping.
(e)

Chain link and other wire mesh fencing as required under Sections .600 A.9 and .600 C.3, and as permitted under
Section .503-I (8) (a) of the Zoning Ordinance shall be constructed of not less than nine gauge wire and not greater
than two-inch mesh. Posts shall be installed supporting such fences that shall be set 36 inches in a concrete base
and shall be spaced a maximum of 10 feet apart. Tension wires of at least No. 9 gauge coil spring wire or equivalent
shall be stretched at the top and bottom of the fence fabric and fastened to the fabric at 24-inch intervals. Gates
shall be constructed substantially the same as the required fence and shall be kept locked when not attended by an
adult. The maximum clear spacing allowed at the bottom of the fence is 2 inches.

5.

Required fence and wall setbacks.

The following setbacks standards shall apply to fences and walls constructed or erected in all zones:
(a)

Fences and walls shall be setback at least 2 feet as measured from the centerline of water utility boxes or 3 feet as
measured from the outside circumference of public fire hydrants.

(b)

Fences and walls shall be setback at least 7' 6" as measured from the centerline of sewer manhole covers.

(c)

A clearance of at least 3 feet shall be maintained around any City utility, such as a meter box or manhole cover,
regardless of whether the meter box or manhole cover is within the public right-or-way or on private property.
144/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

6.

Security Fencing.

The following standards shall apply to security fencing for properties in the "R," "C," "A-P," "C-IND," and "M" zones and within all
residential, commercial, industrial and mixed use districts within Specific Plan areas except where there is a conflict, in which case
the Specific Plan provision shall prevail. Security Fencing refers to barbed wire, razor wire, coiled barbed wire, concertina, and/or
similar products. Sections .503-I. 3 and 4 pertaining to maximum allowed fence or wall heights shall not apply to security fencing.
(a)

General Provisions.
(1)

A warning sign shall be posted visible to the public when security fencing such as barbed wire, razor wire,
coiled barbed wire, concertina wire, or other similar products are used;

(2)

Security fencing shall be maintained at all times by the property owner to ensure the public health, safety and
welfare. The property owner shall repair any security fencing within twenty-four hours from the time that the
City issues the property owner a notice of correction;

(3)

Barbed wire, razor wire, coiled barbed wire, concertina wire, or similar types of fencing materials existing on
Arterial or Major Collector Streets which are not in compliance with the provisions of this section have one
year from the date of adoption of this ordinance to be brought into compliance.

(b)

All security fencing shall be prohibited in the "R" districts and all residential, and residential mixed use districts
within Specific Plan areas and the MU-CDB district of the Downtown Pomona Specific Plan area.

(c)

Security fencing in "C," "A-P," "C-IND," and "M" zones. Barbed wire, razor wire, coiled barbed wire, concertina wire,
and/or similar products may be used in all "C," "A-P," "C-IND" and "M" zones and within the commercial (MU-AR) and
industrial mixed use (MU-LI) districts within the Downtown Pomona Specific Plan area," zones in the following
situations:
(1)

Security fencing shall be prohibited within all front yards and any street facing side and rear yards. For
properties where there is no front or side yard required by the zone in which it is located, security fencing shall
be prohibited between any main building and the front property line and street facing side and street facing
rear property lines on the same property.

(2)

Fences or walls shall be a minimum of six feet in height prior to the use of barbed wire or coiled barbed wire
and shall not exceed eight feet in height, including the barbed wire or coiled barbed wire;

(3)

Razor wire, concertina wire or similar products shall be permitted when the fence or wall has a minimum
height of eight feet and shall not exceed ten feet in height with the concertina wire or razor wire;

(4)

All barbed wire, razor wire, coiled barbed wire, concertina wire, and/or similar products shall be screened from
public view;

(5)

Razor wire, concertina wire and/or similar products shall be prohibited in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-C, C-4 and A-P
zones and the entire Downtown Pomona Specific Plan area;

(6)

Plans for the use of barbed wire, razor wire, coiled barbed wire, concertina wire or similar products shall be
approved by the Planning Division, and a building permit shall be obtained prior to installation of the security
fencing;

(7)

The installation of the barbed wire, razor wire, or coiled barbed wire, concertina wire and/or similar products
shall be installed and maintained at a ninety degree angle to forty-five degree angle into the property
measured from the vertical axis representing the fence. Such fencing shall not protrude or extend over
adjacent private or public property.

7.

Height Measurement.

The height of a fence, wall, or hedge shall be measured upward from the lowest finished ground level beneath it. Where a fence
or wall is built upon a retaining wall, the height shall be measured from the highest adjacent finished ground level.
8.

Prohibited Materials.
(a)

Except for temporary fencing associated with construction activity that has an active building permit on file with the
Building and Safety Division, vacant lots, and temporary fencing in accordance with Sec. .600 A.9 and C.3, the use of
chain link, metal slat and wire fencing shall be prohibited within front yards or street-facing side or rear yards in all
145/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

zones and for all retail/commercial and residential development within the Downtown Pomona Specific Plan area.
(b)

The use of fences or walls made of debris, junk, tarps or other types of fabric, except for mesh fabric specifically
designed as windscreens to be used for tennis courts, rolled plastic, sheet metal, plywood, or waste materials shall
be prohibited in all zones, unless such materials have been recycled and reprocessed into building materials
marketed to the general public as fencing and/or wall materials and resembling new building materials such as
wood.

(c)

The use of glass shards, spikes (other than decorative spikes that are part of an ornamental metal fence), nails or
other sharp material installed on the top of any fence or wall is prohibited in all zones.

(d)

Wood fencing is prohibited in all commercial and industrial zones, and all industrial and commercial, and mixed use
districts within any Specific Plan area, and for use for perimeter walls for residential subdivisions.

9.

Fencing and Walls Design Standards.

Intent. It is the intent of the fencing and walls design standards to provide clear and concise design criteria for the purpose of
enhancing the visual appearance of fences and walls visible from the public right-of-way, improving the aesthetic compatibility
between fences and walls and buildings located on the same and surrounding properties, and ensuring that fences and walls along
highly visible traffic corridors meet high standards of design quality.
Applicability. The design standards provisions of this section are mandatory for all development within any residential,
commercial and industrial zones, and Specific Plan areas. (Where the following provisions conflict or are inconsistent with Specific
Plan regulations and guidelines, the Specific Plan regulations and guidelines shall prevail.) Exceptions to these design standards may
be allowed by the Planning Commission, or other applicable review body, if the Commission or other review body, views the
exceptions to be beneficial to the overall appropriateness of the fence or wall.
(a)

The following shall apply to all residentially zoned property and residential districts within Specific Plan areas:
(1)

Any walls constructed within front yard setbacks and along street facing side and rear yard setbacks shall be
decorative masonry and have a decorative cap.

146/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Split-faced decorative block wall with decorative cap along a street facing side property line
(2)

Wood fencing within front yards and street facing side and rear setbacks shall be painted, stained or water
sealed and have the front side facing out from the property on which it is located.

(3)

Materials and finish shall be continuous and uniform within a given fence or wall along the same property line.

(4)

For through lots (as defined in Sec. .062 Lot, through), fencing or walls located on a rear property line shall be
decorative masonry or painted, stained or water sealed wood with the front side facing out from the property
on which it is located. For every one foot in height, the fence or wall shall be setback one foot from the
property line. The area between the wall and rear property line shall be maintained with landscaping.

147/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(b)

The following shall apply to all commercial and industrial zones, perimeter walls for new residential subdivisions,
and industrial (MU-LI) and commercial (MU-AR) mixed use land use districts within the Downtown Pomona Specific
Plan area:
(1)

Block walls 100 feet or more in length located in any front, street-facing side or rear yard shall be decorative
masonry with landscaped recesses measuring a minimum of 2 feet by 6 feet every 50 feet of continuous wall
or decorative pilasters having caps every 25 feet of continuous wall.

(2)

All walls adjacent to or visible from any public street shall have a decorative cap.

(3)

All fencing in commercial and industrial zones shall be constructed of wrought iron, tubular steel or decorative
masonry within front yards and street facing side and rear yards.

(4)

Where fences and walls are located along street facing side and rear yards, except for through lots, they shall
be setback from the property line at least 5 feet and planted with low shrubbery in combination with vines and
other accent plants on the street side for screening and be maintained with an automated irrigation system as
required in Sec. .503-J J.2. of the Zoning Ordinance.

(5)

All fences and walls shall be constructed so that the finished side faces outward from the property on which it
is located.

(6)

Materials and finish shall be continuous and uniform within a given fence or wall along the same property line.

(7)

For through lots (as defined in Sec. .062), fencing or a wall located on the rear property line shall be setback
from the rear property line one foot for every one foot in fence or wall height. The area between the wall and
rear property line shall be landscaped to screen the wall or fence and be maintained with an automated
irrigation system as required in Sec. .503-J. J.2 of the Zoning Ordinance.

10.

Fencing and Wall Design Guidelines.

Intent. It is the intent of the fencing and wall design guidelines to provide general direction to the property owner and developer
in the design of fences and walls.
148/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Applicability. The design guideline provisions of this section shall apply to all development within residential, commercial and
industrial zones. Any project requiring a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Sec. .580 and/or design review approval shall adhere to
these guidelines where applicable. Exceptions to these design guidelines may be allowed by the Planning Commission, or other
applicable review body, if the Commission or other review body views the exceptions to be beneficial to the overall appropriateness
of the fence or wall.
(a)

The following guidelines apply to residentially zoned property and residential districts in the Downtown
Pomona Specific Plan area:

(1)

Avoid fences and walls in front yard setbacks and street facing side and rear yards in neighborhoods where
open yards predominate unless needed for specific screening or safety purposes. Where a fence or wall is
needed for screening or safety purposes, the fence or wall in the front yard setback or street facing side yard
should be kept open as much as possible.

(2)

Design fences and walls in front yards and street facing side and rear yards to be consistent with or
complement the architectural style of the main building(s) on the same site in terms of color, material and
appearance.

(3)

Walls and fences to be installed along street facing side and rear yards, except for through lots, should be set
back at least 3 feet from the property line (if there is a landscaped parkway at least 3 feet in width between the
sidewalk and the edge of the public right-of-way, the parkway shall serve as the setback), planted with low
shrubbery in combination with vines and other accent plants on the street side for screening, and provided
with automatic sprinklers.

(b)

The following guidelines apply to commercial and industrial zones, perimeter walls for new residential subdivisions,
and industrial (MU-LI) and commercial (MU-AR) mixed use land use districts within the Downtown Pomona Specific
Plan area.
(1)

Avoid fences and walls adjacent to public sidewalks.

(2)

Design fences and walls in front yards and street facing side and rear yards to be consistent with or
complement the architectural style of the main building(s) on the same site in terms of color, materials and
style.

(3)
11.

Keep front yard fencing as low and open as possible.

Fencing and Wall Design Standards for Properties Located in Designated Historic Districts or on Designated Historic
Landmark Properties.

Applicability. In addition to all other provisions contained in this Section, the following provisions apply to all properties located
in designated historic districts and properties containing designated historic landmarks. All new fences and walls constructed where
there are no existing fences or walls and those fences and walls where an existing fence or wall is rebuilt or replaced more than 50
percent of the length of the original fence or wall that are to be located in a front yard, street facing side or rear yard where visible
from a public street require approval of a Minor Certificate of Appropriateness (COA) pursuant to Sec. .5809-13 of the Zoning
Ordinance and shall adhere to these design standards where applicable. Exceptions to the Design Standards for fences and walls in
historic districts and on historic landmark properties may be allowed by the Historic Preservation Commission with the approval of a
Major COA if the Commission determines the exceptions to be beneficial to the overall appropriateness of the fence or wall.
Design Standards:
(a)

Existing historic fences and walls shall be preserved and maintained in place.

(b)

Only deteriorated portions of a historic fence or wall shall be replaced rather than the entire fence or wall. Repaired
areas shall match the original in location, design, style, dimension, detail, texture, pattern, material and color.

(c)

If a historic fence or wall must be removed, it shall be replaced in kind.

(d)

If fencing or retaining walls did not exist historically in the front yard setbacks, new fencing and walls in these
locations shall not be installed except in matters of public safety.

(e)

New features such as arbors or entrance gates located in front yards shall be designed to minimize impacts to the
historic building on the site by keeping them open, installed where they will not obstruct view from the street of
149/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

prominent historic features of the building, such as front entries and front porches, and compatible in material,
color, and design with the main building on the site.
(f)

Fences and walls in front yard setback areas shall be designed to be consistent with the historic architectural style
and period of the main building(s) on the site as follows:
1.

Simple or elaborate wrought iron fencing is appropriate for Spanish Revival, Queen Anne Victorian and Folk
Victorian buildings.

2.

Plain wood picket fencing is appropriate for Colonial Revival, Craftsman, Prairie Style and Period Revival styles
such as English and French Tudors.

3.

Low wood railing fencing is appropriate for Minimal Traditional, Contemporary, and Ranch Style architecture.

4.

Simple stucco and masonry walls with stucco cladding are appropriate for Mediterranean, Spanish or Mission
Revival architecture.

5.

Other historically appropriate styles not listed above that were found historically with the style of architecture
of the main building on the site.

(g)

Combination block and wrought iron/tubular steel style fences shall not be installed in front yards in historic
districts or on historic landmark properties.

(h)

Fencing in front yards and side yards, outside of the rear yard area, adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be open
style such as wrought iron, louvered, lattice, stake and other similar materials with the exception of chain-link
fencing, which is prohibited.

(i)

When replacing an existing historic fence or wall of appropriate design in the front yard setback that is deteriorated
beyond repair, the new fence or wall shall match the existing in layout, materials, height, and design.

(j)

Retaining walls in front yards and street-facing side and rear yards shall be constructed of natural rock or stone or
other material compatible with the historic architectural style of the main building on the same site.

(k)

New retaining walls in front yards shall be the same height as other historic retaining walls located in the same
vicinity. If there are no other retaining walls in the vicinity, any new retaining walls shall not be greater than 4 feet in
height.

(l)

New vinyl fencing and vinyl arbors shall not be installed in any front yard setback or street facing side or rear yard
for properties located in historic districts or on properties containing historic landmarks. New vinyl fencing and vinyl
arbors in front yards and street facing side and rear yards are subject to review and approval by the Historic
Preservation Commission.

12.

Arbors.

150/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Arbors are permitted in the front yard setbacks and street facing side and rear yard setbacks subject to the following
requirements:
(a)

Maximum width of 5 feet as measured from the inside edge of the posts;

(b)

Maximum roof area of 25 square feet as measured from the outside edge of the arbor roof or outside edge of
posts, whichever is greater.

(b)

Maximum height to the top of the structure of 9 feet;

(c)

Sides and roof substantially open (no solid roof or walls).

(d)

An increase of 2 feet in the maximum permitted width between the inside edge of the posts shall be permitted with
a Minor Deviation Variance subject to the requirements contained in Section .560.J. "Minor Deviation Variances";
However, such an increase in post placement shall not increase the roof square footage by more than 10 square
feet of the maximum permitted square footage of the roof area.

13.

Fence and Wall Permits.

All new fences and walls constructed where there are no existing fences or walls and those fences and walls constructed to
replace more than 50 percent of the length an existing fence or wall, or where an existing fence or wall is rebuilt more than 50
percent of the length of the original fence or wall, require the approval of a fence and wall permit from the Planning Division before
start of construction and before building permits are issued when required. The permit shall be reviewed for compliance with all
height, location, and material requirements and applicable design standards contained in Sec. .503-I. When a Certificate of
Appropriateness is required for fences and walls located in designated historic districts and on properties containing designated
historic landmarks, a fence and wall permit shall not be required.
14.

Maintenance.

All fences and walls, including legally nonconforming fences and walls, shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe condition
including, but not limited to, replacement of deteriorated, missing, decayed, or broken structural, and decorative elements, missing
fasteners, bent elements, damaged pieces, split wood, rusted metal, loose fasteners, insecure posts, warped materials or pieces that
are out-of-plumb, out-of-level, etc. All fences and walls shall receive regular structural maintenance to prevent and address sagging
and weathering of surfaces visible from the public right-of-way or from an adjoining property. Any deteriorated, damaged or
decayed fence materials shall be promptly repaired, and any fence or wall post or section that leans more than 20 degrees from
vertical (plumb) shall be promptly repaired to correct that condition. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of a notice of
correction for lack of maintenance, the condition shall be repaired within 30 days. In the event that a notice of correction for
deteriorated materials is issued, "promptly repaired" shall mean no later than seven days from time of notice of correction issuance.
For posts or sections leaning 20 degrees or more from vertical (plumb), "promptly repaired" shall mean within 48 hours of notice if
adjacent to a public right-of-way, or within seven days if in such other location.
15.

Nonconforming Fences and Walls.

All fences and walls not in conformance with this Section shall be consistent with the following:
(a)

All fences and walls existing as of the effective date of the ordinance enacting this Section shall be nonconforming
and may continue to exist except as otherwise limited by this section;

(b)

A nonconforming fence or wall that is destroyed or damaged less than 50 percent of the original by fire, earthquake
or other natural disaster (except for natural aging) or manmade casualty through no fault of the property owner
may be replaced or repaired in a manner substantially identical to the material, height, design and location of the
151/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

original fence or wall. If 50 percent or more of the fence or wall is destroyed or damaged, any replacement fence or
wall shall be constructed or installed in compliance with the requirements of this Section.
(b)

All fences and walls constructed or installed after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this Section shall
conform to the requirements of this Section.

(c)

The expansion of a nonconforming fence or wall shall be prohibited.

(d)

Fences and walls constructed of junk material, debris, etc. as described under Section .503-I 8.b. are considered
nuisances per Sec. 600 Exterior Property Maintenance of the Zoning Ordinance and subject to the regulations under
that section.

(Ord. No. 1549, §§ 12, 13; Ord. No. 1991, § 5; Ord. No. 3817, § 2.)
(Ord. No. 4114, § 3; Ord. No. 4118, § 3.)

503-J LANDSCAPING/IRRIGATION.
A.

Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish landscape standards to mitigate the effects of
urbanization on the environment and to provide for an aesthetically pleasing urban setting. This section establishes
landscape design standards consisting of plant material percentages, design, quantities, location, species types and
combinations of plant types (i.e., shrubs and groundcover). The city recognizes the importance of landscaping to the
health and well-being of the community and desires to enhance the overall appearance of development projects in the
city. It is the intent of this section to establish a measure of uniformity in landscaping for new projects as well as
providing a mechanism to require updating and upgrading of existing landscaping in existing developments when
improvements are proposed. It is also the intent of this section to encourage optimum use of drought-tolerant plant
materials in conjunction with water-conserving automatic irrigation systems.

B.

Definitions.
1.

Ecological restoration project means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined,
indigenous, historic ecosystem.

2.

Hydrozone means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a
valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a
naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a
nonirrigated hydrozone.

3.

Infiltration rate means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g.,
inches per hour).

4.

Landscaped area means the entire parcel less the building footprint, driveway, nonirrigated portions of parking lots,
hardscapes such as decks and patios and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the calculation of
the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens, are not included.

5.

Mulch means any material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, manure or other materials left loose and applied to
the soil surface to reduce evaporation.

6.

Overspray means the water which is delivered beyond the landscaped area and wetting pavements, walks,
structures or other nonlandscaped areas.

7.

Rain-sensing device means a system which automatically shuts off the irrigation system when it rains.

8.

Recreational area means areas of active play or recreation such as sports fields, schoolyards, picnic grounds or
other areas with intense foot traffic.

9.

Rehabilitated landscape means an relandscaping project that requires or is a component of a required permit,
including a grading permit, building permit or use permit.

10.

Runoff means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area.
For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration
rate) or where there is a severe slope.

11.

Soil moisture-sensing device means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil.

12.

Turf means a single-bladed grass or sod.
152/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

13.
C.

Wind-sensing device means a system which automatically shuts off the irrigation system when windy conditions exist.

General Provisions.
1.

General landscaping requirements as defined herein shall be provided in all zones for the following:
a.

All new and rehabilitated landscaping for private and public development projects that require a grading
permit, building permit or use permit;

b.

Developer shall install landscaping in single-family and multifamily residential projects;

c.

All landscaping shall be designed according to the latest standards as adopted by the American Society of
Landscape Architects.

2.

This section shall not apply to:
a.

Homeowner-provided landscaping at existing single-family and multifamily residential projects of four units or
less;

D.

b.

Cemeteries;

c.

Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

d.

Any project with a landscaped area less than two thousand five hundred square feet;

e.

Existing multifamily parcel(s) which do not increase the existing floor area by twenty-five percent; or

f.

Registered historical sites.

Landscape Requirements.
1.

All required landscaped setback areas, including front, rear, side, street side and landscaped areas within parking
lots shall meeting the following requirements:
a.

Area. All landscaped areas that may be counted toward required landscaping must have a minimum width of
three feet, not inclusive of curb or wall.

b.

A minimum of six percent of the total off-street parking area shall be landscaped with at least one fifteengallon minimum size tree per each five parking stalls (which may be clustered or grouped) and appropriate
shrubs and groundcover. Setback areas required to be landscaped by other sections of this code shall not be
considered part of the required parking lot landscaping.

c.

A minimum of a ten-foot wide planter area shall be provided between the parking area and all property lines
adjacent to a public street.

d.

All landscaping shall be protected with a minimum six-inch high concrete curb.

e.

All landscaping shall be continuously maintained free of weeds, debris, litter or temporary signage.

f.

All landscaped areas except designated hydrozones shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system.

g.

Landscape materials, trees, shrubs, groundcover, turf and other vegetation, and planting symbols shall be
clearly drawn and plants labeled by botanical name, common name, container size, spacing and quantities of
each group of plants indicated.

h.

For multifamily projects of five units or more and for new commercial, industrial and institutional projects, a
landscaping maintenance bond shall be required and held for a period of one year to ensure the project's
compliance with the approved landscaping plan. Amount shall be determined by the community development
director or designee.

i.

The percentage of turf for commercial and industrial development shall not exceed forty-five percent of the
required landscaping area and multifamily residential development shall not exceed seventy-five percent of
the required landscaping area.

E.

Planting Material.
1.

Trees.
a.

No trees shall be planted under any eave, overhang or balcony.

b.

All trees in landscape planters ten feet in width or less and located closer than five feet from any permanent
structure shall be provided with tree root barriers.

c.

All trees shall be staked as determined by the standards maintained by the community development
153/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

department.
d.

Minimum width of all planters shall not be less than three feet clear, interior dimensions, not inclusive of
retaining curb or wall. All areas which require twenty-four-inch box trees shall have planters of not less than
four feet not inclusive of retaining curb and wall.

e.

Number of trees:

Parking area: One per five spaces.
Street setbacks: One per ten spaces.
Balance of site: One per six hundred square feet (less parking area buildings, and structures).
F.

Groundcover and Shrubs.
1.

All areas required to be landscaped shall be covered with turf, nondeciduous groundcover, shrubs or other types of
plants which are predominantly drought tolerant.
a.

Shrubs. Minimum of two five-gallon size shrubs shall be provided every six feet of distance along perimeter
planter areas.

b.

Groundcover. Groundcover shall be used throughout and be planted at least six inches on center. No artificial
groundcovers shall be accepted.

2.

Materials such as crushed rock, redwood chips, pebbles and stone may be allowed up to fifteen percent of the total
required landscaping. Artificial plants and synthetic groundcovers are prohibited.

G.

Screening.
1.

Landscaping shall be required to screen storage areas, trash enclosures, parking areas, public utilities, freeways,
highways and other similar land uses or elements that do not contribute to the aesthetic enhancement of the
natural environment surrounding area. Where plants are required for screening, such screening shall consist of the
use of evergreen shrubs and/or trees closely spaced. Berming shall be encouraged as an effective screening
measure for parking lots and where adjacent site areas are contiguous to street frontages. Such berming shall not
exceed thirty-six inches above the highest adjacent curb.

2.

Where parking areas are adjacent to other properties along the side and rear lot lines, perimeter landscaping with a
minimum depth of four feet, not inclusive of retaining curbs and walls, is required.

H.

Landscape at Vehicular Intersections.
1.

Landscaping at major entry points are considered the focal points for landscaping emphasis and shall contain
accent landscaping through a variety of trees, flowers and shrubs with special concern for visibility and safety.

2.

Within twenty feet of street/driveway intersections, no landscaping material other than trees shall exceed a
maximum height of thirty-six inches above the adjacent concrete curb.

3.

No berming at street entrances and parking lot accessway intersections shall exceed a height of thirty-six inches
above the highest adjacent curb.

4.

All trees, whether singularly placed or placed in clusters shall not inhibit visibility for vehicular and pedestrian
movement.

5.

Parking may be designed to overhang landscaped areas. Maximum permitted overhang is three feet where planter
areas have a minimum dimension of five feet or more. Otherwise, concrete wheel stops shall be installed. Any
broken or damaged wheel stops shall be replaced.

I.

Landscape Documentation Package.
1.

A copy of the landscape documentation package conforming to this section and landscape plan check fee as set
forth by the city council shall be submitted to the city. No grading or building permits shall be issued until the city
reviews and approves the landscape documentation package.

2.

For multifamily developments of five units or more and for all new commercial, industrial or institutional
developments, a copy of the approved landscape documentation package shall be provided to the property owner
or site manager along with the record drawings and any other information normally forwarded to the property
154/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

owner or site manager. All installed landscaping and irrigation systems shall be maintained according to the
approved landscape documentation package.
3.

Each landscape documentation package shall include the following elements, as describe in this chapter:
a.

Landscape design plan;

b.

Irrigation design plan;

c.

Certificate of substantial completion signed and sealed by licensed landscape architect (to be submitted after
installation of the project as a requirement prior to certificate of occupancy);

d.

Such other information as deemed necessary by the director of community development or designee
including, but not limited to, a grading design plan and/or soils analysis.

J.

Elements of Landscape Documentation Package.
1.

Landscape Design Plan. A landscape design plan meeting the following requirements shall be submitted as part of
the landscape documentation package:
a.

Plant Selection and Grouping.
i.

Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

ii.

Plants shall be selected appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geological and
topographical conditions of the site. Protection and preservation of native species and natural areas is
encouraged. The planting of trees is encouraged wherever it is consistent with other provisions of this
section.

iii.

Changes to planting materials appearing on the approved landscaping plans may be permitted during
construction of the project, after completion of the project, or during the course of normal landscape
maintenance provided that all requested alternate plant materials are contained on the list of acceptable
planting materials in this section and provided further, that equivalent size, type, coverage and
appearance is approved by the community development director or designee.

iv.

Fire prevention needs shall be addressed in areas that are fire prone. Fire-resistant landscaping buffers
shall be provided between commercial/residential building developments and naturally vegetated but
fire-prone areas, as identified by the community development department.

b.

c.

Water Features.
i.

Recirculating water shall be used for decorative water features.

ii.

Pool and spa covers are encouraged.

Landscape Design Plan Specifications. The landscape design plan shall be drawn on project base sheets at a
scale that accurately and clearly identifies the following:
i.

Designation of hydrozones and a description of water usage within said hydrozones (low, moderate and
high irrigation water requirements);

ii.

Landscape materials, trees, shrubs, groundcover, turf and other vegetation. Planting symbols shall be
clearly drawn and plants labeled by botanical name, common name, container size, spacing and
quantities of each group of plants indicated;

iii.

Property lines and street names;

iv.

Streets, driveways, walkways and other paved areas;

v.

Pools, ponds, water features, fences and retaining walls;

vi.

Existing and proposed buildings and structures including pad elevations, if applicable;

vii.

Natural features including but not limited to rock outcroppings, existing trees and shrubs that will
remain;

viii.

Tree staking, plant installation, soil preparation details and any other applicable planting and installation
details;

ix.

A calculation of the total landscaped area and percentage of turf area;

x.

Designation of recreational areas.
155/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

Irrigation Design Plan. All landscaped areas shall be provided with an approved irrigation system that shall include an a
control with multi-calendar, timer and multi-station capabilities when the project is zoned commercial, institutional or
project is multiple-family residential with more than five dwelling units.

Irrigation shall be performed in conformance with city ordinances or with standard water conservation practices.
An irrigation design plan meeting the following requirements shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation
package:
a.

Runoff and Overspray. Soil types and infiltration rate shall be considered when designing irrigation systems.
All irrigation system shall be designed to avoid runoff, low head drainage, over-spray or other similar
conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways or structures.
Proper irrigation equipment and schedules, including features such as repeat cycles, shall be used to closely
match application rates to infiltration rates, therefore minimizing runoff.

Special attention shall be given to avoid runoff on slopes and to avoid overspray in planting areas with a width less than
ten feet and in median strips.
b.

Equipment.
i.

Water Meters. Separate landscape water meter shall be installed for all projects except for single family
dwellings or any project with a landscaped area of less than five thousand square feet.

ii.

Controllers. Automatic control systems shall be required for all irrigation systems and must be able to
accommodate all aspects of the design.

iii.

Valves. Plants which require different amounts of water shall be irrigated by separate valves. If one valve
is used for a given area, only plants with similar water use shall be used in that area. Anti-drain (check)
valves shall be installed in strategic points to minimize or prevent low-head drainage.

iv.

Sprinkler Heads. Heads and emitters shall have matched precipitation rates within each control valve
circuit. Sprinkler heads shall be selected for proper area coverage, application rate, operating pressure,
adjustment capability and ease of maintenance.

v.

Rain-Sensing Override Devices. Rain-sensing override devices shall be required on all irrigation systems.

vi.

Soil Moisture-Sensing Devices. It is recommended that soil moisture-sensing devices be considered
where appropriate.

c.

Irrigation Design Plan Specifications. Irrigation systems shall be designed to be consistent with hydrozones.

The irrigation design plan shall be drawn on project base sheets. It shall be separate from, but use the same format as,
the landscape design plan. The scale shall be the same as that used for the landscape design plan described in subsection
K(1)(c).
The irrigation design plan shall accurately and clearly identify:
i.

Location and size of separate water meters for the landscape;

ii.

Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system including but not limited to automatic
controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture-sensing devices, rain switches, quick
couplers and backflow prevention devices;

iii.

Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

iv.

Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour) and design operating pressure (psi) for
each station;

v.
3.

Estimated annual water use expressed in inches per square foot of landscaped area per year;

Certificate of Substantial Completion. Prior to the final of building permits, the developer shall submit a certificate
of substantial completion to the city utilizing forms designated for this purpose.

K.

Plant List. Other plant materials not included in this list but suitable in climate zones overlaying the city of Pomona shall
be subject to review and approval by the planning division.

156/322

7/11/2019

Legend:

Pomona, CA Zoning

L - Low water usage plants
M - Medium water usage plants
H - High water usage plants

Groundcovers
Achillea tomentosa

Woolly Yarrow

L

Ajuga reptans

Carpet Bugle

H

Drosanthemum spp.

Ice Plant (Drosanthemum)

L

Mesembryanthemum

Ice Plant (Memsembryanthemum)

L

Armeria maritima

Sea Pink

M

Atriplex semibaccata

Australian Saltbrush

L

Carissa macrocarpa

Natal Plum

M

Ceanothus spp.

California Lilac

L

Ceratostigma

Dwarf Plumbago

M

Cistus spp.

Rockrose

L

Hedera helix

English Ivy

M

Lantana

Lantana

L

Phyla nodi orra

Lippia

L

Potentilla verna

Cinquefoil

M

Rosemarinus

Trailing Rosemary

L

Santolina spp.

Lavender Cotton

L

Trachelosperum

Star Jasmine

M

crystallinum

(pros. cvs.)

plumbaginoides

montevidensis

"Prostratus"

jasminoides
157/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Verbena peruviana

Peruvian Verbena

L

Vinca minor

Periwinkle

M

Bougainvillea spp.

Bougainvillea

L

Cissus antarctica

Kangaroo Treebine

M

Clytostoma

Violet Trumpet Vine

M

Distictis buccinatoria

Blood Red Trumpet Vine

M

Ficus pumila

Creeping Fig

M

Gelsemium

Carolina Jessamine

M

Hedera helix

English Ivy

M

Lonicera

Giant Burmese Honeysuckle

L

Lonicera japonica

Japanese Honeysuckle

L

Macfadyena unguis-

Cat's Claw

L

Bower Vine

M

Virginia Creeper

M

Boston Ivy

M

Passi ora spp.

Passion Vine

M

Rosa banksiae

Lady Banks Rose

M

Rosa., other climbing

Climbing Roses

M

Potato Vine

L

Vines

callistigioides

sempervirens

hildebrandiana

cati
Pandorea
jasminoides
Parthenocissus
quinquefolia
Parthenocissus
tricuspidata

spp.
Solanum jasminoides

158/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Tecomaria capensis

Cape Honeysuckle

M

Trachelospermum

Star Jasmine

M

Wisteria

M

Callistemon citrinus

Bottle Brush

L

Cassia artemisioides

Feathery Cassia

L

Ceanothus spp.

California Lilac

L

Dietes bicolor

Fortnight Lily

M

Elaeagnus

Russion Olive

L

Feijoa sellowiana

Pineapple Guava

M

Fremontedendron

Flannel Bush

L

Grevillea spp.

Grevillea

L

Heteromeles

Toyon

L

Mahonia aquifolium

Oregon Grape

M

Nandina domestica

Heavenly Bamboo

M

Nerium oleander

Oleander

L

Phormium tenax

New Zealand Flax

M

Pittosporum tobira

Mock Orange

M

Punica granatum

Dwarf Pomegranate

M

Raphiolepsis spp.

Indian Hawthorne

M

Ribes sanguineum

Red Flowering Currant

M

jasminoides
Wisteria spp.

Shrubs

angustifolia

spp.

arbutofolia

"Nana"

159/322

7/11/2019

Ternstroemia

Pomona, CA Zoning

Ternstroemia

M

Viburnum tinus

Laurustinus

M

Xylosma congestum

Shiny Xylosma

L

Acacia longifolia

Sydney Golden Wattle

L

Acacia melanoxylon

Blackwood Acacia

L

Agonis exuosa

Peppermint Tree

M

Albizia julisbrissin

Silk Tree

M

Areccastrum

Queen Palm

M

Bauhinia variegata

Purple Orchid Tree

M

Brachychiton

Flame Tree

L

Bottle Tree

L

Cedrus deodora

Deodar Cedar

M

Ceratonia siliqua

Carob

L

Cercis occidentalis

Western Redbud

L

Chilopsis linearis

Desert Willow

M

Cinnamomum

Camphor Tree

M

Citrus spp.

Orange, Lemon, etc.

M

Cupaniopsis

Carrotwood

M

Eryobotrya japonica

Loquat

M

Eucalyptus cifolia

Red Flowering Gum

M

gymnanthera

Trees

romanzo anum

acerifolius
Brachychiton
populneus

camphora

anacardiodides

160/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Eucalyptus

Silver Dollar Gum

L

Ficus microcarpa

Indian Laurel Fig/Laurel Fig

M

Ficus rubiginosa

Rusty Leaf Fig

M

Fraxinus oxycarpa

Raywood Ash

M

Gleditsia triacanthos

Honey Locust

M

Hymenosporum

Sweet Shade

M

Jacaranda

M

Golden Rain Tree

L

Lagerstroemia indica

Crape Myrtle

M

Liquidambar

Sweet Gum

M

Phoenix Canariensis

Canary Island Date Palm

L

Pinus canariensis

Canarian Island Pine

M

Podocarpus gracilior

Fern Pine

H

Pyrus calleryana

Callery Pear

M

Quercus ilex

Holly Oak

L

Washington lifera

California Fan Palm

L

polyanthemos

"Raywood"

avum
Jacaranda
mimosifolia
Koelreuteria
paniculata

styraci ua

cultivars

L.

Water-Efficient Landscape Criteria. Landscape and irrigation plans shall be reviewed for compliance with the waterefficient landscape criteria. These comprise a point system with points awarded for both landscape and irrigation
techniques.

A minimum of one hundred points out of one hundred forty available, shall be achieved in each technique category in order for
the community development director or designee to approve the plans.

Landscape

Points

Techniques
161/322

7/11/2019

Water

Pomona, CA Zoning

40

conserving
plants, and/or
plants native
to hot/dry
summers,
utilized in
seventy- ve
percent of the
total plant
area of the
landscape.
Turf limited to

30

forty percent
of the total
landscape
area in
residential
projects;
twenty
percent of the
total
landscape in
all other
projects. In no
case shall turf
make up
more than
fty percent
of the total
landscape.

162/322

7/11/2019

Use of

Pomona, CA Zoning

30

creative,
thoughtful
and diverse
hydrozones to
enhance the
overall
landscape
design, with
plants
grouped
based on the
amount of
water needed
to sustain
them.
Mulch utilized

20

in the
landscape
(two inches
minimum,
three inches
preferred)
Hardscape, or

10

nonirrigated
surfaces use
in at least ten
percent of the
total
landscape.
Where turf is

10

utilized, the
use of a
proven waterconserving
turf (e.g.,
"marathon" or
equivalent).
Total 140

163/322

7/11/2019

Irrigation

Pomona, CA Zoning

Points

Techniques
The total

40

amount of
irrigation
water applied
to all
landscaped
areas does
not exceed
forty-two
inches per
square foot of
landscaped
area per year.
Low-water

30

volume
irrigation
system
equipped with
a multistation
and multischedule
master
control panel.
Irrigation

20

system
designed to
waterdi erent
areas of the
landscape
based on
watering need
(drip/trickle
for shrubs,
separate
valves, etc.).
Sensitive to

20

slope factors.

164/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Soil moisture

10

sensors used
in conjunction
with the
automatic
irrigation
system.
Wind sensors

10

and rain
sensors used
in conjunction
with the
automatic
irrigation
system.
Uses of

10

reclaimed or
recycled
water in
accordance
with Health
and Safety
Codes.
Total 140

Additional comparable points (not to exceed thirty) may be awarded for the use of any water-conserving method not listed
above which the community development director or designee finds to be in accord with the purposes of this chapter.
M.

Maintenance. All landscaping shall be maintained. Maintenance of landscaping areas shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
1.

Irrigation equipment shall be in working condition at all times.

2.

Litter shall be removed from all landscaped areas in a timely fashion.

3.

All lawn or turf areas shall be mowed on a regular basis. Sod areas shall at all times be kept green. Accumulation of
leaves, twigs, bark and other similar plant materials shall be removed in a timely fashion. Planting areas must be
kept in a weed-free fashion.

4.

Landscaping maintenance shall include pruning, cultivating, weeding, fertilizing, replacement of plants and watering
on a regular basis.

5.

Landscape maintenance shall also include pruning or removal of overgrown vegetation, cultivated or uncultivated,
that is likely to harbor rats, vermin or other nuisances or that causes detriment to neighboring properties.

6.

Landscape maintenance shall also include the removal of dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds and
debris constituting unsightly appearance, dangerous to public safety and welfare or detrimental to neighboring
properties or property values. Compliance shall be by removal, replacement or maintenance.
165/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Replanting. All trees, shrubs and plants which have been planted and which, due to accident, damage, disease or other cause,
fail to show a healthy growth, shall be replaced. Replacement plants shall conform to all standards that govern the original planting
installation, approved landscaping plan, or as approved by the planning division.
(Ord. No. 3680, § 4.)

503-K SIGNS.
A.

Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the orderly display of signs which are necessary for the identification
of locations and businesses, and to provide standards in order to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment of
the City, to maintain and enhance the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth and to
safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating the design, quality of materials, construction,
illumination, location and maintenance of signs.

B.

Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, for the purpose of this chapter,
the following words or phrases shall be defined as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is
intended:

"Abandoned Sign" means any sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of ninety (90) days which no longer
advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product or service available on the business premise where the sign is located.
"Aerial Sign" means any sign or device that is either floating or flying in the air but is secured to a building or to the ground by
strings or cables, and is primarily installed to attract attention to or to advertise a business, a business location, a service, a product,
or an event.
"Animated Sign" means any sign which uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
"Area of Sign" means the area included within the outer dimensions of a sign face display area including all portions not part of
the necessary supporting structure; a double-faced sign whose faces are parallel or no more than thirty (30) degrees apart shall be
deemed to be a single sign for the purposes of determining sign area. In the case of a sign placed on a wall or other building surface,
the area shall be computed by enclosing the sign within sets of parallel lines.
"Awning Sign" means any sign painted or otherwise affixed permanently to the exterior surface of any awning. For purposes of
this section, "awning" means shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and constructed of a rigid
frame covered by a flexible "skin" such as fabric, synthetic material or thin sheet metal.
"Balloon" means an inflatable airtight bag that, when in multiple numbers can be strung together and displayed to attract
attention to a business location. A balloon shall not be considered an inflatable sign.
(Ord. No. 3878 § 8 (part).)

"Banner" means a temporary sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing framework.
"Building Frontage" means the linear dimension of a building which faces upon a public street (excluding an alley) or public/private
parking lot, if appropriate, and is roughly parallel to it. Where a building has more than one frontage, the sign applicant or business owner
may designate the "primary building frontage" and the "secondary building frontage" for the purposes of this section.
"Bunting" means any decoration made out of fabric, synthetic material, sheet metal, or any thin pliable material that is securely attached
to at least two ends of a rigid frame attached to a pole or projecting from a building.
"Can Sign" (Box Sign) means any sign on the outside face of a metal box with or without internal illumination.
"Canopy" means a rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal or other material and supported by columns or posts embedded
in the ground, or cantilevered out from the main structure.
"Changeable Copy Sign" means a sign whose informational content can be changed or altered by manual, electric, electro-mechanical,
electronic or any other artificial energy means.
"Channel Letters" means three (3) dimensional individual letters or figures, with an open back or front, illuminated or non-illuminated,
which are affixed to a building or to a freestanding sign structure.
166/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

"Directional Sign" means an on-site sign designed to direct or guide pedestrian or vehicular traffic and which is non-advertising in
nature, except for a logo and directional information, e.g., "handicapped parking," "one way," "exit," and "entrance."
"Directory Sign" means a freestanding or wall sign which identifies all businesses located within a commercial building, a shopping
center, an industrial building or an institutional establishment.
"Fence Sign" means a sign attached to or painted onto any freestanding wall or fence.
"Fin Sign" means a sign applied to or constructed as part of a vertical architectural element projecting from the main building mass and
integral to the design and construction of a building facade.
"Flag" means any loose fabric or membrane secured to a pole or rod, which flutters and moves with air or wind movement.
"Freestanding Sign" means a sign which is permanently supported upon the ground by poles or braces and is not attached to any
building or other structure.
"Freeway Oriented Sign" means a freestanding sign which is primarily oriented to the traveling public using a freeway or expressway,
and installed for the sole purpose of identifying major business locations within certain commercial zones in close proximity to a freeway or
expressway.
"Height" means the vertical distance measured from the surface grade beneath the sign to the highest element of the sign. For purposes
of this section, all heights specified are measured from the natural grade adjacent to the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign.
Grading of a lot solely to increase sign height above natural grade shall not be permitted.
"High-Rise Building Identification Sign" means a sign placed upon the top story wall or parapet of a building which is three (3) or more
stories in height and contains the name or symbol of the building or principal tenant of the building to attract attention to or to advertise a
business, a business location, a service, or a product.
"Illegal Sign" means a sign which does not meet the requirements of this section or which does not have legal nonconforming status.
"Illuminated Sign" means a sign with an artificial source of light incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the
sign.
"Inflatable Sign" means any form of inflatable device (e.g., shaped as an animal, a blimp or other object) that is displayed, printed or
painted on the surface of an inflatable background, and is primarily installed outside a building to attract attention to or advertise a business,
a business location, a service, a product, or an event. An inflatable sign shall not be considered a balloon.
(Ord. No. 3878, § 8 (part).)

"Legal Nonconforming Sign" means a sign which was legally installed under laws or ordinances in effect at the time of its installation,
but which does not comply with subsequently enacted laws or ordinances.
"Logo" means a specially designed graphic symbol of a business establishment, a company, or any other legal private or public entity.
"Lot Frontage" means the length of the property line of any one premise along a public right-of-way (except alleys and railroad rights-ofway) on which it borders.
"Major Site Identification Sign" means a freestanding sign, located on sites of two (2) acres and over in size, for the purpose of
identifying the development on the subject site.
"Marquee Sign" means any sign advertising an event, performance, service, seminar, conference or show, and displayed on a permanent
roof-like structure or canopy made of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building.
"Master Sign Plan" means a coordinated program of signage for building complexes with four (4) or more tenants.
"Message Center Display Sign" means any display sign which has a changeable message board which remotely controlled by electrical
or electronic means.
"Mobile Sign" means any sign mounted, attached, affixed, or painted upon any surface of a motor vehicle, trailer or similar conveyance
parked on public or private property for the purpose of advertising a business or a business location within the City or outside the City.
167/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

"Monument Sign" means a low-profile freestanding sign erected upon or supported solely by a planter, pedestal base or similar ground
structure approximately the same dimension as the height of the sign and which is designed to incorporate the architectural theme and
building material of the building on the premises.
"Mural" means a picture on an exterior surface of a structure that does not contain the name of the business, product or service on the
premises.
"Neon Sign" means a sign with tubing that is internally illuminated by neon or other electrically charged gas.
"Official Flag" means the official flag of the United States of America, the State of California, other government agencies, civic
organizations, corporate organizations, and private or non-profit organizations.
"Off-Site Advertising Sign" means any sign structure or billboard, whether freestanding or mounted on an existing building, built for the
purpose of advertising an establishment, product or service which is not available on the property upon which the sign is located at the time
the sign structure was erected.
"On-Premise Sign in Redevelopment Areas" means a sign or billboard advertising those businesses and activities developed within the
boundary limits of, and as part of, an individual redevelopment project area, which may, with the consent of the redevelopment agency
governing the project area, be considered to be on the premises anywhere within the limits of that project area when all of the land is
contiguous or is separated only by a public highway or public facilities developed or relocated for inclusion within the project area.
"Painted Sign" means any sign painted or silkscreened onto a building wall or freestanding structure.
"Pennant" means any device made of flexible materials, such as cloth, paper or plastic, which may or may not contain copy, and which is
installed for the purpose of attracting attention.
"Pole Sign" means any freestanding sign supported by one or more poles.
"Political Sign" means any temporary sign installed which advertises a political candidate, a political party, or a political issue.
"Portable sign" means any sign not permanently attached to, mounted upon or affixed to a building, structure or the ground. Such signs
include, but are not limited to, "A"-frame signs, sandwich board signs and signs on wheels.
"Projecting Sign" means a sign, the sign surface of which is not parallel to the face of the supporting wall and which is supported wholly
by such wall. This definition shall include "V" or wing-type signs.
"Project Sign" means a temporary sign advertising a planned future development project on a property. Such sign typically has a
rendering of the proposed project in addition to a brief description of it.
"Real Estate Sign" means a temporary sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is located is for sale, lease or rent. Such signs
typically include "Rider" Signs that describe amenities such as swimming pools and spas, "Open House" Signs, "Subdivision" Signs and "OffSite Directional" Signs.
"Roof Sign" means a sign erected, constructed, and attached to and/or maintained upon or above any roof or portion of a roof of any
building, including a mansard roof. For the purposes of this section, a mansard roof is any roof or parapet wall with roofing material for
siding, that slopes from thirty (30) degrees to ninety (90) degrees and does not have a ridge line.
"Sign" means any object or device which is designed, intended, used or located so as to be visible by the public from outdoors for the
purpose of advertising the property, establishment or enterprise, including goods and services.
"Sign Copy" means any words, letters, logos, numbers, figures, design or other symbolic representation incorporated into a sign.
"Snipe Sign" means a temporary sign or poster that advertises shows and events, and which is installed within public or private property
on structures such as lamposts, traffic signs, street signs, building walls, fences, and similar structures.
"Temporary Sign" means a sign which is designed or intended to be temporarily mounted or displayed and which is not intended for
permanent or long term use.
"Under-Canopy Sign" means any sign suspended under a canopy, marquee or arcaded walk in front of a building.
168/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

"Vehicle For-Sale Sign" means any sign painted or affixed onto vehicles for sale, which are kept in vehicle display areas of new and used
car dealership lots.
"Wall Sign" means a sign painted or installed on or attached to a wall and which is parallel to the building facade. This definition includes
painted, channel letters and can signs.
"Window Sign" means a sign painted or installed on a glass window or located within twelve (12) inches from inside the window in such a
manner that it can be viewed from the exterior of a structure.
C.

Permit Procedures.
1.

Permit Required. Except for certain signs exempted herein, no sign shall hereafter be erected, re-erected,
constructed or altered (change of copy), except as provided by this section unless a Sign Permit for same has been
approved by the Planning Division. Building and/or electrical permits shall also be obtained, as required in
accordance with the Uniform Building Code and/or National Electrical Code.

2.

Permit Fee. No Sign Permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid permit fees as adopted by resolution of the
City Council.

3.

Plans Required. Sign plans shall include a plot plan of the site showing sign(s) location, elevations of buildings and
signs, a detailed sign copy, proposed colors, materials and illumination. All plans shall be fully dimensioned and
drawn to scale. All Sign Permit applications shall be reviewed for compliance and final approval by the City Planner,
or his designee, prior to issuance of any building permits.

4.

Master Sign Plan. Any new commercial, industrial or manufacturing project with four (4) or more units shall require
the submittal and City approval of a Master Sign Plan prior to issuance of any building permits. Any major
rehabilitation work that involves the exterior remodeling of any existing commercial, industrial or manufacturing
project with four (4) or more units shall also require City approval of a Master Sign Plan prior to issuance of any
building permits. For the purposes of this section, major rehabilitation means adding more than 50% onto the total
square footage of the building/buildings, or exterior redesign of at least 50% of the length of the building/buildings
facade within the development. In approving a Master Sign Plan, the City Planner shall make the following findings
regarding signs within the plan:
a.

The signs are compatible with the design motif of buildings in the project;

b.

The signs incorporate common design elements such as type of sign, materials, letter style, colors,
illumination, size, location and shape;

c.

The signs promote unity and continuity, and prevent unsightly clutter and disarray within the project;

d.

The signs comply with the standards contained within this section and with the design policies of the General
Plan.

D.

General Requirements.
1.

Applicability. The requirements and development standards contained herein shall apply Citywide except for signs
within the Downtown Pomona Specific Plan Zone. Development standards and requirements for signs within said
specific plan zone shall be contained in the Downtown Pomona Specific Plan.

2.

Content. The lettering and advertising matter on all permitted commercial or industrial signs within the City, except
as herein provided, shall be restricted to: the business name, business logo, services rendered or goods sold upon
such premises, and nature of business. Detailed advertising information such as telephone numbers and prices of
the product or services offered are prohibited from permanent sign copy faces. No more than one business may be
identified per sign face, except as herein provided. No person shall advertise or display any unlawful act, business
or purpose.

3.

Illumination. On signs where goose neck reflectors and lights are permitted, such gooseneck reflectors and lights
shall be provided with proper lenses and guards concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to
prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. It shall be unlawful to illuminate any sign whether internally or
externally where any portion of such illumination creates harmful glare such as excessive radiation, or lights that
distract motorists, or cause a nuisance to adjacent property.

4.

Quality/Maintenance/Aesthetics. All signs shall be maintained in proper working order and in a state of good repair
169/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

at all times. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept clean and legible at all times. The rear of any sign face or
cabinet visible to the public shall be provided with a flat-surfaced cover to obscure structural elements from public
view. "Angle bars," "metal pipes" or "I-Beams" shall not be used as visible structural supports unless covered with
decorative material approved by the City Planner.
E.

Exempted Signs. The following classes of signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this section, provided they
conform with the standards contained herein:
1.

Directional Signs. On-site directional signs to aid vehicle or pedestrian traffic, provided such signs do not exceed
four (4) square feet in area or four (4) feet in height, and provided further that the number and location are
approved by the City Planner or designee.

2.

Official Flags.

3.

Political Signs. No Political Signs shall be installed on fences, walls, light poles, utility poles, or any other structures
within the public right-of-way. Such signs may be installed on private property, but only with the property owner's
consent. Such signs shall be removed by the subject political candidate or political organization by the Monday
following the election pertaining to the candidate/issues advertised by the signs. Signs not removed within seven (7)
days of the specified deadline shall be removed by the City at the expense of the political candidate or organization
involved.

4.

Project Signs. No more than one (1) sign per street frontage. Such signs may be externally illuminated but may not
be internally illuminated. For sites less than one (1) acre, maximum sign area: thirty-two (32) square feet; maximum
height: eight (8) feet. For sites one (1) acre or larger, maximum sign area: sixty (60) square feet; maximum height:
fifteen (15) feet.

5.

Commercial Real Estate Signs. Not more than one (1) Commercial Real Estate Sign with a maximum size of thirty
two (32) square feet, advertising property for sale, for rent, or for lease shall be allowed per commercial or
industrial property of less than one (1) acre in size. Commercial or industrial properties of one (1) acre or more in
size shall be allowed a Commercial Real Estate Sign of no more than fifty (50) square feet in size. However, corner
commercial or industrial lots of less than one (1) acre in size may have two (2) Commercial Real Estate Signs, one
along each street frontage, with a maximum size of thirty two (32) square feet each. Also, corner commercial or
industrial lots of one (1) acre or over in size may have two (2) Commercial Real Estate Signs, one along each street
frontage, with a maximum size of fifty (50) square feet each. No more than a total of nine (9) square feet of "Rider"
Signs advertising features such as conference rooms, number of stores, etc. may be attached to a Commercial Real
Estate Sign.

6.

Residential Real Estate Signs. All Residential Real Estate, Subdivision and Open House Signs shall be subject to the
following requirements:
a.

Number and size. Not more than one (1) Residential Real Estate Sign per property, with a maximum size of
nine (9) square feet, advertising property for sale, for rent, or for lease. However, corner lots may have two (2)
Real Estate Signs, one along each street frontage, with a maximum size of nine (9) square feet each. No more
than a total of nine (9) square feet of "Rider" signs advertising features such as swimming pools, spas, number
of bedrooms, etc. may be attached to a Real Estate Sign. One "Open House" sign not exceeding three (3)
square feet in size is allowed per property during "Open House" sale periods. In addition, two (2) pennants or
flags per property are allowed during "Open House" sale periods.

b.

Placement. Off-Site Directional, Subdivision and Open House Signs may be placed only on private property and
only with the consent of the owner(s).

c.

Removal. All Real Estate Off-Site Directional Signs, Subdivision and Open House Signs shall be removed within
two (2) hours after sundown.

7.

Vehicle For Sale Signs.

8.

Window Signs. Window Signs shall cover no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the glass window area along
each building frontage and shall be no more than twelve (12) inches behind the glass window.

9.

Search Lights and Laser Displays. All search lights and laser displays shall be allowed only within commercial,
industrial, institutional zones, and the Fairgrounds zone, and in commercially designated districts of specific plan
170/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

zones. Such devices shall be focused away from ground level areas, residential areas, pedestrian areas, vehicular
traffic areas and areas that could cause reflected glare on to surrounding neighborhoods. The level of illumination
shall be low enough so as not to cause any unnecessary direct or reflected glare onto surrounding neighborhoods.
F.

Prohibited Signs. The following types of signs and devices shall be specifically prohibited:
1.

Abandoned Signs.

2.

Aerial Signs or Aerial Devices.

3.

Animated Signs, except "Message Center Display Signs" and "On-Premise Signs in Redevelopment Areas."

4.

Banners, except as permitted herein.

5.

Balloons and Blimps, except as permitted herein.

(Ord. No. 3878, § 8 (part).)

6.

Fence Signs.

7.

Inflatable Signs, except as permitted herein.

(Ord. No. 3878, § 8 (part).)

8.

Light Bulb Strings, except for holiday decorations.

9.

Mobile Signs.

10.

Off-Site Advertising Signs (billboards).

11.

Paper or Cloth Signs on the exterior of the building, or any matter or similar material, except only those signs
located inside a building as part of window signage which meet all other provisions of this Section.

12.

Pennants, except as permitted herein.

13.

Portable Signs.

14.

Roof or Fin Signs.

15.

Signs which simulate in color, size or design, any traffic control sign or signal, or which make use of words, symbols
or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

G.

16.

Snipe Signs.

17.

Temporary Signs, except as otherwise permitted herein.

Permitted Signs. The following signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements contained herein:
1.

Freeway Oriented Signs. No signs shall be permitted unless the text, logo, or pictures on said signs are legible to the
freeway traveling public, and unless the following requirements are satisfied:
a.

Conditional Use Permit Required. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required per Section .580 of the Pomona
Zoning Ordinance.

b.

Location. No Freeway Oriented Signs shall be permitted except within the C-2, C-3, and C-4 zones, and such
signs shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a freeway right-of-way, including exit and entrance
ramps.

c.

Size. Maximum face of sign shall be two hundred (200) square feet each side.

d.

Height. Maximum height of signs shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet.

e.

Number. One (1) sign for each principal use and premise, for identification purposes only, shall be permitted
and shall be placed so as not to obstruct other authorized on-site identification signs. Any site with an existing
Off-Site Advertising Sign (billboard) shall be ineligible to also display a Freeway Oriented Sign.

f.

Sign Copy. Freeway Oriented Signs shall be limited to two (2) sign copy faces. Each sign copy face shall display
no more than four (4) major tenant names and the name of the commercial or industrial center, and shall be
limited to five (5) copy lines.

2.

Major Site Identification Signs. Such signs shall be limited to sites of two (2) acres or larger over in size and shall be
located in the C-2, C-3 and C-4 zones.
a.

Number. One (1) per site.

b.

Size and height. No more than two hundred (200) square feet in size and thirty (30) feet in height shall be
171/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

permitted.
c.

Sign Copy. Major Site Identification Signs shall be limited to two (2) sign copy faces. No more than sixty percent
(60%) of the sign face on each side shall be utilized for the sign message. Each sign copy face shall display no
more than three (3) major tenant names and the name of the commercial or industrial center, and shall be
limited to four (4) copy lines.

3.

On-Premise Signs in Redevelopment Project Areas. On-Premise Signs in Redevelopment Project Areas shall only be
permitted as Freeway Oriented Signs within redevelopment project areas, with the consent of the Redevelopment
Agency.
a.

Conditional Use Permit Required. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required per Section .580 of the Pomona
Zoning Ordinance.

b.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3959.

c.

Location. Within five hundred (500) feet of the freeway right-of-way, including on-ramps and off-ramps.

d.

Distance Separation. Each such sign shall be at least two thousand (2,000) feet apart.

e.

Size and height. On-Premise Signs in Redevelopment Project Areas shall be limited to two hundred (200)
square feet in size and a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet.

f.

Sign Copy. On-Premise Signs in Redevelopment Project Areas shall be limited to two (2) sign copy faces. Each
sign copy face shall display no more than four (4) major tenant names and the name of the commercial or
industrial center, and shall be limited to five (5) copy lines.

4.

Message Center Display Signs. Such signs shall only be permitted as Freeway Oriented Signs within redevelopment
project areas adjacent to a freeway.
a.

Conditional Use Permit Required. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required per Section .580 of the Pomona
Zoning Ordinance.

b.

Number. One (1) per redevelopment project area, provided that no Freeway Oriented Sign or On-Premise Sign
in Redevelopment Project Area is allowed or is already in place on the same site.

c.

Location. All Message Center Display Signs shall be located within five hundred (500) feet from a freeway rightof-way, including on-ramps and off-ramps.

d.

Distance Separation. Each such sign shall be at least two thousand (2,000) feet apart.

e.

Size and height. Message Center Display Signs shall be limited to two hundred (200) square feet in size and a
maximum height of forty-five (45) feet.

f.

Sign Copy. Message Center Display Signs shall be limited to two (2) sign copy faces. The fixed sign copy on
each sign face shall be limited to five (5) lines to accommodate a maximum of four (4) major tenant names
within the subject site and the name of the commercial center. The changeable message display shall be
counted as part of the total sign area.

5.

Pole Signs. Such signs shall be limited to the C, M and AP zones, and to commercially designated properties within
Specific Plan areas.
a.

Architectural Treatment. Pole Signs shall be architecturally compatible in style, finish, and color with the
subject building or development. Any exposed structural supports or poles such as "angle bars," "iron pipes,"
"I-beams" or similar structural members shall be architecturally encased with finished metal cladding, stucco,
wood or similar material, subject to the City Planner's approval as to proportion and architectural
compatibility.

b.

Number. No more than one (1) Pole Sign shall be permitted per site, provided that such site has at least three
hundred (300) feet of continuous frontage along the street where the sign is proposed. A second Pole Sign is
permissible along a second street frontage with at least three hundred (300) feet of property frontage.

c.

Location. No Pole Sign shall be placed within ten (10) feet of a common lot line. Minimum separation between
Pole Signs shall be two hundred (200) feet.

d.

Size and height. No more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of area per sign face, and a maximum
height of twenty (20) feet.
172/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

e.

Sign Copy. Pole Signs shall be limited to two (2) sign copy faces. Each sign copy face shall display no more than th
and the name of the commercial or industrial center, and shall be limited to four (4) copy lines. No more than sixt
face on each side shall be utilized for the sign copy.

f.

Projection. No Pole Sign shall project beyond the property line. All Pole Signs shall have a minimum clearance
of fourteen (14) feet over parking lots or driveways, and eight (8) feet over pedestrian walkways.

6.

Monument Signs. Such signs shall be limited to the C, M and AP zones, and to commercially designated properties
within Specific Plan areas. Neon shall be allowed with monument signs.
a.

Location. No Monument Sign shall be placed within ten (10) feet of a common lot line. Minimum separation
between Monument Signs shall be one hundred (100) feet.

b.

Number. No more than one (1) Monument Sign shall be permitted per site, provided such site has at least two
hundred (200) feet of continuous frontage along the street where the sign is proposed. A second Monument
Sign is permissible along a second street side with at least two hundred (200) feet of property frontage.

c.

Size and height. No more than one sixty-five (65) square feet of area per sign face, and a maximum height of
ten (10) feet.

d.

Sign Copy. Monument Signs shall be limited to two (2) sign copy faces. No more than sixty percent (60%) of the
sign face on each side shall be utilized for the sign message which shall be contained within a maximum of
three (3) lines. No more than three (3) major tenants shall be permitted to be advertised on any Monument
Sign.

7.

High Rise Building Identification Signs. Such signs shall be limited to buildings of at least three (3) stories high
located in the AP and C zones and in commercially designated properties within Specific Plan areas.
a.

Number. Two (2) per building.

b.

Location. On the upper-most story, provided the building is at least three (3) stories high.

c.

Size. No more than one (1) square foot of sign area for every lineal foot of building frontage where the sign is
proposed.

8.

d.

Sign Type. Internally illuminated channel letters.

e.

Sign Copy. Each sign copy shall be limited to one (1) line.

Directory Signs. Such signs shall be limited to the A-P, C and M zones, except for properties with institutional uses
within the R zones.
a.

Number. Sites having more than six hundred (600) feet of frontage along a single street may either have one
(1) freestanding Directory Sign or one (1) wall-mounted Directory Sign. No freestanding Directory Sign may be
located on any residentially-zoned lot that has less than one hundred (100) feet of street frontage.

b.

Size and Height. Freestanding Directory Signs shall be limited to one hundred (100) square feet in size and
fifteen (15) feet in height. Wall-mounted Directory Signs shall be limited to fifty (50) square feet in size.

c.

Sign Copy. No more than sixty percent (60%) of the sign face shall be utilized for the sign message.
Freestanding Directory Signs shall be limited to two (2) sign copy faces.

9.

Wall Signs. Such signs shall be permitted in all zones except on lots with a single family use within Residential zones.
Channel letters, can signs and neon signs shall be permitted.
a.

Number. A business with only one (1) building frontage may have one (1) primary wall sign, a business with
two (2) building frontages may have one (1) primary wall sign and one (1) secondary wall sign, and a business
with three (3) or more building frontages may have one (1) primary wall sign and a maximum of two (2)
secondary wall signs.

b.

Ground Floor Sign Size. The total size of the primary wall sign shall not exceed an area of one and one-half
(1½) square feet per lineal foot of primary building or business frontage on the wall to which the sign is
attached. The total size of the secondary wall sign shall not exceed an area of one (1) square foot per lineal
foot of secondary building or business frontage on the wall to which the sign is attached (area can not be
accumulated from one side for application to another side of a building). Sign copy shall be limited to the
business name and product or service offered, and logo.
173/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

c.

Second Floor Sign Size. The total size of wall signage on the second floor shall not exceed an area of one (1) squa
building or business frontage on the wall to which the sign is attached.

d.

Height. Wall Signs shall not be mounted or placed any higher than the second story and shall not extend
higher than the building wall upon which they are attached.

e.

Coverage. In no case shall wall sign copy occupy more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the length of the
business frontage wall to which it is affixed.

f.

Primary and secondary building frontages shall be designated by the property owner or the applicant/tenant.

g.

Projection. No Wall Sign shall extend more than twelve (12) inches beyond the face of the wall to which it is
attached or affixed.

h.
10.

Sign Copy. All sign copy on both the ground floor and the second floor shall be contained within two (2) lines.

Awning Signs. Awning Signs shall be limited to the A-P, C, and M zones, and within commercially designated
properties within Specific Plan areas.
a.

Location. Signage shall be restricted to the awning valance not to exceed a vertical dimension of six (6) inches
and shall be contained within one (1) line.

b.

Height. Awnings shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet above ground level and may be internally or externally
illuminated.

11.

Under-Canopy Signs. Under-Canopy Signs shall be limited to the C zones and to commercially designated properties
within Specific Plan areas.
a.

Area. Maximum area shall be six (6) square feet.

b.

Height and Projection. A minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet over the pedestrian walkway shall be
provided and the top of the sign shall be no higher than 12 feet over the sidewalk/walkway.

c.

Number. One (1) sign suspended under a canopy shall be permitted per business establishment in pedestrian
areas such as sidewalks, plazas or malls.

d.

Sign Copy. Under-Canopy Signs shall be limited to two (2) sign copy faces with each face having a maximum of
two (2) lines.

12.

Banners. Banners shall only be permitted for advertising a grand opening (once for each company), change of
business name, change of ownership, and nationally recognized holidays, provided the following requirements are
met:
a.

Number. One (1) Banner per business location may be permitted at any one time.

b.

Location. Banners shall be disallowed in residential zones, except in cases of governmental or institutional use
of such properties. Banners may also be mounted within public properties such as parks, and public rights-ofway such as streets, with the approval of the Public Works Department. On-site banners shall only be mounted
against a building wall, and shall not be strung between freestanding poles, structures or trees.

c.

Size. No more than forty five (45) square feet in area, with a maximum length of fifteen (15) feet, and a
maximum width of three (3) feet.

13.

d.

Duration. Maximum duration of thirty (30) days for every sixty (60) days.

e.

Permit Required. A Banner Permit shall be required for each thirty (30) day period that is requested.

Bunting. Bunting shall be permitted only for new automobile dealership lots and commercial centers of five (5) or
more tenants.
a.

Content. Bunting shall not contain any advertising information such as company name or product name but
may contain information such as nationally recognized holidays and events.

b.

Size. No more than two (2) feet wide by three (3) feet high.

c.

Placement and Mounting. Bunting shall be mounted on parking lot light poles or on rigid brackets attached to
the exterior wall of the building, and shall be at least eight (8) feet above the ground.

d.

Duration. Bunting shall be limited to sixty (60) days, three (3) times a year, with a time gap of sixty (60) days
between mounting periods.
174/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

e.

Permit Fee and Deposit. The applicant shall pay a permit fee and a deposit fee every time Bunting is requested. T
reimbursed at the end of the permitted mounting period provided the bunting is removed by the applicant.

14.

Pennants. Pennants shall be permitted on automobile only on automobile dealerships and commercial centers of
five (5) or more tenants.
a.

Size. Pennants shall be no more than eight (8) inches wide by eighteen (18) inches long.

b.

Condition and Location. The location of pennants shall be approved by the economic development director or
designee. Pennants shall not be permitted on offsite utility/light poles or within the public right-of-way. All
pennants shall be maintained in good condition. Torn, tattered and/or damaged pennants shall be replaced,
repaired or removed upon notification.

(Ord. No. 3878, § 8 (part).)

c.

Duration. Pennants shall be limited to sixty (60) days, three (3) times a year, with a time gap of sixty (60) days
between mounting periods.

d.

Permit Fee and Deposit. The applicant shall pay a permit fee and a deposit fee every time pennants are
requested. The deposit fee shall be reimbursed at the end of the permitted mounting period provided the
pennants are removed by the applicant.

15.

Painted Signs. Painted Signs shall be allowed only as a wall sign and shall be professionally executed by a licensed
commercial sign painter.

16.

a.

Sign Permit Application required.

b.

All development standards pertaining to Wall Signs shall apply.

Religious facility signs. The following standards shall be met for a religious facility, pursuant to Section .062:
a.

Number. One (1) Monument Sign, and either one (1) Wall Directory Sign or one (1) Freestanding Directory Sign for a
religious facility and its accessory uses.

b.

Size and Height. A Monument Sign for a religious facility shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size and
seven (7) feet in height, and a Wall Directory Sign or Freestanding Directory Sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
square feet in size. A Wall Directory Sign shall be mounted no higher than ten (10) feet from the ground and a
Freestanding Directory Sign shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height.

c.

Location and Mounting. A Monument Sign shall not be placed within five (5) feet of any property line and shall be
within a landscaped area or planter. A Wall Sign or Directory Sign shall not be mounted higher than the building
wall.

(Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

17.

Balloons and Bunting. Balloons and bunting shall be permitted within automobile dealerships.
a.

Condition and Location. The size and location of balloons and bunting shall be approved by the economic
development director or designee. Balloons and bunting shall not be permitted on off-site utility/light poles or
within the public right-of-way. Torn, tattered and/or damaged balloons/bunting shall be replaced, repaired or
removed upon notification.

(Ord. No. 3878, § 8 (part).)

18.

Used car lot signs. The following signage shall be permitted for used car lots:
a.

Number. One monument sign shall be permitted per used car sales lot with a maximum sign area of sixty-five
(65) square feet per sign face at a maximum height of ten (10) feet. A monument sign shall be allowed for used
car sales lots with a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in lot area. Multiple used car sales lot
businesses located on the same legal lot shall be allowed only one monument sign. If a site for a used car lot
qualifies for a pole sign pursuant to the city's sign ordinance, such sign may be substituted for a monument
sign.

b.

Vehicle Windshield signage. Vehicle windshield signage shall be permitted to cover up to fifty percent (50%) of
each vehicle windshield area.

c.

Other signs. All other signs including wall signs and temporary signs shall be permitted pursuant to the Section
.503-K of the zoning ordinance.
175/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 3878, § 8 (part).)

H.

I.

Abatement. The following signs shall be abated immediately:
1.

Nonconforming Signs changed or altered in any way beyond maintenance and repair other than change of copy.

2.

Flags, banners, balloons, temporary, portable and mobile signs, except as permitted herein.

3.

Illegal Signs.

4.

Painted Signs, "Wall" or "Window Signs" which do not conform with the provisions of this section.

Inventory and Abatement of Abandoned Nonconforming Signs.

Within six (6) months from the adoption of this section, the city shall commence with an inventory and identification of all
abandoned nonconforming advertising signs. Within sixty (60) days after said six-month period, the City shall commence abatement
of such signs.
J.

Use Discontinued.
1.

Nonconforming signs. When a commercial or manufacturing use is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days,
any nonconforming sign advertising such discontinued use shall be considered abandoned and shall be abated per
the provisions of the Pomona City Code.

2.

Conforming signs. When any land use is discontinued for a period of sixty (60) days or more, the property owner
must maintain all remaining conforming signs by modifying such signs to remove the name, and other
advertisement of the former business and continue to maintain the sign structure in proper working condition. Any
sign not in compliance with this section shall be determined to be a public nuisance and the City shall abate same
per the provisions of the Pomona City Code.

K.

Proposition "L."*

Editor's note—
* Editor's note. — Former Section .503-K-G7, which was approved in a special municipal election held on November 2, 1993 (Proposition "L"),
and which cannot be modified without a vote of the people, is redesignated .503-K-K by Ordinance No. 3845.
1.

No new or structurally altered offsite billboards shall be permitted within the City of Pomona. In technical words
conveying the same meaning, no "offsite advertising signs" as defined shall be constructed, relocated, or
structurally altered in any zoning district.

2.

Noncommercial advertising by the property owner or by another with their consent is permitted on any advertising
sign allowed by this ordinance for onsite advertising, whether the message concerns activity at the property or not.

(Ord. No. 1561, § 6; Ord. No. 1963, § 3; Ord. No. 1983, §§ 2, 4; Ord. No. 2108, § 1; Ord. No. 2487, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 3385, § 35; Ord. No. 3584, § 1; Ord. No. 3625, § 3;
Ord. No. 3676, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 3680, § 3; Ord. No. 3697, § 3; Ord. No. 3709, § 2; Ord. No. 3768, §§ 2—5; Ord. No. 3809, § 2; Ord. No. 3845, §§ 3, 4.)

.503-L LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
1.

Generally. Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building hereafter erected or established shall have
and maintain loading space as provided in section .503-L-2.
(a)

When the lot upon which the loading space is located abuts upon an alley such loading space shall adjoin or have
access from said alley. The length of the loading space may be measured perpendicular to or parallel with the
center line of the alley. Where such loading space is parallel with the alley the loading space shall extend across the
full width of the lot, except that if only two spaces are required the length of the loading area need not exceed fifty
(50) feet.

(b)

Where the loading area abuts a street, the front yard required in the district may be used in calculating the area
required for loading providing that there be no more than one (1) entry or exit to sixty (60) feet of lot frontage or
fraction thereof.

(c)

Loading space being maintained in connection with any existing main building on the effective date of this
ordinance shall thereafter be maintained so long as said building remains, unless an equivalent number of such
spaces are provided on a contiguous lot in conformity with the requirements of this section; provided, however,
that this regulation shall not require the maintenance of more loading space than is hereby required for a new
building, nor the maintenance of such space for any type of main building other than those specified above.
176/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(d)

Loading space required by this ordinance may occupy a required rear yard, but in no case shall any part of an alley or
loading.

(e)

Before any parcel of land is paved with asphaltic concrete, concrete, or any other surfacing material, a permit shall
be obtained from the city engineer.

2.

Loading requirements for various uses:

All hospitals, institutions, hotels, commercial and industrial uses shall provide loading spaces not less than ten (10) feet in width,
twenty (20) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height, as follows:

Total Square Feet of Building Space (gross oor area)

Loading Spaces Required

(a) Commercial Buildings
3,000-15,000

1

15,001-45,000

2

45,001-75,000

3

75,001-105,000

4

105,001-and over

5

(b) Industrial Buildings
3,500-40,000

1

40,001-80,000

2

80,001-120,000

3

120,001-160,000

4

160,001-and over

5

(c) Hospitals and Institutions
3,000-20,000

1

20,001-50,000

2

50,001-80,000

3

80,001-110,000

4

(d) Hotels and O ce Buildings
110,001-and over

5

3,500-50,000

1
177/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

50,001-100,000

2

100,001-and over

3

.503-M MINIMUM SIZE OF BUILDING
No requirements.
.503-N MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SIZE OF DISTRICT
The minimum and maximum size of the districts shall be not less than that prescribed within the district regulations.
.503-O FREQUENCY OF DISTRICT
1.

In the "C-1" District

No neighborhood stores district should be closer than one-half mile from any other commercial district.
2.

In the "C-2" district.

The location of "C-2" districts shall be determined by studies of the purchasing power available to support the uses permitted in
the district. Said districts should not, however, be closer than one (1) mile from any other "C-2" district already established. A "C-2"
district may, however, be established abutting or as an expansion of any commercial district other than a "C-1" district or a "C-2"
district.
.503-Q COMPUTATION OF YARDS
1.

In measuring a front yard or side yard adjoining a street, it shall be the perpendicular distance between the street and a
line through the corner or face of said building closest to and drawn parallel with the street excluding any architectural
features.

2.

If any future right-of-way line has been established by provisions of a specific ordinance or by the master plan, then the
measurement of the yard shall be made from the future right-of-way line, or future property line so defined.

.503-R BUILDING SETBACK
1.

The highway setback line on all major and secondary highways shall be established as fifty (50) feet from the center line
of all major highways and forty (40) feet from the center line of all secondary highways. The major and secondary
highways referred to in this section shall be those shown on the master plan for the city.

2.

In cases where front yards are required, such front yards shall be calculated from the line established by the highway
setback line by this section.

.503-S AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE TO ESTABLISH STREET SETBACK LINES
1.

Authority to establish front yard setbacks:

Upon application of any property owner, or by action initiated by the planning commission or the city council, front yard
setbacks on any premises shall be established or re-established in the manner herein provided. The action on the application for the
establishment of such front yard setbacks shall be in conformity with the provisions of this section notwithstanding any other
provision to establish front yard setbacks in other parts of this ordinance.
2.

Application by property owner:

Any owner of property within any use district desiring to have front yard setbacks established or re-established as to such
property, may present to the planning commission an application requesting same. Such application, obtained at the office of the
planning department, shall be completed, showing the name and street address of the property owner, and an indication of the

178/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

extent along said street to which the request for front yard setback establishments or reestablishment is made. Names and
addresses of other property owners along said street may be included within the application, however, such additional names and
street addresses are optional.
3.

Setting for hearing and notice:

Upon receiving said application, notice shall be given to property owners along said street by mailed notice, or posting of
placards, or legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Pomona, one or all of such methods of notice to be
determined by the planning commission. Such notice shall give the nature and extent of the request, date, time, and place of
hearing, the name of the applicant, and such other facts as may be prescribed from time to time by the commission or the council.
4.

Hearing and recommendation by the planning commission:

The planning commission shall hear such application and shall make a recommendation thereon to the city council; in doing so
the commission may recommend the location of the front yard setback line to the established or re-established, but no
recommendation shall be made for the establishment of said setback line for any property with reference to which no notice shall
have been given.
5.

Hearing and order by council:

Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall hear such application, after which a
decision shall be made to accept, reject, or alter the recommendation of the planning commission.
6.

Ordinance:

Thereafter such front yard setback line shall be established by ordinance.
Editor's note.—The following setback lines are hereby established:
(a)

No buildings shall be constructed closer than 15 feet from the north property line of lots abutting Pasadena Street.
This restriction does not apply to walls and open use of the property.

(Ord. No. 1592, § 2.)

(b)

A fifteen-foot front yard building setback line along the north side of Hawthorne Place between Mountain View
Avenue and Reservoir Street shall be established.

(Ord. No. 1658, § 1.)

(c)

A twelve-foot front yard building setback line is established on the south side of Nemaha Street between Garey
Avenue and Orange Grove Avenue in the City of Pomona.

(Ord. No. 1696, § 2.)

(d)

A fifteen-foot front yard setback line for the north and south sides of West Center Street between White Avenue and
Hamilton Boulevard in the City of Pomona is established.

(Ord. No. 1812, § 1.)

(e)

New setback lines on both the north and south sides of Orange Grove between White and the San Bernardino
Freeway shall be established as follows:
a.

For any existing and future "A-P," administrative and professional district, a minimum front yard setback of
five feet for nonresidential uses shall be permitted in the district, and fifteen feet for residential uses shall be
permitted in the district.

b.

For any existing and future residential district, a minimum front yard setback of fifteen feet.

c.

For any existing and future commercial district, no change from that now set forth in Ordinance 1466.

(Ord. No. 1891, § 1.)

(f)

The minimum front yard setback line along the south side of Pasadena Street between Gibbs Street and Palomares
Street shall be fifteen feet for all uses.

(Ord. No. 1902, § 1.)

(g)

The minimum front yard setback line along the west side of Wisconsin Street between Holt Avenue on the south
179/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

and Texas Street on the north shall be fifteen feet for all uses.
(Ord. No. 1903, § 1.)

(h)

New front yard setback lines on the south side of San Francisco Street, between Palomares and Eleanor Street shall
be established as fifteen feet.

(Ord. No. 1938, § 1.)

(i)

The minimum landscape building setback line along the west side of Main Street between Pomona Mall West and
Fifth Avenue shall be five feet, provided this setback will not preclude roof overhangs and architectural features
projecting into such area of setback.

(Ord. No. 1943, § 1.)

(j)

New building setback lines on the east side of Main Street between Pomona Mall West and Fifth Avenue shall be
established as five feet.

(Ord. No. 1954, § 1.)

(k)

A building setback of one hundred feet shall be required from the south boundary of Harrison Avenue, between
Garey Avenue and the westerly boundary of the "M-1" district between Harrison Avenue and Bonita Avenue. (For
further details see last unnumbered paragraph of Section .413-D-4.)

(Ord. No. 2084, § 3.)

(l)

A minimum landscaped building setback of twenty feet from the western Pomona city limits boundary to Garey
Avenue along the south side of Bonita Avenue. (For further details and landscaping requirements see Section .413D-5(a).)

(Ord. No. 2084, § 3.)

(m)

A minimum landscaped building setback of fifteen feet in the "M-1" zoning district along the east side of Reservoir
Street from Franklin Avenue to Philadelphia Street. (For further details, wall and landscaping requirements, see
Section .413-D-5(b).)

(Ord. No. 2084, § 3.)

.503-T. Repealed by Ordinance No. 3385.
.503-U. TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT MEASURES.
Purpose and Intent. These regulations are established to encourage the efficient use of existing and planned transportation
infrastructures, the maintenance and improvement of traffic levels of service and the citywide reduction of motor vehicle emissions.
Goals and Strategies. To minimize the number of peak period vehicle trips generated by new development by setting development
standards that support the use of alternative transportation systems that also minimize fuel emissions into the atmosphere. Regionwide and
countrywide participation on transportation demand management is also strongly supported by the development standards.
A.

Definitions.
1.

"Alternative transportation" means the use of modes of transportation other than the single-passenger motor
vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.

2.

"Applicable development" means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size
threshold criteria contained in subdivision C of this subsection.

3.

"Buspool" means a vehicle carrying sixteen or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work
with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule.

4.

"Carpool" means a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis.

5.

"The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" is a statute that requires all jurisdictions in the State of California
to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development.

6.

"Developer" means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable
development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this subsection as
determined by the property owner.

7.

"Development" means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which
180/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this subsection and which exceed the thresholds defined
in subdivision C of this subsection shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added
cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All
calculations shall be based on gross square footage.
8.

"Employee parking area" means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees.
Unless specified in the zoning code, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

Commercial

30%

O ce/Professional

85%

Industrial/Manufacturing

90%

9.

"Preferential parking" means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space
markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a
location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single-occupant vehicles.

10.

"Property owner" means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property
owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this subsection either directly or by delegating such
responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent.

11.

"South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)" is the regional authority appointed by the California State
Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert
portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties).

12.

"Tenant" means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project.

13.

"Transportation demand management (TDM)" means the alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of
commuters, through programs of incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant
vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period
or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks).

14.

"Trip reduction" means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single-occupant vehicles.

15.

"Vanpool" means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular
basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to fifteen adult passengers, and on a
prepaid subscription basis.

16.

"Vehicle" means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and
motorcycles.

B.

Review of Transit Impacts.

Prior to approval of any development project for which an environmental impact report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the
requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route
transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted with. Projects for which a notice of preparation
(NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this subsection shall be exempted from its provisions. The "Transit Impact Review Worksheet," contained in the Los Angeles County
Congestion Management Program Manual, or similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of
CEQA, transit operators shall be sent a NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given opportunity to
comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as
a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and
recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the draft EIR prepared for the project.
Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA.

181/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring
subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the
discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a previously certified
EIR.
C.

Transportation Demand and Trip Reduction Measures.
1.

Applicability of Requirements.

Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provisions for, as a minimum, all of the following
applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures.
This subsection shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed "complete" by the city
pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for an EIR has been circulated or for which an
application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection.
All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair.
2.

Development Standards.
a.

Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand square feet or more shall provide the following to the
satisfaction of the city:
(1)

A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest
number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall including, but is not limited to, the
following:

(2)

Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;

(3)

Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional
ridesharing agency and local transit operators;

(4)

Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

(5)

Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/ local bicycle maps and bicycle safety
information;

(6)

A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the
site.

b.

Nonresidential development of fifty thousand square feet or more shall comply with subdivision (2)(a) above
and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city:
(1)

Not less than ten percent of the employee parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the
employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for the use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without
displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area
shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of the city. A
statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the
method for obtaining such spaces must be included in the required transportation information board.
Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants provided that at all times at least one space for
projects of fifty thousand square feet to one hundred thousand square feet and two spaces for projects
over one hundred thousand square feet shall be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.

(2)

Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located
within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet, two inches shall be
provided for those spaces and access ways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radius and
parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas.

(3)

Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first
fifty thousand square feet of nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional fifty
thousand square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or
higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully

182/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike
from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provisions of racks, lockers, or locked rooms)
shall be to the satisfaction of the city.
c.

Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand square feet or more shall comply with subdivisions (2)
(a) and (2)(b) above, and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city:
(1)

A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers.

(2)

Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian
circulation system to each building in the development.

(3)

If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements shall be
provided. The city shall consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate
improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances shall be designed
to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops.

(4)
D.

Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on-site.

Monitoring.

All applicable development standards in this section and all identified mitigation measures for development projects subject to
this subsection shall be monitored for appropriate compliance prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or business license.
E.

Enforcement.

All applicable development standards in this section and all identified mitigation measures for development projects subject to
this subsection shall be properly in place and updated before any permit for tenant improvement work, remodeling, site work,
additional building square footage or landscaping work is permitted.
(Ord. No. 3690, § 1.)

Sec. .504. - Other conditions to use.
B.

THE FOLLOWING EVIDENCE AND CONDITIONS, RELATED TO THE ESTABLISHING OF NEW "C-1" NEIGHBORHOOD STORES
DISTRICTS SHALL BE REQUIRED:
1.

A report on the methods to be employed to adjust the "C-1" neighborhood stores to surrounding land uses, including
statements of intent related to provisions and amount of parking, walls, landscaping, lighting, etc., and a statement
setting forth the manner and time table of construction and required improvements.

2.

The presentation of a site plan in conformity with the provisions of the ordinance, which plan defines the area to be
developed for buildings, the areas to be developed for parking, the location of pedestrian and vehicular circulation and
the points of ingress and egress, the location and height of masonry walls, the provision of spaces for loading, the
location, size and amount of signs and permitted outdoor advertising, and adjustments to be made in relation to
abutting land uses and zoning districts.

3.

A statement of financial responsibility, including the posting of bonds or cash to assure the installation of the
improvements required by the ordinances of the city as a condition to development in the "C-1" district.

4.

Establishing of a time schedule for development which demonstrates the applicant's readiness and ability to provide the
proposed services. Said time shall be for a period of one year. This time may be extended for a period of not more than
one additional year by submitting a request for approval to the commission for recommendation to the council prior to
the expiration date of the initial time limit.

C.

THE "C-2" DISTRICT: Same as the "C-1" district. See Section .504-B.

(Ord. No. 2508, § 5.)

Sec. .505. - Zoning review.
A.

THE "C-1" DISTRICT: If the applicant for the "C-1" district does not conform, within the time defined in Section .504-B of this
ordinance, to the conditions set forth for the creation of a "C-1" neighborhood stores district then no building permit shall be
issued for the construction of any building and/or structure within the specific "C-1" area until the area has been examined by
183/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

the planning commission and the area proposed for zoning and/or rezoning for its most appropriate use. All conditions fixed
by the city council in the amendment to the ordinance creating the specific "C-1" district shall run with the land and shall be
binding upon the applicant for the amendment, his heirs, successors and assigns.
B.

THE "C-2" DISTRICT: Same as the "C-1" district. See Section .505-A.

Sec. .508. - Other requirements.
All plants permitted in the industrial districts shall be subject to the performance standards and regulations established by the Los
Angeles County air pollution control district.
Sec. .520. - Density bonus.
A.

Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide affordable housing pursuant to State Government Code Section 65915.

B.

Affordable Housing. State Government Code Section 65915 provides for the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of
equivalent financial value when a developer of housing agrees to construct at least one of the following:
1.

Twenty percent of the total units of a housing development for persons and families of lower income, as defined in
Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code;

2.

Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for very low income households, as defined in Section 50105 of
the Health and Safety Code;

3.

Fifty percent of the total dwelling units of a housing development for qualifying residents, as defined in Section 51.2 of
the Civil Code.

C.

Incentives and Requirements. A request for a density bonus and regulatory concessions and/or incentives shall require
conditional use permit review and be subject to the following provisions:
1.

For the purpose of this section, "density bonus" shall mean a density increase of twenty-five percent over the otherwise
maximum allowable residential density under the zoning ordinance. When determining the number of housing units
which are to be affordable, the density bonus shall not be included.

2.

The procedures for implementing this section are as follows:
a)

The city shall within ninety days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the developer in writing of the procedures
governing these provisions.

b)

The council may approve the density bonus and regulatory concessions and/or incentives only if all of the following
findings are made:
1)

The developer has proven that the density bonus and adjustment of standards are necessary to make the
project economically feasible;

2)

That additional adjustment of standards is not required in order for the rents for the targeted units to be set
pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(c); and

3)
3.

The proposed project is compatible with the purpose and intent of the general plan and the zoning ordinance.

The density bonus shall only apply to housing developments consisting of five or more dwelling units which are owneroccupied.

4.

Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any dwelling unit in a development for which "density bonus units" have
been awarded or incentives have been received, the developer shall submit documentation which identifies the
restricted units and shall enter into a written agreement with the city to guarantee for thirty years their continued use
and availability to low and moderate income households. The agreement shall extend more than thirty years if required
by the Construction or Mortgage Financing Assistance Program, Mortgage Insurance Program or Rental Subsidy Program.
The terms and conditions of the agreement shall run with the land which is to be developed, shall be binding upon the
successor in interest of the developer, and shall be recorded in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder.

The agreement shall include the following provisions:
a)

The developer shall give the city the continuing right-of-first-refusal to purchase or lease any or all of the designated
units at the fair market value.
184/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

b)

The deeds to the designated units shall contain a covenant stating that the developer or his/her successor in interest s
lease, sublet, assign or otherwise transfer any interests for same without the written approval of the city confirming th
the units is consistent with the limits established for low and moderate-income households, which shall be related to t
Index.

c)

The city shall have the authority to enter into other agreements with the developer or purchasers of the dwelling
units, as may be necessary to assure that the required dwellings units are continuously occupied by eligible
households.

d)

Applicable deed restrictions, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, shall contain provisions for enforcement of
owner or developer compliance. Any default or failure to comply may result in, but is not limited to, the following
section.

e)

1)

Withdrawal of certificate of occupancy;

2)

Foreclosure; or

3)

Specific performance.

In any action taken to enforce compliance with deed restrictions, the city attorney shall, if such compliance is
ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, take all such action as may be permitted by law to recover all city's
costs of such action, including costs of legal services.

5.

"Density bonus units" shall be generally dispersed throughout a development project and shall not differ in appearance
from other units in the development.

6.

The city shall provide, in addition to a density bonus, at least one of the following regulatory concessions and/or
incentives to ensure that the multifamily residential project will be developed at a reduced cost:
a)

A reduction or modification of zoning ordinance requirements to allow a reduction in dwelling unit size and building
setback requirements that would otherwise be required;

b)

Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial or other land
uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial or other land uses are
compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed
housing project will be located;

c)
7.

Expedited processing of planning and building permits.

Following are those individuals who, by virtue of their position or relationship, shall be ineligible to purchase or rent a
unit provided pursuant to this program as their residence:
a)

All employees and officials of the city of Pomona or its agencies, authorities or commissions who have, by the
authority of their position, policy-making authority or influence affecting city housing programs.

b)

The immediate relative of employees of, and anyone gaining significant economic benefit from a direct business
association with such public employees or officials.

8.

In setting priorities among eligible households for a density bonus and other development incentives and/or
concessions, the first priority shall be given to residents of the city of Pomona.

9.

Maximum occupancy standards as set forth in the Uniform Housing Code shall be adhered to.

(Ord. No. 3724, § 3.)

Sec. .530. - Home occupations.
The following regulations shall apply to the conduct of a home occupation in any residential zone:
A.

Permit—Application.
1.

Permit. A home occupation permit shall be required prior to conducting any home occupation. The planning
division may issue a home occupation permit providing the following procedure is complied with.

2.

Application. The home occupation applicant shall file an application for his request as provided by the planning
division giving all the required information.

B.

Permit not Transferable. A Home Occupation Permit is not transferable. A permit for each new home occupation must be
185/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

applied for.
C.

Limitation on Type of Home Occupation. A home occupation shall be limited to an office.

D.

No Employment. No person shall be employed other than members of the resident family.

E.

Limitation on Number of Home Occupations. There shall be not more than one home occupation in any dwelling unit.

F.

Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, any use not deemed detrimental to the subject area which
is conducted by physically handicapped persons or by persons for therapy, provided that in either case the applicant's
claim for handicap or therapy is supported by a written statement by a medical doctor or in the event that the applicant
is receiving services from an authorized rehabilitation agency by a written statement from this agency. In all cases it is
subject to a conditional use permit.

G.

Sales. No goods or products shall be sold or displayed on the premises.

H.

No Use of Commercial Delivery Vehicles. The use of commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials or equipment to or
from the premises is expressly prohibited.

I.

Storage. There shall be no storage of materials, supplies, and/or equipment in a garage, accessory buildings, or outdoors.
Stock-in-trade shall not change the residential use of any room.

J.
K.

Signs. No signs or other advertising of the premises shall be permitted.
Limitation on Area. A home occupation shall be confined entirely to one room in the dwelling and the entrance to such
space shall be within the dwelling. No garage or accessory building shall be used for a home occupation.

L.
M.

No Remodeling. No addition or remodeling is permitted in connection with the home occupation.
Clientele. No pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be generated by the use. No customers, clients or other persons may
visit the premises for business purposes.

N.

Utilities. There shall be no utility connection added or established to serve the use.

O.

Appearance and Conduct. In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the conduct of the home
occupation within the structure be such that the structure may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use,
either by color, lighting, signs, sounds, noises, vibrations, or any other similarity.

P.

Limitation on Equipment and Material. There shall be no use of material or mechanical equipment not recognized as
being part of reasonable household material and equipment.

(Ord. No. 2098, § 2; Ord. No. 2153, § 1; Ord. No. 2391, § 1 (part); Ord. No. 3131, § 1; Ord. No. 3623, § 7 (part).)

Sec. .530.1. - Termination of business license for home occupation.
When any home occupation results in an undesirable condition interfering with the general welfare and environment of the surrounding
residential area or any provisions of this section are violated, the home occupation shall be terminated by the planning director by giving
written notice thereof, and the business license of the particular home occupation shall be revoked and the fee forfeited by the city clerk. The
decision of the planning director is final, unless a written appeal is made to the planning commission within ten days after the giving of said
written notice. The planning commission may set a public hearing if deemed necessary. The decision of the planning commission is final, in
the absence of an appeal. Applicant or majority vote of city council may appeal planning commission decision to city council. City council
decision is final.
(Ord. No. 2098, § 3; Ord. No. 3623, § 7 (part).)

Sec. .530.2. - Uses permitted as home occupations.
The following uses are permitted as home occupations providing all home occupation regulations are met:
A.

Dressmaking, millinery, and other home sewing work.

B.

Handicraft, weaving and other arts and crafts.

C.

Laundering and ironing.

D.

Offices such as the following could be permitted provided all the other provisions and regulations of the home
occupation section are met:
186/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

1.

Professional;

2.

Janitorial service;

3.

Gardening service.

(Ord. No. 2098, § 4; Ord. No. 2455, § 2; Ord. No. 3623, § 7 (part).)

Sec. .530.3. - Uses expressly prohibited as home occupations.
The following uses are expressly prohibited as home occupations:
A.

Electrician shops;

B.

Plumber shops;

C.

Repair or fix-it shops;

D.

Uses which entail food handling, processing or packing other than specialized minor cooking and baking;

E.

Uses which entail repair, servicing or manufacture of motorized vehicles and/or body and fender repairing;

F.

Uses which entail the harboring, training, raising, or grooming of dogs, cats, or other animals;

G.

Those which do not meet the provisions of the home occupation regulations;

H.

Those which, in the judgment of the city planner, would constitute an objectionable use of residentially zoned property
due to potential noise, increased pedestrian and vehicular traffic, or any other conditions which might interfere with the
general welfare and environment of the surrounding residential area.

(Ord. No. 2098, § 5; Ord. No. 2391, § 2; Ord. No. 2455, § 1; Ord. No. 3623, § 7 (part).)

Sec. .530.4. - Determination of home occupation uses allowed.
The city planner shall make the final determination when there is doubt or certainty as to whether or not a certain use should be allowed
as a home occupation. The decision of the city planner is final unless a written appeal is made to the planning commission within ten days
after the applicant has been notified of the city planner's decision.
(Ord. No. 2098, § 6; Ord. No. 3623, § 7 (part).)

Sec. .530.5. - Home occupation review.
The planning director may review any and/or all requests for a home occupation permit with the planning commission without prejudice
to the applicant. The planning commission may set a public hearing if deemed necessary.
(Ord. No. 2098, § 7.)

Sec. .531. - Prohibited home occupations.
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of Section .530 governing home occupations and notwithstanding any other provisions of this
ordinance, the following shall not be permitted as home occupations:
a.

The repair, reconditioning, servicing, or manufacture of any internal combustion or diesel engine.

b.

The repair, reconditioning, servicing, or manufacture of any motor vehicle, including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles or
motor bikes.

(Ord. No. 2069, § 1.)

Sec. .540. - Substandard lots of records.
If two or more adjoining and vacant platted lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this
zoning ordinance and such platted lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width and area requirements of the district in which they
are located, such group of platted lots shall be considered as a single plot or several plots of minimum size and the plot or plots in one
ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this zoning ordinance, and all sections thereof.
187/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. .541. - Parking or storage of vehicles used primarily for commercial purposes; exemptions.
A.

It shall be unlawful to park or store a vehicle or trailer used primarily for commercial purposes in any residential zone or on
parcels of land used for residential purposes, except when such vehicles are present in the course of business.

A vehicle or trailer shall be deemed to be used primarily for commercial purposes:
(1)

If specialized equipment or material storage devices, or racks are visible on the vehicle; or

(2)

If a classification of operator's license other than a Class 3 classification is required to operate the vehicle on a public
street; or

(3)

If it is of a specialized nature that is commonly used for construction purposes, including but not limited to dump trucks,
cement trucks, backhoes, flatbed trucks; or

(4)

If the vehicle or trailer has been modified so as to serve as a portable self-contained sales or service oriented facility from
which a business activity/commercial transaction could occur. Acquisition of a Home Occupation Permit shall not serve to
exempt a vehicle or trailer from the provisions of this section.

B.

Exemptions—Scope, standards and procedure. It is recognized that the maintenance of the public health, safety and welfare
require that certain vehicles be available for prompt response and thus require such vehicles to be immediately accessible to
the operator. It is further recognized that the residential uses must, insofar as possible, be protected from unnecessary
disruption and intrusion of nonresidential activities. To accommodate these competing interests, the following exemption and
related restrictions have been developed:
1.

Qualifications for Exemption. No commercial vehicle shall be granted an exemption unless such vehicle is utilized in and
for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare. For the purposes of this section, the
public health, safety and welfare shall mean maintaining the operational and functional status of those facilities and
devices that benefit the public at large, such as roadways, pipelines, railway lines, communication lines, governmental
facilities and similar infrastructure elements. A presumption of such purpose shall apply to any commercial vehicle
owned and/or operated by either a governmental entity or a public utility. All other owners and operators of commercial
vehicles shall be required to submit an application for and obtain a permit which shall serve to authorize the vehicle to
be parked in an area of residential use subject to certain restrictions.

2.

Permit—Application Process.
(A)

The owner or operator of a commercial vehicle that seeks to have said vehicle qualified for and to receive a permit
shall apply for such permit in accordance with the following:
(1)

(2)

The applicant shall submit to the City Treasurer a written application setting forth:
(a)

Name, address, phone number and responsible party of the entity owning the vehicle;

(b)

Name and address of operator, including site where vehicle will be stored;

(c)

A description of the function or service the vehicle performs.

The Treasurer shall submit the application to the Fire and Police Departments for both a determination as to
whether the vehicle meets the requirement of being necessary to preserve and protect the public health,
safety and welfare, and a determination as to what restrictions on use are to be applied to the request.
(a)

Approved request: If the application is approved the Treasurer shall issue a permit, in the form of a decal
which shall be placed on either the lower left corner of the rear window or on the left side of the rear
bumper.

(b)

Denied request: If the request is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial pursuant to the process set
forth in Section 14-22.9 of the City Code.

(3)

Restrictions on usage: A permit shall be revoked if the following restrictions are violated:
(a)

The vehicle shall be parked on an approved surface, either on-street or off-street.

(b)

The vehicle's appearance shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner.

(c)

The vehicle shall be operated in a reasonable manner that creates a minimum of visual and audible
disruption.

(d)

The departments set forth in paragraph (A)(2) of subdivision 2 of subsection B of this section may
188/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

establish additional specific restrictions that pertain to the site for which the permit is being sought.
(4)

Permit revocation process. Any person may file a written complaint with the Treasurer alleging that the
operator of a permitted commercial vehicle is violating the restrictions set forth in paragraph (A)(3) of
subdivision 2 of subsection B of this section. Such complaint shall state with specificity the actions or activities
that are the basis for the complaint. The City Treasurer shall give notice and conduct a hearing in accordance
with Sections 14-22.12 through 14-22.15. If the complaint is proven to be valid the permit issued to the
owner/operator shall be immediately revoked, and notice of such revocation shall be sent by certified mail to
the permit holder.

(5)

Fees shall be set by separate resolution.

(Ord. No. 3386, § l; Ord. No. 3416, § 1.)

Sec. .550. - Nonconforming buildings and uses; intent and purpose.
Where buildings and/or the use of buildings and/or the use of land with or without structures are not in conformity with the provisions of
this zoning ordinance and where the uses of buildings and/or land are not compatible with the uses permitted in the zoning district in which
they are located or where such uses are specifically prohibited, it is the intent and purpose of this section, in part, to:
A.

Require, within a reasonable time, that said nonconforming uses be terminated; and

B.

Require nonconforming, incompatible buildings, to be, within a reasonable period of time, removed from the land upon
which they are located: and

C.

Prescribe a reasonable amortization period for said nonconforming buildings, which period will define the remaining
useful life of said buildings, after which the provisions set forth in subsection B of this section shall be applied; and also

D.

Prescribe a reasonable period of time for the termination of nonconforming uses of the land where no buildings are
involved.

Where buildings and/or the uses of buildings and/or the use of land with or without structures are not in conformity with the provisions
of this zoning ordinance and where said uses of buildings and/or land are compatible with the uses prescribed in the zoning district in which
they are located, it is the intent and purpose of this section, in part, to:
A.

Permit said uses to continue for an unspecified length of time.

B.

Prescribe limitations on the expansion of said nonconforming buildings and/or uses: and

C.

Prescribe the termination of said nonconforming buildings and/or uses when said buildings and/or uses have been
voluntarily discontinued for a specified period of time, and

D.

Define the amount of reconstruction or rebuilding that may be done if said nonconforming building is destroyed by fire
or act of God; and

E.

Provide for the improvement of nonconforming buildings and/or uses as may be required by law and/or where the
degree of nonconformity would be decreased.

All for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, welfare, convenience and prosperity of the persons residing or owning property in the
neighborhood and zoning district in which the nonconforming uses are found to exist.
Sec. .551. - Determination of compatibility of nonconforming buildings and uses.
The commission shall apply the following standards in determining the compatibility of a building or use in any residential, commercial
and industrial districts:
1.

All residential buildings, regardless of number of families provided for therein shall be deemed to be compatible unless:
(a)

Said building is structurally substandard as determined by the city buildings official; or

(b)

Said building deprives buildings and/or uses on abutting properties of light, air and privacy; or

(c)

Said building contains occupancies that are nonresidential in nature or classification in which cases said building
may be deemed to be not compatible.
189/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

Any nonresidential building which has been converted to residential use which building meets all of the requirements for a
building set forth in subsection 1 of this section may be deemed compatible.

3.

Any nonresidential use of a residential building shall be deemed to be incompatible, excepting however, those home
occupation uses permitted by and subject to the conditions set forth in the Section .530 of the zoning ordinance.

4.

Any nonresidential use of land where said use is other than an open or agricultural use shall be deemed to be not
compatible.

(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .5512. - O -Site advertising abatement.
(A)

Removal of Nonconforming Billboards. Off-site advertising signage or billboards, as defined in Section .503-K, are permitted
only in an eligible display area, provided, the required conditional use permit and development agreement have been issued
and approved. All off-site advertising signage or billboards which were lawfully constructed at the time in which they were
erected which are outside an eligible display area, as defined by Section .503-K-G6, shall be deemed nonconforming. All offsite advertising signage which is erected within an eligible display area without obtaining the required conditional use permit
and development agreement shall be nonconforming, or which was erected outside an eligible display area with appropriate
building permits, conditional use permit or other requirements as set forth by law or this code abatement. Off-site advertising
or billboards which are nonconforming or become non-conforming through annexation, zone change, or other provisions of
this code, including approved amendments hereto, shall be removed within the following specified time period, whichever is
longer:
1.

On or before December 31, 1994; or

2.

The useful life adopted for such sign for the purpose of depreciation under Section 167 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any sign owner or sponsor may allocate a sign area authorized by this code to a
noncommercial message.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all signs deemed nonconforming must in all other respects be operated and
maintained so as not to create a nuisance or dangerous condition as set forth in the Pomona City Code and Zoning Code.
(B)

Request for Review.
1.

Filing of Application. A written application may be filed with the director of the community development department
requesting extension of the date a nonconforming off-site advertising sign must be abated. In addition to or in place of
the request for extension of the date for abatement, the applicant may request an alternate type or form of relief.
Applications must be filed with the director no later than sixty days prior to the date at which such sign must be
discontinued and removed.

2.

Administrative Hearing. Within fifteen days of the filing of the application with the director, the director shall cause to be
mailed to the applicant the day, time and location of an administrative hearing concerning the request for review. A
hearing officer shall be appointed by the city administrator to conduct, make findings and render a decision based upon
the application and relevant facts, both oral and written, submitted at the administrative hearing. The procedures for
conducting the hearing shall be the same as those found at Sections 5-18, 5-19, 5-20, and 5-21 of the Pomona City Code.

3.

Burden of Proof. In addition to the information required in the application, the applicant shall substantiate to the
satisfaction of the hearing officer the following facts:
a.

That to require discontinuation and removal of the sign in question would impair the property rights of any person
to such an extent as to be an unconstitutional taking of property; and

b.

That such sign does not now and will not during any extension period requested jeopardize, endanger or otherwise
constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.

4.

Findings and Decision. The hearing officer shall not approve an application for the extension of time from which to
discontinue and remove a nonconforming off-site sign or grant any other remedy requested by the applicant unless he
finds the burden of proof set forth in subsection B of this section has been met by the applicant. The hearing officer
190/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

shall, within fifteen days from the date the hearing is closed, file a written decision in the office of the city administrator.
Such decision shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state the hearing officer's findings and
decision(s), and shall set forth that it is subject to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6.
(Ord. No. 1983, § 3; Ord. No. 2115, § 1; Ord. No. 3685, § 3.)

Sec. .55121. - Nonconforming advertising signs in areas annexed into Pomona since the e ective date of section .5512.
All off-site advertising signs which lawfully existed at the time the land upon which they are situated had been annexed into the city after
the effective date of section .5512, but are nonconforming to the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, may continue; provided no structural
alterations are made thereto; and further provided that such nonconforming off-site advertising signs shall be removed from the districts
where they are situated not longer than two years from July 23, 1975, unless ninety days prior to the expiration of the one-year period the
owner of the off-site advertising sign files a request for a hearing before the city planning commission pursuant to section .5513. If such
request is made substantially in the form provided in section .5513, a hearing shall be held by the commission under section .5513.
(Ord. No. 2730, § 1.)

Sec. .55122. - Nonconforming massage parlors.
All massage parlors which lawfully exist, but are nonconforming to the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, may continue; provided no
structural alterations are made thereto; and further provided that such nonconforming massage parlors shall be removed from the districts
where they are situated no longer than one year from the date of the ordinance codified in this section, unless within thirty days prior to the
expiration of the one-year period the owner of the massage parlor files a request for a hearing before the city planning commission pursuant
to Section .5513. If such request is made substantially in the form provided in Section .5513, a hearing shall be heard by the commission
under Section .5513.
(Ord. No. 2765, § 1; Ord. No. 3480, § 16.)

Sec. .55123 - Nonconforming rabbit and poultry ranches.
(a)

No person shall construct, conduct or maintain any poultry or rabbit ranch in any residential or commercial zone of the city.
Poultry and rabbit ranches now in lawful existence shall become a nonconforming use.

(b)

Where any buildings, structure or premises enjoying a nonconforming use are not conducted for such nonconforming use for
a continuous period of six months, such use shall cease.

(c)

No buildings, structures, or premises used in conjunction with any rabbit or poultry ranch and enjoying a nonconforming use
shall be extended or enlarged.

(Ord. No. 3224, § 2.)

Sec. .55125. - Nonconforming roominghouses.
All Roominghouses which lawfully exist, but are nonconforming to the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, may continue; provided no
structural alterations are made thereto; and further provided that such nonconforming use shall be discontinued no longer than one year
from the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, unless within thirty days prior to the expiration of the one-year period the
owner or operator of the Roominghouse files a request for a hearing before the Planning Commission pursuant to section .5513. If such
request is made substantially in the form provided in section .5513, a hearing shall be heard by the commission under section .5513.
(Ord. No. 4051, § 9.)

Sec. .5513. - Hearings to determine length of amortization periods.
The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance may determine that certain uses and/or structures are nonconforming and require that the
nonconforming uses and/or structures be terminated within a time certain. In such event, the planning commission shall, upon the request
of an owner or lessee of the affected property, conduct a hearing to determine whether the termination date should be extended.
Such request shall be verified by the owner and shall set forth all facts and all contentions upon which the owner relies, including without
limitation:
191/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(1)

The time which the owner contends is necessary to amortize the nonconforming use and/or structure;

(2)

If the nonconforming use and/or structure was purchased by the present owner, the date of purchase, the cost of the
purchase and all other facts of the purchase;

(3)

The date of construction and the cost of construction of the nonconforming use and/or structure;

(4)

The gross income for each year that the nonconforming use and/or structure was in existence;

(5)

All maintenance costs and taxes paid each year the nonconforming use and/or structure was in existence;

(6)

All contentions relating to the improper enactment of the ordinance codified in this section or any ordinance affecting
the owner declaring his use and/or structure nonconforming;

(7)

All facts known to the owner relating to any claim that the ordinance codified in this section or any ordinance affecting
the owner that declares his uses and/or structures nonconforming is unconstitutional under the state or federal
constitutions;

(8)

All contentions of the owner that the ordinance codified in this section or any ordinance affecting the owner that
declares his use and/or structure nonconforming that either such ordinance is vague or inapplicable to his use and/or
structure.

Said hearing shall be conducted within sixty days from the time said request is filed and evidence may be presented by the owner or
lessee or the city which might assist the planning commission in determining what additional period of time, if any, to permit the said use
and/or structure to remain and thereby relieve any undue hardship on the owner of said use.
At said hearing, the planning commission shall consider whether such use and/or structure is detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare, or is a nuisance. The planning commission shall find:
a.

That the condition of the improvements, if any, on the property is such that to require the property to be used only for
those uses permitted in the zone where it is located would not impair the constitutional rights of any person; and

b.

That the nature of the improvements is such that the improvements can be altered so as to be used in conformity with
the uses permitted in the zone in which such property is located or removed without impairing the constitutional rights
of any person.

Evidence at said hearing may be introduced to show the extent of private investment in said nonconforming use and/or structure; the
degree to which that investment would be jeopardized by a termination of the nonconforming use and/or structure; the age, condition and
physical characteristics, and nature of the nonconforming property, and the location of the nonconforming use and/or structure; and the
practical possibility that it may be relocated at a legally permissible site within or without the city without unreasonable expense, the range of
alternative but legally permissible uses to which the property could be put if the existing nonconforming use and/or structure were
terminated, and the salvage value of such use and/or structure; the value of such use and/or structure; the period of time required for
recovery of such value; depreciation timetables; cost of conversion or relocation; the effect of the nonconforming use on other property in
the area; and the monopoly or advantage, if any, resulting from the fact that similar new structures are prohibited in the same area; and any
other factors which might bear on the issues of the hardship to the owner or lessee of such nonconforming use and/or structure and the
removal of same without the impairing of the constitutional rights of any person; and as to whether said use is detrimental to the health,
safety and general welfare of the community, or is a nuisance.
The hearing will be informally conducted and the rules of evidence followed by the court shall not apply and hearsay evidence, otherwise
inadmissible in a court of law, shall be admissible, but the determination of the planning commission shall not be based solely on such
hearsay evidence. Any person requesting such hearing may be represented by counsel of his choice at all stages of the hearing.
At the conclusion of the said hearing, the planning commission shall, based upon the evidence, grant or deny the extension of time set
for the continued existence of the said nonconforming use and/or structure. The property owner or lessee may provide, at its own expense, a
certified shorthand reporter to transcribe the testimony at said hearing. In the event that such reporter is not provided, the minutes of the
secretary shall set forth the substance of the testimony of each witness. As a condition of granting such extension, the planning commission
may require the owner to consent in writing to the removal of the use at the end of such extension period and to post a cash bond to cover
the full cost of such removal.

192/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The planning commission's decision shall be final ten days after notice thereof is sent by first class mail to the owner or lessee who
requested the hearing, unless said person requests within ten days after said notice was mailed in writing to the city clerk, that the city
council review the determination of the planning commission. The city council may decide within thirty days after the filing of such request,
whether or not to review the decision of the planning commission. In the event that the city council determines not to review the decision of
the planning commission (or takes no action), the decision of the commission shall be final thirty days after the request for the city council
review was filed with the city clerk. In the event that the council determines to review the decision of the planning commission, it shall
examine within a reasonable time after the decision to review was made, the verbatim transcript, or the secretary's minutes if a transcript is
not available including the documentary evidence introduced at such hearing. The council shall exercise its independent judgment on the
facts set forth in the transcript or minutes of the hearing and may affirm the decision of the planning commission or either extend or reduce
the amortization period determined by the planning commission. The council's decision shall be final upon the filing of its decision with the
city clerk. The clerk shall forthwith notify the owner or lessee who requested the planning commission hearing of the decision of the council.
(Ord. No. 2694, § 1.)

Sec. .552. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3699.
Sec. .553. - Nonconforming buildings.
A nonconforming and noncompatible building may be continued, subject to the regulations set forth in this ordinance, provided no
additions or enlargements are made thereto and no structural alterations are made therein, excepting those required by law or ordinance. If
said nonconforming building is removed from the land, every future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .554. - Nonconforming use of buildings and/or land.
A.

NONCONFORMING USE OF A NONCONFORMING BUILDING

Nonconforming uses in a nonconforming building may be expanded or extended throughout said building; provided, however, that
no structural alterations, except those required by law or ordinance shall be made therein; and provided, further, that the uses of said
building are not incompatible with the use of other property in the district. Further, if no structural alterations are made a
nonconforming use of a nonconforming building may be changed to permit a similar or more restricted type of nonconforming use;
provided, however, that said new use be determined by the commission to be more compatible with the uses permitted in the district.
B.

NONCONFORMING USE OF A CONFORMING BUILDING

The nonconforming use of a conforming building shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the conforming
building, and if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of two years, any future use of said building shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance; and further, that within five years after the notification by the city that an existing use is
nonconforming, and not compatible, said use shall be terminated. Conforming uses in said buildings may be expanded.
(Ord. No. 3699, § 3 (part).)

C.

NONCONFORMING USE OF THE LAND
1.

The nonconforming use of land, where no main buildings are involved, may be continued for a period not to exceed
three years after the effective date of this ordinance, subject to the following conditions:
(a)

No such nonconforming use of land shall be expanded or extended in any way either on the same or adjoining
property.

(b)

Where such nonconforming use of the land is discontinued for a period of two years any future use of the land shall
be in conformity with this ordinance.

(Ord. No. 3699, § 3 (part).)

(c)
2.

These provisions do not apply to land used for agricultural purposes.

Signs, billboards or commercial advertising structures which lawfully exist and where maintained at the time this
ordinance became effective may be continued, provided no structural alterations are made thereto; and further
193/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

provided, that all such nonconforming signs, billboards or commercial advertising structures shall be removed from the
district not later than five years from the effective date of this ordinance.
During the interim five year period, said nonconforming signs, billboards, or commercial advertising structures shall be maintained and
kept in good repair and good visual appearance.
D.

BUILDING SETBACKS MADE NONCONFORMING BECAUSE OF STREET WIDENING:

When because of street widening or other public works property is taken for public use or voluntarily dedicated to public use which
results in setbacks for an existing building less than that required within the zoning district where such building is located such as
resulting setback shall not be considered making such building nonconforming and shall not be considered incompatible with the
neighborhood on account of such reduced setbacks.
(Ord. No. 2325, § 1.)

E.

NONCONFORMING/COMPATIBLE ONE FAMILY DWELLING

Additions or enlargements may be allowed to nonconforming/ compatible one family dwellings if the following standards are met:
(a)

The new addition or enlargement does not exceed more than 25% of the existing gross square feet of the existing one
family dwelling unit.

(b)

The new addition or enlargement shall comply with all the R-1-10,000 zone Development Standards.

(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .554B-1. - Nonconforming use of theater in a conforming building.
In the case of nonconforming theater uses, all are declared to be incompatible. Nonconforming theater uses in conforming buildings
where structural alterations to the building or fixtures are in place which cannot physically be removed without severely damaging the
building specially designed for theater uses do not totally exceed in current market value the sum of three thousand dollars, shall be
discontinued within six months after such theater use becomes nonconforming and notice thereof given by the planning department staff to
the proprietor of the theater use and to the owner of the real property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or as known by the
planning department staff; provided, however, that if the proprietor of the theater or owner of the property requests an additional six
month's period, such a hearing shall be granted and evidence may be presented showing the current value of such alterations and fixtures.
After such hearing, if the city council determines the current value of such alterations and fixtures are in excess of three thousand dollars,
then the ordinary amortization for nonconforming uses in a conforming building shall apply. The city council may, however, even if it finds
that the value of such alterations does not exceed three thousand dollars, grant up to an additional six month's extension if it determines
discontinuance at the end of the initial six months would work an extreme hardship upon the proprietor of the theater or the owner of the
real property upon which the theater use is located.
(Ord. No. 2518, § 1.)

Sec. .555. - Amortization period for nonconforming, incompatible buildings.
A.

FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.

Every nonconforming, incompatible use shall be completely removed or shall be so altered that it will be in conformity with the uses
permitted in the district and that nonconforming, incompatible building shall be completely removed from the land within the time set
forth in subsection B of this section.
B.

TIME SCHEDULE FOR REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING, INCOMPATIBLE BUILDINGS
1.

Type 1 and 2 construction *—twenty years.

2.

Type 3 and 4 construction * (fire resistant)—fifteen years.

3.

Type 5 construction *—ten years. * as defined in the uniform building code. These time limits shall be applied to all
nonconforming, incompatible buildings beginning on the effective date of this ordinance. This time table shall be deemed
to provide for the amortization of the affected buildings.

C.

EXTENSION OF AMORTIZATION PERIOD

194/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Nonresidential uses in a residential district may be allowed to remain beyond the established amortization period defined in Section
.555 B; provided, that a petition be signed by a majority of the residents in the district whose properties are within a radius of five
hundred feet of the external boundaries of the subject use, and that the council, after a public hearing requiring all-public notifications
established in Section .560-E, and the presentation of the above petition and its verification, adopt a resolution granting an extension for
a specific period of time and with such conditions as may be deemed proper and necessary to protect the surrounding properties.
Sec. .556. - Reconstruction of nonconforming/compatible buildings.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not prevent the reconstruction, repair or rebuilding of any nonconforming/ noncompatible building
damaged by fire, explosion or act of God or the enemy, subsequent to effective date of this ordinance; provided, however, that the cost of
such reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding shall not exceed fifty percent of the reasonable replacement value of the building immediately
prior to damage.
A nonconforming/compatible one family dwelling unit in commercial and/or industrial zones shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section. If a nonconforming/compatible one family dwelling unit is damages by fire, explosion or act of God or the enemy subsequent to
effective date of this ordinance, it may be reconstructed if the following conditions are satisfied:
(a)

The rebuilt one family dwelling shall comply with all current R-1-10,000 Development Standards and shall not be
expanded more than 25% of the original size of the one family dwelling; and

(b)

The rebuilt one family dwelling shall comply with all current Off Street Parking Standards.

(Ord. No. 3581, § 3 (part).)

Sec. .558. - Reversion to nonconforming use.
Any portion of a nonconforming building or use, which is altered or changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be used for a
nonconforming use.
Sec. .559. - Elimination of temporary, nonconforming residential buildings.
If on the effective date of this ordinance, a temporary one family dwelling shall lawfully exist on the rear half of a lot in an "R-1" district,
and where said lot is of record, a dwelling or dwellings as permitted by the regulations of the district in which the subject lot is located, may
be erected on the front portion of said lot; provided, however, that within thirty days after the granting of an occupancy permit by the city for
the use of the newly constructed building, the temporary dwelling shall be made to conform with the requirements of the district in which it
is located.
Sec. .5595. - Poultry processing plants and animal slaughtering facilities—Amortization period.
Poultry processing plants and animal slaughtering facilities in existence on or before May 14, 1957 in any zoning district other than an
"M-1" or "M-2" zone are nonconforming uses. Such non- conforming uses shall be permitted to exist as nonconforming uses for three years
after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. In the event that an owner of a nonconforming poultry processing plant or
an animal slaughtering facility claims that such amortization period creates undue hardship he may request an additional period of time to
amortize such use under the provisions of Section .5513 comprehensive zoning ordinance. Such request shall be filed with the planning
commission ninety days prior to the expiration of the amortization period set forth in this section. The failure to request an extension of the
amortization period shall be a conclusive admission that the three-year period is legally and economically sufficient to amortize the
nonconforming use.
(Ord. No. 1685, § 2; Ord. No. 3428, § 1.)

Sec. .5596. - Non-conforming manufactured housing developments.
Any manufactured housing development that does not have Sections .480 through .487, the Residential-Manufactured Housing
Development Zone (R-MHD) applied to the development shall be considered a non-conforming use of the land.

195/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Any manufactured housing development that is determined to be a nonconforming use shall be allowed to continue and shall have
applicable all the rights described in the non-conforming use statutes.
Any manufactured housing development that is determined to be a non-conforming use shall also have applicable Sections .484, .485,
.486, and .487 contained in the Residential-Manufactured Housing Development Zone (R-MHD). These sections shall be applied whenever a
Change-of-Zone, Change-of-Use, or Conversion to Condominium Ownership application is submitted to the Planning Department. The
provisions contained in these sections shall be followed in their entirety in conjunction with the application.
(Ord. No. 3137, § 3.)

Sec. .560. - Variances.
Editor's note—
1. Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 1821, 2050, 2070, 2076, 2134, 2709, 3131, 3398 and 3427.
A.

GENERAL. When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purpose of this
ordinance result through enforcement of the provisions hereof, the planning commission shall have authority, as an
administrative act, subject to the provisions of this ordinance, to grant upon such conditions as it may determine, such
variance from the provisions of this ordinance as may be in harmony with its general purpose and intent, so that the spirit of
this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. No variance shall be granted
which would have the effect of granting a special privilege not shared by other property in the same vicinity and zone.

A variance shall not be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized
by the zoning regulations governing the property. Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as deemed necessary by the
planning commission to assure the adjustment thereby authorized allows all findings of fact.
B.

REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR VARIANCE. Prior to the granting of any variance, other than a variance of the off-street parking
requirements for nonresidential uses, the planning commission shall make all the following findings of fact:
1.

That there are special circumstances applicable to the property including but not limited to size, shape, location,
topography or surroundings that deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under
identical zoning classification.

2.

That the granting of the variance will not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other
properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is situated.

3.

That the granting of the variance will be consistent with the provisions of any Specific Plan, or the adopted General Plan.

4.

That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental or injurious to the surrounding properties nor to the
general development pattern of the neighborhood.

Prior to the granting of a variance of the off-street parking requirements for any nonresidential use, the planning commission
shall make the following findings of fact:
5.

That the amount of parking provided is adequate to accommodate the proposed use(s). The public works director, or
designee, shall prepare a report which evaluates the adequacy of the parking for such proposed use(s).

6.

That the granting of the variance will not create a safety hazard or interfere with the free flow of traffic both on and off
site.

(Ord. No. 3716, § 3.)

C.

APPLICATION PROCEDURE. Applications for variances shall be filed by the property owner or authorized agent upon forms
provided by the planning division. Before accepting an application for variance, the planning division shall charge and collect a
filing fee as established by resolution of the city council.

D.

PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARINGS.
1.

Within thirty calendar days of receiving an application planning division shall determine completeness of application.

2.

The secretary of the planning commission shall place the item on a planning commission agenda for public hearing not
more than thirty days after the date of the application being deemed complete.

3.

Notice of hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the community not less than ten days
196/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

before the date set by the commission for the hearing. The notice shall contain data pertinent to the case, including date,
time, place of hearing and location of documents for review.
4.

Written notice shall be mailed in the United States mail not less than ten days prior to the date of the meeting, to owners
of property within a radius of four hundred feet from the external boundaries of the property described in the
application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as are shown on the tax roll of the
county of Los Angeles. Such written notice shall contain pertinent data related to the case. No posting of any notice shall
be required, other than that required by State Law.

5.

The commission shall hold a public hearing upon the application and shall make a determination and announce its
decision at a regular meeting or special meeting. Said decision shall approve, approve with stated conditions, or deny the
application, and shall set forth findings in support of the decision.

6.

The decision shall, within twenty days, be filed with the commission secretary, and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the
applicant at the address shown on the application by the Secretary.

E.

CONDITIONS TO USE.
1.

The commission, in approving a variance, may set forth in its decision conditions deemed necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, or to be in the interest of the community, such conditions may include but are not limited to
the following:

Regulation of use;
Special yards, spaces, and buffers;
Special fences, solid fences, and walls;
Surfacing of parking areas;
Street, parkway, sidewalk, service road, or alley dedications and improvement or appropriate bonds;
Regulation of signs;
Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress;
Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof;
Requiring maintenance of the grounds;
Regulation of noise, vibration, odors;
Regulation of hours for certain activities;
Time period within which the proposed use shall be developed;
Hours of use;
Posting of a bond or bonds sufficient to guarantee the removal of any nonconforming structures or uses of the land upon the expiration of
the period of the conditional use permit;
Requiring the dedication of access rights;
Considering aesthetic concerns as they relate to land use and neighborhood compatibility; and
Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner.
2.

The acceptance of any of the benefits of such grant shall constitute acceptance of the burdens and the conditions
attached thereto.

3.

The attaching of conditions shall be construed as an integral part of the grant, without which the application would
otherwise be denied. The invalidation or failure to comply with any condition shall invalidate the entire grant.
197/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

F.

APPEAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION.
1.

Written appeals may be filed with the city clerk, by one or more city councilmembers, by the applicant, or by any person
owning property within four hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the applicant's property.

2.

Four copies of an appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within twenty days from the date of action by the planning
commission.

(Ord. No. 3959, § 2.)

3.

Fee. Before accepting an appeal, the city clerk shall charge and collect a filing fee except of appeals instituted by city
council. Such fee shall be as established by a resolution of the city council.

4.

An appeal shall specifically state the specific nature of the appeal, grounds thereof and wherein the planning commission
erred or failed to conform to the requirements of this ordinance.

5.

The city clerk shall immediately transmit one copy of said appeal to the planning division and if the appeal has been
made by someone other than the applicant, one to the applicant.

6.

Said appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed until the determination of the appeal as provided
herein.

7.

The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the city council within thirty days of the date of appeal. The clerk
shall forward the appeal; planning commission staff report; planning commission minutes and planning commission
resolutions to the city council. At its discretion, the city council may set the matter for public hearing or uphold the
decision of the planning commission upon the facts presented.

8.

Upon majority vote of city council to hold a hearing on the appeal, the city clerk shall place the item on the agenda for
city council not less than fourteen days nor more than forty-five days from the date of the decision to hear. The city
council shall hold a hearing of the facts as presented to planning commission on the matter. The city clerk shall give
notice of such hearing in the manner prescribed in Section .560-D.

9.

The city council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the project application. In doing so the city council must
make written findings of fact setting forth findings wherein the property or particular use involved meets or fails to meet
the qualifications set forth in this ordinance.

10.
G.

An appeal may be withdrawn at any time prior to the date and time of the public hearing by the appellant.

MODIFICATION. Any condition imposed upon the granting of a variance, including such granted prior to the adoption of these
regulations, may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added, providing that the granting body shall first
conduct a public hearing thereon, in the same manner as is required for the granting of the same. A modification may be
initiated by the community development director, granting body or property owner. If the modification is initiated by the
applicant, the applicant shall pay the same filing fee as required by the original application. The applicable expiration period
shall be extended for a period equal to that required for processing the modification. No such modification shall be made
unless the granting body finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public peace, health and safety, or in case of
deletion of such a condition, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation under the variance as granted. If the
modification hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal, taken in the time and
manner set forth in Section .560-F.

H.

REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
1.

Revocation proceedings may be initiated by a majority vote of the granting body, or majority vote of city council or the
community development director.

2.

The body which granted a variance shall conduct a noticed public hearing to determine whether such variance should be
revoked. This revocation procedure shall apply to permits or variances granted prior to as well as after the adoption of
these regulations. If the granting body finds any of the following facts to be present, it may revoke the variance:
a.

That the variance or permit was obtained by fraud; or

b.

That the permit or variance granted is being, or has been, exercised contrary to any conditions imposed upon such
permit or variance, or in violation of any law; or

c.

That the use for which the approval was granted is being exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health or
safety, or as to constitute a nuisance; or
198/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

d.

That the neighborhood has changed substantially since the permit or variance was granted so that the use is no longe
surrounding neighborhood.
(1)

If the granting body determines that facts of either b. or c. are present, and that such facts can be corrected
and are not likely to recur, it may suspend, rather than revoke, a variance for a period of time that it deems
appropriate for the implementation of corrective measures.

(2)

If the revocation hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal,
taken in the time and manner set forth in this chapter.

3.
I.

Effect of Revocation. The revocation of a variance shall have the effect of denying the privileges granted by the variance.

LAPSE.
1.

A variance shall lapse and shall become void at the time specified in the resolution approving such variance or if no time
is so specified one year following the date on which the approval became effective unless prior to the expiration of one
year, a building permit is issued and work is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was
the subject of the application, or a permit is issued authorizing occupancy of improvements to the site or structure which
was the subject of the application, or the site is occupied if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required;
provided that if litigation is filed prior to the exercise of such rights attaching the validity of such variance or permit, the
time for exercising such rights shall be automatically extended pending a final determination of such litigation.

2.

A variance may be extended twice for an additional period of one year provided that prior to the expiration of one year
from the date when the approval or the renewal became effective, an application for renewal of the variance is filed with
the planning division.
a.

Application for extension must be received prior to the date of expiration.

b.

The variance shall remain valid from the time of application for extension until the matter is heard by the granting
body.

c.

Prior to granting the second extension of such a variance, the approving authority must find, based upon
substantial evidence submitted by the applicant, that all of the following exist:
(1)

The applicant has made a consistent, progressive, good-faith effort to exercise his variance within the one-year
period following its initial extension;

(2)

The applicant has been prevented or otherwise inhibited in his efforts to exercise such variance by
unreasonable conditions beyond his control. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to,
requirements imposed by other governmental agencies;

(3)

Substantial evidence does not currently exist which would justify revocation of the variance. Such evidence
must not have existed at the time of approval of the original variance, or if such evidence did exist, it must not
have been capable of production at that time with the exercise of reasonable diligence;

(4)

The variance will not be contrary to or in violation of any currently adopted policy, ordinance, rule or
regulation;

(5)

Only the applicant (owner or developer) who originally received approval for the variance may be granted a
second extension.

(Ord. No. 3673, § 2.)

3.

A variance shall remain in effect during operation of the same use or business for which it was granted within substantial
conformance. A termination or cessation of use shall not terminate the variance unless or until a new and distinct use is
established.

(Ord. No. 3699, § 4.)

J.

MINOR DEVIATION VARIANCES.
1.

Purpose. The purpose of this section is to grant authority to the city planner to take action on requests for minor
deviations to certain requirements of this ordinance when such requests constitute a reasonable use of property not
permissible under the regulations herein. For the purpose of administering this section, a minor deviation variance is any
deviation to the terms or requirements of this ordinance which, if granted, would allow the following:
a.

A decrease of not more than twenty percent of the required width or depth of a lot when total lot area
199/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

requirements are met.
b.

A decrease of not more than twenty percent of the required width of a front, rear or side yard or the required yard
between buildings.

c.

An increase of not more than two feet in the permitted height of a fence or wall, subject to the review and
conditions of the public works director.

d.

A decrease in the number of required parking spaces of not more than twenty percent when total required spaces
are at least thirty spaces.

e.

An increase of not more than ten percent in the maximum allowable lot coverage.

f.

A decrease in parking aisle or space width of not more than ten percent.

g.

A decrease of ten percent in the minimum floor area of residential units.

h.

A decrease of ten percent in landscaping islands size or total landscaping requirements within parking areas.

i.

An increase of not more than twenty percent of the maximum allowable sign area and an increase of not more than
ten percent of the maximum allowable sign height.

(Ord. No. 3731, § 3.)

j.

Properties which are unable to provide trash facilities for multi-family residential developments pursuant to Section
.5809-17-D-1 due to property constraints (e.g., size, shape and topography). A site plan shall be prepared and
submitted by the applicant demonstrating that the subject property is unable to provide the required trash
facilities.

(Ord. No. 3878, § 6.)

k.

For arbors located in the front yard setback area and in street facing side and rear yards setback areas, an increase
of not more than two feet in the maximum width between the inside edges of the posts provided that shall not
increase the roof square footage by more than ten square feet of the maximum square footage of the roof area.
(Ord. No. 4118, § 21.)

2.

Upon the filing of an application and payment of fee as set by resolution of city council for a minor deviation variance,
the city planner, without publishing, posting of notice, or public hearing, shall consider and render decisions on said
applications. If he finds that facts exist justifying the granting of the minor deviation variance requested, he shall grant
the same in writing stating the reasons therefor subject to such conditions as it may find to be necessary to protect the
public peace, health, safety, morals or general welfare, he shall transmit a copy of said decision to the applicant within
thirty days. If the city planner does not find that such facts exist, he shall deny the application in writing with findings and
transmit a copy of such denial to the applicant.

If the city planner denies an application for a minor deviation variance, or if the applicant disagrees with the conditions imposed
on the granting of a minor deviation variance, if any, the applicant may file for a variance in accordance with Section .560-C.
(Ord. No. 3633, § 4.)

Sec. .570. - Amendment of Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance—Exception.
Any amendment of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the city of Pomona, except for the application of a zoning district to
individual parcels of property within the city, shall be made in the same manner as the adoption of ordinances pursuant to Article V of the
Charter of the City of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 3308, § 3.)

Sec. .571. - Changes of zone for individual parcels of property.
Any change of zone for any one or more parcels of property shall be made in the following manner:
A.

INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS

Such changes may be initiated by the council, commission or owner or bona fide agent of the owner of any land or building. A
petition for change of zone shall be filed on forms provided by the city for this purpose, and shall be duly signed and verified by the
petitioner. (The petitioner shall also furnish the commission a list of the names and addresses of the owners required to be notified
200/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

as provided by subsection D-2(a) of this section.) Upon receipt of such petition and list of names, the commission shall fix the time
and place of public hearing thereon not less than fifteen days or more than forty days thereafter.
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1.)

C.

HEARINGS ON PETITION
1.

The commission shall hold one public hearing upon the matters referred to in such petition and thereupon within
forty days of said hearing shall make a determination and report thereon to the council.

2.

The council, after receipt of the report and recommendation, or on its own initiative, shall after one public hearing,
either approve, modify or reject the same.

D.

NOTICING FOR PUBLIC HEARING
1.

Legal notice of hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten
days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall contain data pertinent to the case, including date, time, place
of hearing and location of documents for review.

2.

In addition to the item No. 1 of this subsection, written notice shall be mailed in the United States mail not less than
ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to the affected property owners and owners of property within a radius of
four hundred feet from the external boundaries of the property described in the application, using for this purpose
the last known name and address of such owners as are shown on the tax roll of the county of Los Angeles. Such
written notice shall contain pertinent data related to the case.

3.

If the properties in an area proposed for change of zone exceeds one thousand in number, written notice shall be
mailed in the United States mail not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to only those property
owners in the area affected by the proposed change of zone. Such written notice shall contain pertinent data
related to the case. In addition, notice of hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in
the city, as described in item No. 1 of this subsection.

(Ord. No. 2199, § 1; Ord. No. 3766, § 2.)

E.

LIMITATION ON TIME FOR ADOPTION OF ZONE CHANGE ORDINANCE AFTER HEARING.

No ordinance making an amendment for a change of zone shall be adopted any later than one year after the conclusion of the
hearing concerning said proposed change of zone; however, as soon as possible after a hearing at which the city council indicates its
approval, and in any event not later than sixty days after the hearing, the staff shall present to the city council the zone change
ordinance amendment for action. If conditions are imposed for such zone change at the conclusion of the hearing of the city council,
such conditions imposed shall either be met before the zone change amendment ordinance is finally adopted or the zoning
amendment ordinance when adopted shall provide that such zone change shall not become effective until such conditions are met.
A new application must be made or initiated and a new hearing conducted if the formal ordinance making such change of zone is
not adopted within one year after city council approval.
(Ord. No. 2389, § 1; Ord. No. 3131, § 5; Ord. No. 3308, § 2.)

Sec. .580. - Conditional Use Permits.
A.

GENERAL. Certain uses, and all matters directly related to such uses, are declared to be uses possessing such unique and
special characteristics as to make it impractical for them to be automatically included within some or any of the zoning
districts defined in this ordinance. The location and operation of any of these uses shall be subject to the review and issuance
of a conditional use permit (CUP).

The purpose of such review shall be to determine whether the characteristics of any such use are compatible with the types of uses
generally permitted in the surrounding area, and further, to stipulate such reasonable conditions as may be deemed necessary to assure
that the basic purposes of this ordinance are being served.
B.

REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS. Prior to the granting of a conditional use permit, the planning
commission shall make the following findings of fact:
1.

That the proposed use at the particular location will contribute to the general wellbeing of the neighborhood or
community;
201/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, or genera
persons residing or working in the vicinity or detrimental to the use, valuation or enjoyment of property or improvements in

3.

That the site for the proposed use is of adequate topography, size and shaped to accommodate said use, as well as all
yards, spaces, walls, fences, parking, loading, landscaping, and any other features necessary to allow said use with the
land and uses in the neighborhood and make it compatible thereto;

4.

That the site abuts streets and highways adequate in width and improvements to carry traffic generations typical of the
proposed use;

5.

That the granting of such conditional use permit will not adversely affect the General Plan of the city, or any other
adopted plan of the city and conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance.

C.

APPLICATION. Applications for conditional use permits shall be filed by the property owner or authorized agent upon forms
provided by the planning division. If the project requires phasing, then the application shall contain a precise description of
each proposed phase and the timing thereof. In all other respects the public hearing procedure shall be the same as Section
.560-D. (variances). Before accepting an application for conditional use permit, the planning division shall charge and collect a
filing fee as established by resolution of the city council.

D.

PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARINGS.
1.

Within thirty calendar days of receiving an application planning division shall determine completeness of application.

2.

The secretary of the planning commission shall place the item on a planning commission agenda for public hearing not
more than thirty days after the date of the application being deemed complete.

3.

Notice of hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the community not less than ten days
before the date set by the commission for the hearing. The notice shall contain data pertinent to the case, including date,
time, place of hearing and location of documents for review.

4.

Written notice shall be mailed in the United States mail not less than ten days prior to the date of the meeting, to owners
of property within a radius of four hundred feet from the external boundaries of the property described in the
application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as are shown on the tax roll of the
county of Los Angeles. Such written notice shall contain pertinent data related to the case. No posting of any notice shall
be required, other than that required by State Law.

5.

The commission shall hold a public hearing upon the application and shall make a determination and announce its
decision at a regular meeting or special meeting. Said decision shall approve, approve with stated conditions, or deny the
application, and shall set forth findings in support of the decision.

6.

The decision shall, within twenty days, be filed with the commission secretary, and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the
applicant at the address shown on the application by the secretary.

E.

CONDITIONS TO USE. 1. The commission, in approving a conditional use permit, may set forth in its decision conditions
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or to be in the interest of the community, such conditions
may include but are not limited to the following:

Regulation of use;
Special yards, spaces, and buffers;
Special fences, solid fences, and walls;
Surfacing of parking areas;
Street, parkway, sidewalk, service road, or alley dedications and improvement or appropriate bonds;
Regulation of signs;
Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress;
Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof;

202/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Requiring maintenance of the grounds;
Regulation of noise, vibration, odors;
Regulation of hours for certain activities;
Time period within which the proposed use shall be developed;
Hours of use;
Posting of a bond or bonds sufficient to guarantee the removal of any nonconforming structures or uses of the land upon the expiration of
the period of the conditional use permit;
Requiring the dedication of access rights; and
Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner.
2.

The acceptance of any of the benefits of such grant shall constitute acceptance of the burdens and the conditions
attached thereto.

3.

The attaching of conditions shall be construed as an integral part of the grant, without which the application would
otherwise be denied. The invalidation or failure to comply with any condition shall invalidate the entire grant.

F.

APPEAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION.
1.

Written appeals may be filed with the city clerk, by one or more city councilmembers, by the applicant, or by any person
owning property within four hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the applicant's property.

2.

Four copies of an appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within twenty days from the date of action by the planning
commission.

(Ord. No. 3959, § 3.)

3.

Fee. Before accepting an appeal, the city clerk shall charge and collect a filing fee except for appeals instituted by city
council. Such fee shall be as established by a resolution of the city council.

4.

An appeal shall specifically state the specific nature of the appeal, grounds thereof and wherein the planning commission
erred or failed to conform to the requirements of this ordinance.

5.

The city clerk shall immediately transmit one copy of said appeal to the planning division and if the appeal has been
made by someone other than the applicant, one to the applicant.

6.

Said appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed until the determination of the appeal as provided
herein.

7.

The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the city council within thirty days of the date of appeal. The clerk
shall forward the appeal; planning commission staff report; planning commission minutes and planning commission
resolutions to the city council. At its discretion, the city council may set the matter for public hearing or uphold the
decision of the planning commission upon the facts presented.

8.

Upon majority vote of city council to hold a hearing on the appeal, the city clerk shall place the item on the agenda for
city council not less than fourteen days nor more than forty-five days from the date of the decision to hear. The city
council shall hold a hearing of the facts as presented to planning commission on the matter. The city clerk shall give
notice of such hearing in the manner prescribed in Section .560-D.

9.

The city council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the project application. In doing so the city council must
make written findings of fact setting forth findings wherein the property or particular use involved meets or fails to meet
the qualifications set forth in this ordinance.

10.
G.

An appeal may be withdrawn at any time prior to the date and time of the public hearing by the appellant.

MODIFICATION. Any condition imposed upon the granting of a conditional use permit, including such granted prior to the
adoption of these regulations, may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added, providing that the granting
body shall first conduct a public hearing thereon, in the same manner as is required for the granting of the same. A
modification may be initiated by the community development director, granting body or property owner. If the modification is
initiated by the applicant, the applicant shall pay the same filing fee as required by the original application. The applicable
203/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

expiration period shall be extended for a period equal to that required for processing the modification. No such modification
shall be made unless the granting body finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public peace, health and
safety, or in case of deletion of such a condition, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation under the
conditional use permit as granted. If the modification hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to
review on appeal, taken in the time and manner set forth in Section .560-F.
H.

REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
1.

Revocation proceedings may be initiated by a majority vote of the granting body, or majority vote of city council or the
community development director.

2.

The body which granted the conditional use permit shall conduct a noticed public hearing to determine whether such
conditional use permit should be revoked. This revocation procedure shall apply to permits granted prior to as well as
after the adoption of these regulations. If the granting body finds any of the following facts to be present, it may revoke
the conditional use permit:
a.

That the permit was obtained by fraud; or

b.

That the permit granted is being, or has been, exercised contrary to any conditions imposed upon such permit, or in
violation of any law; or

c.

That the use for which the approval was granted is being exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health or
safety, or as to constitute a nuisance; or

d.

That the neighborhood has changed substantially since the permit was granted so that the use is no longer
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
(1)

If the granting body determines that facts of either b. or c. are present, and that such facts can be corrected
and are not likely to recur, it may suspend, rather than revoke, a permit for a period of time that it deems
appropriate for the implementation of corrective measures.

(2)

If the revocation hearing is conducted by the commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal,
taken in the time and manner set forth in this chapter.

3.

Effect of Revocation. The revocation of a conditional use permit shall have the effect of denying the privileges granted by
the permit.

I.

LAPSE.
1.

A conditional use permit shall lapse and shall become void at the time specified in the resolution approving such
conditional use permit or if no time is so specified one year following the date on which the approval became effective
unless prior to the expiration of one year, a building permit is issued and work is commenced and diligently pursued
toward completion on the site which was the subject of the application, or a permit is issued authorizing occupancy of
improvements to the site or structure which was the subject of the application, or the site is occupied if no building
permit or certificate of occupancy is required; provided that if litigation is filed prior to the exercise of such rights
attaching the validity of such variance or permit, the time for exercising such rights shall be automatically extended
pending a final determination of such litigation.

2.

A conditional use permit may be extended twice for an additional period of one year provided that prior to the expiration
of one year from the date when the approval or the renewal became effective, an application for renewal of the
conditional use permit is filed with the planning division.
a.

Application for extension must be received prior to the date of expiration.

b.

The conditional use permit shall remain valid from the time of application for extension until the matter is heard by
the granting body.

c.

Prior to granting the second extension of such a conditional use permit, the approving authority must find, based
upon substantial evidence submitted by the applicant, that all of the following exist:
(1)

The applicant has made a consistent, progressive, good-faith effort to exercise his conditional use permit
within the one-year period following its initial extension;

(2)

The applicant has been prevented or otherwise inhibited in his efforts to exercise such conditional use permit
by unreasonable conditions beyond his control. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to,
204/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

requirements imposed by other governmental agencies;
(3)

Substantial evidence does not currently exist which would justify revocation of the conditional use permit.
Such evidence must not have existed at the time of approval of the original conditional use permit or, if such
evidence did exist, it must not have been capable of production at that time with the exercise of reasonable
diligence;

(4)

The conditional use permit will not be contrary to or in violation of any currently adopted policy, ordinance,
rule or regulation;

(5)

Only the applicant (owner or developer) who originally received approval for the conditional use permit may
be granted a second extension.

(Ord. No. 3673, § 3.)

3.

A conditional use permit for all uses excluding auto service stations, dance halls, auto repair and on- and off-sale alcohol
licenses shall remain in effect during operation of the same use or business for which it was granted within substantial
conformance, except as provided otherwise. A termination or cessation of such use shall not terminate the conditional
use permit unless or until a new and distinct use is established.

(Ord. No. 3699, § 5.)

J.

The following uses shall be permitted in the zones indicated, provided that a conditional use permit shall first be obtained
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter:

Subject to conditional use permit:

USE

ZONES IN WHICH ALLOWED

*

All zones

Airport or
aircraft landing
eld

*

Alcohol o -sale

C-1, C-2

establishments,
in conjunction
with bona de
grocery stores,
subject to
provisions in
Section .5809.4
*

Alcohol o -sale

C-C, C-3, C-4

establishments,
subject to
provisions of
.5809.4

205/322

7/11/2019

*

Alcohol on-sale

Pomona, CA Zoning

C-C, C-3, C-4, C-IND, M-1, M-2

establishments
in conjunction
with bona de
restaurants
subject to
provisions in
Section .5809.4
*

Alcohol on-sale

A-P

in hospitals for
patients/guests
*

Alternative fuel

M-1, M-2

processing, as
de ned in
Section .062.
*

Animal

C-4

hospitals
*

Archery ranges

O

*

Ashrams,

All residential zones

cloisters,
convents
*

Auto body and

M-1, M-2

paints shops
*

Automatic

C-4, M-1

service
stations,
subject to
provisions of
Section .5804
*

Automobile

C-C

lube and tune
*

Automobile

C-3, C-4, C-IND, M-1, M-2, subject to standards in Sec. .361.F

repair facility

206/322

7/11/2019

*

Automobile

Pomona, CA Zoning

A-P, C-1, C-2, C-C, C-3, C-4, C-IND, M-1

service
stations,
subject to
provisions of
Section .5804
*

Automobile

C-4

modi cations
*

Automotive-

M-1

oriented sports
facility
*

Banks, building

A-P

and loan
o ces
*

Banquet halls,

C-3, C-4, C-IND, M-1, M-2

pursuant to
Section .062
*

Boxing arenas

C-4

*

Bridle trails

O

*

Board and

R-4

care, including
rest homes,
fraternities and
sororities,
pursuant to
Section .062
*

Business

R-1-15,000

colleges,

R-1-20,000

vocational

R-1-40,000 A-P

schools
*

Camp grounds

O

*

Cemeteries

All zones

*

Charter bus

M-2

company

207/322

7/11/2019

*

Child care

Pomona, CA Zoning

A-P

centers
*

Circuses,

C-4

carnivals, fairs
and other
amusements
*

Collection

C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-IND, M M-1, M-2

facilities
*

Commercial

All Zones

coach, subject
to provisions of
Section .5806.
*

Commercial

All C Zones

facilities of four
or more
commercial
units or more
than 20,000
square feet of
lot area.
*

Commercial

All zones

radio and
television
antennas
and/or
transmitters
*

Community

PRD

television
receiving and
distribution
systems (cable
TV)
*

Convenience

M-1, M-2

store may not
be allowed o sale alcohol

208/322

7/11/2019

*

Conversion to

Pomona, CA Zoning

R-2, R-3, R-4

condominiums,
subject to
provisions
Section .58012
*

Dance halls

C-3, C-4

*

Day care

All zones

centers
*

Day nurseries

R-1-6000,
R-1-7200,
R-1-7500,
R-1-10,000,
R-1-E, R-2, PRD, A-P, C-C, C-4

*

Development

All zones

of natural
resources
(excluding
drilling for a
producing oil,
gas, or other
hydrocarbon
substances or
the production
of rock and/or
gravel)
together with
the necessary
buildings,
apparatus or
appurtenances
thereto
*

Disabled adult

R-3, A-P

day care (6 or
fewer persons)
*

Drive-in

C-4

theaters
*

Driving ranges

O

209/322

7/11/2019

*

Pomona, CA Zoning

Group home

R-1-6000,

care facilities

R-1-7200,

caring for

R-1-7500,

seven or more

R-1-10,000,

persons subject

R-1-20,000,

to of Section

R-1-E, R-2, R-3, R-4, M-1 and M-2

.5809-14.
*

Fences up to 12

All R, A-P, C and M zones

feet in height
around tennis,
badminton,
basketball or
volleyball
courts and
similar play
areas when
located on a
property line or
within 10 feet
of a property
line within the
rear half of the
lot.
(See Sec. .503-I
for additional
requirements.)
*

Fishing ponds

O

*

Food and

O

beverage uses,
accessory

210/322

7/11/2019

*

Fortunetelling,

Pomona, CA Zoning

C-4, CIND

not located
within 300′ of a
religious
facility, park,
school, or
residential
zone and not
operating
before 9 a.m.
or after 10 p.m.
*

Fraternity and

R-4, A-P

sorority house
when related to
a public or
private school
or educational
institution
*

Freeway signs,

All C and M zones

subject to
provisions of
Section .509J.J.4
*

Golf course and

R-1-6000,

country club,

R-1-7200,

excepting

R-1-7500,

driving ranges

R-1-10,000,
R-1-20,000,
R-1-40,000,
R-1-E, R-2

*

Group home

All R zones

care facilities
for seven (7) to
twelve (12)
persons,
subject to
provisions of
Sec. .231.F

211/322

7/11/2019

*

Pomona, CA Zoning

Health club,

C-3, C-4, M-1

subject to
provisions of
Section .5809-8
*

Highrise

All C and M zones

building
identi cation
signs, subject
to provisions of
Section .503J.J.1.
*

Homeless

C-IND, M-1, M-2

shelter, subject
to provisions in
Sec. .391.F
*

Hospitals

A-P

*

Hotels, motels

C-3, C-4, C-IND, M-1, M-2

and apartment
hotelssubject
to the
requirements
of Section
.5809-10.
*

Industrial

All M zones

facilities of over
20,000 square
feet of gross
oor area or lot
greater than
one acre in size
*

In-patient drug

C-3, C-4

abuse
treatment
facility

212/322

7/11/2019

*

Kennels,

Pomona, CA Zoning

C-IND, M-1

subject to
provisions to
Section
.411.A.11
*

Major site

All C and M zones

identi cation
sign, subject to
provisions of
Section .503J.J.2
*

Manufactured

R-MHD

housing
developments
*

Manufacturing

M-2

uses not listed
as permitted in
M-2 Zone
*

Massages

C-4

and/or baths,
sauna and the
like when they
are an
accessory use
to an athletic
club or
association
which is a
facility o ering
a full range of
physical tness
programs
including, but
not limited to,
swimming,
basketball,
hand-ball and
similar court
games and
weight lifting.
213/322

7/11/2019

*

Mechanical car

Pomona, CA Zoning

C-4

wash
*

Model homes,

All residential zones

with or without
sales
*

Mortuaries and

C-4

funeral parlors
*

Moving of any

All zones

residential,
commercial or
industrial
structures onto
a lot, subject to
provisions of
Section .590
*

Multi-family

R-2, R-3, R-4

residential of
10 or more
units, subject
to provisions of
Section .58011
*

O -site

M-1, M-2

advertising,
subject to
provisions of
Section .503-J
*

Outdoor

All commercial zones

commercial
recreation
facilities

214/322

7/11/2019

*

Outdoor public

Pomona, CA Zoning

F

address system
used between
9:00 p.m.—9:00
a.m. at times
other than
during Los
Angeles County
Fair, excepting
Carnation Ring
and
Grandstand
between 10:00
p.m.—9:00
a.m., subject to
provisions of
Section .437.2
*

Permanent

O

structures,
primary use, by
private or
government
agency, subject
to provisions of
.221 (G) (7)
*

Planned

R-1-6000,

freeway

R-1-7200,

commercial

R-1-7500,

development,

R-1-10,000,

subject to

R-1-E, R-2

provisions of
Section .5808
*

Projecting

All C and M

signs, subject
to provisions of
Section .503J.J.5

215/322

7/11/2019

*

PRUD

Pomona, CA Zoning

R-1-6000,
R-1-7200,
R-1-7500,
R-1-10,000,
R-1-15,000,
R-1-20,000,
R-1-40,000,
R-1-E, R-2

*

Public

All residential, commercial, industrial and professional zones

assembly uses,
pursuant to
Section .062
*

Recycling

M, M-1, M-2

centers
*

Residential

C-IND, M-1, M-2

buildings,
subject to
provisions of
Section .411.G
and .412.B
*

Residential care

R-3, R-4, R-MHD, A-P, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-C, M, M-1, M-2 as well as the following districts of speci c

facilities

plans: multiple family residential, o ce, institutional, commercial, mixed use, and business park

serving more
than six
*

Residential

R-3, R-4, R-MHD, A-P, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-C, M, M-1, M-2 as well as the following districts of speci c

service facilities

plans: multiple family residential, o ce, institutional, commercial, mixed use, and business park

serving more
than six
*

Rest homes

C-3, C-4

*

Rest homes

A-P

sanitariums,
and board and
care facilities
*

Roller skating

C-C

rinks
*

Rooming house

All residential zones and A-P
216/322

7/11/2019

*

Self-storage

Pomona, CA Zoning

C-4

facilities
(subject to
development
standards set
forth in Section
.5809-12)
*

Senior citizen

R-4

housing,
subject to R-4
provisions of
.300.B.7.
*

Skill game

C-3, C-4, C-C

centers, (10 or
more games)
subject to
provisions of
Section .5809.5
*

Stadia

All zones

*

Super service

C-3, C-4, C-IND

stations,
subject to
provisions of
Section .5804

217/322

7/11/2019

*

Tattoo

Pomona, CA Zoning

C-4

establishments
as de ned by,
and subject to,
the
requirements
of Section
.5809-22.
(Sections .580922 D (1-3) shall
not be
applicable to
exhibitions
and/or trade
shows involving
tattoo parlors
and facilities
located in the F
(Fair) Zone.)
*

Theaters,

C-3

except adult
motion picture
theaters,
subject to
provisions of
Section .5809-3
*

Trucking

M-1, M-2

facilities,
subject to
standards
contained in
Section .5809-6
*

Used Car Lots,

C-3, C-4, C-IND

as de ned in
Sec. .062 and
subject to the
requirements
in Section
.5809-16

218/322

7/11/2019

*

Pomona, CA Zoning

Uses not listed

F

in F zone

(Ord. No. 3633, § 6; Ord. No. 3660, §§ 10, 24; Ord. No. 3698, § 5; Ord. No. 3704, § 5; Ord. No. 3724, § 5; Ord. No. 3756, § 6; Ord. No. 3787, § 8; Ord. No. 3804, § 3; Ord.
No. 3878, § 9; Ord. No. 3971, § 4; Ord. No. 3985, § 3; Ord. No. 4051, § 8; Ord. No. 4052, § 4; Ord. No. 4073, § 5; Ord. No. 4114, § 3; Ord. No. 4118, § 18.)

Sec. .5801. - Conditional use permit required for use of minibikes, motor-bikes, trail-bikes, motorcycles, and other similar vehicles.
(a)

DEFINITIONS: As used in this section, "mini-bike, motor-bike, trail-bike, motorcycle, or other similar vehicle" mean, in addition
to the ordinary accepted meaning and usage of these terms, any two-wheel, gasoline-propelled engine vehicle, excepting lawn
mowers, or any vehicle having more than two wheels as defined in Section 415 of the California Vehicle Code.

(b)

No mini-bike, motor-bike, trail-bike, motorcycle, or other similar vehicle shall be ridden, driven or used upon land in any
zoning district which has not been approved by a conditional use permit. This prohibition shall not, however, apply to:
(1)

Authorized emergency vehicles as defined in California Vehicle Code 165; or

(2)

Those operated upon paved parking lots or structures open to the public; or

(3)

Those operated upon property primarily used for motorcycle or motor driven cycle retail or wholesale, service or repair,
manufacture, or distribution, but operated in a manner not to be offensive and which shall not disturb the peace and
quiet of the general neighborhood; or

(4)

Those generally used in conjunction with construction, agricultural or industrial uses and used solely in conjunction with
said uses in a manner not to be offensive and which shall not disturb the peace and quiet of the general neighborhood;
or

(5)

Those operated upon private roadways or easements necessary for ingress to and egress from property used for those
purposes designated in Subsections (2), (3) and (4) above; or

(6)

The owner or lessee of the property or any other person having in his possession written permission signed by the
owner or lessee of the property providing such use is at least one hundred feet from the property line of any residential
use unless written permission is given by the residents or persons in possession of such residential use and further
providing such permission is not given for any valuable consideration or such use is not commercial in nature.

The enforcement of this section shall be by the Pomona police department's police officers which may issue citations to anyone who
rides, drives, or uses a mini-bike, motor-bike, trail-bike, motorcycle, or other similar vehicle upon property contrary to the provisions of this
section, and police officers are further authorized to enter vacant land when such prohibited use is clearly visible to them and they may issue
citations or make arrests providing they have made themselves aware of all places in the city where conditional use permits for such uses
have been granted and they thereby know that the land upon which such mini-bikes, motor-bikes, trail-bikes, motorcycles, or vehicles are
being ridden, driven, or used has not been granted a conditional use permit for such use. Furthermore, the planning department shall by
written memorandum keep the police department informed of all land in the city for which conditional use permits have been granted for
the riding, driving, and use of mini-bikes, motor-bikes, trail-bikes, motorcycles, or other similar vehicles.
(c)

STANDARDS: In addition to any other standards appropriate and determined necessary for the granting of a conditional use
permit for land to be used for riding, driving, and use of mini-bikes, motor-bikes, trail-bikes, motorcycles, or other similar
vehicles, the following minimum standards shall be applicable to all such conditional use permits:
(1)

The location shall be a sufficient distance from any residential uses so the noise generated shall not be offensive to the
residential uses;

(2)

Competent supervision shall be provided at all times to insure that such use is conducted in an inoffensive manner to the
neighborhood and to insure that the use does not extend beyond the premises for which the conditional use permit is
issued;

(3)

The land for which the conditional use permit is issued shall be fenced in such a manner which will adequately contain
such use within the premises granted the permit;

(4)

A plan for dust control shall be submitted and approved in connection with the conditional use permit, and shall be
enforced in the operation of such use;
219/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(5)

Such other conditions in addition to the above standards may be imposed to insure that such use shall not be detrimental t
surrounding neighborhood;

(d)

A conditional use permit issued pursuant to this section may be issued for a specified and limited period of time and
terminate at the end of such period. If renewal is sought, it shall be done through the same procedure for an original
conditional use permit. Any conditional use permit granted pursuant to this section may be terminated by the city council at
any time if the conditions imposed upon its granting are violated or if such use is determined by the city council after ten days'
notice to the person holding the conditional use permit and a hearing held and findings made that such conditions have been
violated or that such use, despite the conditions, has, nevertheless, become a nuisance and no additional conditions can be
imposed that would prevent it from continuing to be a nuisance.

(e)

DEDICATED PUBLIC STREETS EXCLUDED: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of mini-bikes, motorbikes, trail-bikes, motorcycles, or other similar vehicles on publicly dedicated streets in accordance with provisions of the
Vehicle Code of the state of California.

(Ord. No. 2424, § 1.)

Sec. .5804. - Standards of development, conditions, and restrictions upon automobile service stations and super service stations.
All automatic service stations, automobile service stations, super service stations, trucking stations and service stations shall be allowed
in designated zoning districts by conditional use permit. Before granting the planning commission or the city council, if on appeal, shall make
the following findings:
A.

That the proposed business is compatible with existing commercial development in the area.

B.

That the proposed location is sufficiently removed from any existing or proposed residential development or zoning so
as not to be detrimental to the residential area. However, in the case of any district which has been designated as
freeway oriented, it shall be presumed that such use shall not be detrimental to the surrounding residential
neighborhood unless such presumption is rebutted by clear and substantial evidence to the contrary.

C.

That the proposed building and site are adequate to accommodate the proposed use and that the design of the facility is
such that a minimum of conflict will occur with adjoining uses.

The planning commission or city council, if on appeal, shall also find that the following development standards, conditions and
restrictions have been complied with:
A.

AUTO-RELATED AND NON-RELATED RETAIL ITEMS:
1.

Open racks or unenclosed stacks of merchandise shall be prohibited on a pump island.

2.

Other retail products may be displayed outside of the station building. However, these products shall not be
allowed at random, but must be enclosed in a movable display rack or structure that can be opened for public view.
These displays shall be confined to an area within five feet of the main station building.

B.

REPAIR WORK:
1.

All repair work shall be performed in an enclosed area or building except that usual driveway services such as
changing of a battery, replacing a fan belt, installing a window wiper blade and so forth may be permitted outside of
an enclosed area.

2.

Major repair shall be limited to service stations (with the facilities required by building regulation contained in the
Uniform Building Code of the city of Pomona for this activity), in the "C-3," "C-4," "C-IND.," "M-l" and "M-2" districts.
"Major repair" is defined as any extensive disassembly of components of the engine, clutch, transmission and
differential. Open flame welding, use of flammable liquids, body, frame and fender repair, painting, tire recapping,
or upholstery work shall also be considered major repair work. Where major repair work is performed, it shall be
conducted according to the standards for repair garages as set forth in the Uniform Building Code of the city of
Pomona.

3.

All repair work shall be conducted in such a manner that it shall not create a disturbance or become a nuisance to
the surrounding properties.

C.

SITE LOCATIONS:
220/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

1.

When zoned for such use, service stations, shall be permitted only when the site is situated at the intersection of arter
collector streets, and abutting freeway ramps as defined in the circulation element of the city's master plan. However,
is proposed to be located on a service road or abutting freeway ramps catering to freeway traffic or located in an "H-R,
and "M-2" zones catering to the highway traffic, automobile service stations may be located on an interior lot.

D.

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
1.

Automobile and Automatic Service Stations:
(a)

Corner site. The minimum area of a corner site for an automobile service station shall be twenty thousand
square feet with a minimum frontage of one hundred forty-five linear feet on each street. *

(b)

Interior site. Where an interior lot is allowed for automobile service stations, the minimum area for this type of
site shall be fifteen thousand square feet, with a minimum frontage of one hundred fifty linear feet on one
street and a minimum depth of one hundred feet.*

2.

Super service station site. The minimum area for all super station sites shall be thirty-size thousand square feet,
with a minimum frontage of three hundred linear feet on one street and a minimum depth of one hundred feet.*

* Corner cut-off areas and areas for required future street-widening can be deducted from the required minimum site areas.
3.

Existing service stations. The rebuilding of a service station on an existing site with less dimensions as outlined in
this section will not be prohibited by the provisions of this ordinance. A conditional use permit is required for the
conversion of an existing service station to an automatic service station.

4.

Minimum size of building. The minimum building size of the main building on the site shall be one thousand square
feet.

5.

Architectural treatment. Architectural treatment of the "precise plan of development" shall be approved by the
planning commission subject to appeal to the city council. Building design shall be compatible with the
neighborhood or surrounding area of the site and shall not be of such a nature to be detrimental to property values
in the area. When the site is adjacent to a residential area, a building of residential character (such as a low-profile,
ranch-type) shall be required. In a planned industrial or commercial area, the service station building shall conform
to the exterior architectural design of other structures in the planned development. The "precise plan of
development" to be submitted for review shall include the following:

6.

(a)

Plot plan and floor plan.

(b)

Landscape and parking plan.

(c)

Elevation plans of buildings, signs, walls, lighting, and all other structures on the site.

Setbacks. Building setback shall be no less than twenty feet from any street property line and fifteen feet from any
interior property line. Canopies shall have the following setbacks unless the zoning district requires a greater
setback.
(a)

Detached canopies shall project to no less than five feet from any property line.

(b)

Canopies attached to the station building shall project to no less than eight feet from any property line.

(c)

Pump islands for all service stations shall have the following setbacks:

Gasoline pumps, or other facilities upon which they are placed shall be set back a minimum of twelve feet from the property
line; however, if the pumps or the island upon which the pumps are located are set in a perpendicular position to any street or
property line, or if the pumps or islands are at any other position than parallel to a property line, the setback shall be a
minimum of twenty feet, so that all vehicular traffic by the pumps shall be far enough away from the property line so that there
will be no hazard to pedestrians walking or traveling upon the sidewalk adjacent to the subject property. For automatic service
stations, the distance between dispensing units on the same pump is and shall be a minimum of twenty feet.
8.

Curb cuts and driveways. No curb cut shall be closer than two feet from an interior property line or be closer than
thirty-five feet from the projected intersection of the two curb lines along the street frontages, providing however
no drive approach shall encroach in the curb return area. The curb distance around the corner between the two
corner driveways shall be painted red by the city to prevent on-street parking in this area. Driveways shall have a

221/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

width of thirty feet at the sidewalk plus four feet transitions on each side. Entrance to a service station side from an
abutting alley or shopping center may be allowed. (Existing stations would not be required to meet these curb cut
requirements.)
9.

Access standards. The city traffic engineer shall review and make recommendations regarding proper and safe
circulation for the patrons and the traveling public which may include, but not limited to: Number of automobile
storage spaces in waiting line; limiting on-street parking; visibility for safe sight distance for ingress and egress;
design of parking lot, etc.

10.

Paving and drainage. The entire ground area of the site, except for building and planting areas, shall be paved with
asphaltic concrete to standards set by the engineering and building departments. Drainage flow lines shall be
shown on the plot plan and if drainage is to street, water must be carried under sidewalks in a manner approved by
the city engineer.

11.

Gasoline fill pipes. Fill pipes for underground gasoline storage tanks shall be located no less than fifteen feet from
any property line, or further if so required by the fire and safety code.

12.

Screening of restrooms. All restroom entrances shall be screened from view of adjacent property of public right-ofway by solid or louvered material or landscaping.

13.

Storage facilities:d
(a)

Storage and rentals of trailers, trucks and other equipment shall be allowed only in the "C-3," "C-4" and "CIND.", "H-R", "M-1" and "M-2" zoning districts. However, such storage uses being conducted on the effective
date of the enactment of this section in the "C-l ," "C-C" and "C-2" zones shall not be determined incompatible
and may be continued as prior existing nonconforming uses.

(b)

Trucking stations shall be permitted as super service stations in the "C-3," "C-4," "C-IND.," "M-l" and "M-2"
zoning districts. Outdoor storage of cars not capable of moving under their own power (junk cars) shall not be
allowed on any service station site for longer than forty-eight hours.

14.

Trash areas. All outside trash areas shall have a minimum area of seven feet by ten feet (inside dimensions) and
shall be surrounded by a six-foot high solid wall which is constructed of noncombustible materials compatible with
the main building. All trash, debris, old parts, junk and similar material shall be stored within this designated trash
area. The enclosure may be designed to accommodate metal refuse containers (dumpsters) on wheels and shall
have an opening with a minimum width of five feet clearance. A solid, double swinging gate, such as a chain-link
gate with metal strips woven to form an opaque screen, is required for the opening for the trash enclosure, and the
opening shall not be visible to the usual pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The gate shall be the height of the wall and
shall have a maximum clearance of two inches from ground level.

15.

Walls. A decorative masonry wall shall be required separating any service station* use from a residential use and/or
a residential district. It shall be constructed at the time the service station main building is constructed. The height
of the wall shall be six feet, except immediately adjacent to the front yard setback of any residential use next to the
service station, and in such event the height shall be thirty-six inches. No wall shall be required separating a service
station use from another commercial use; however, in the case of a service station being located adjacent to a
shopping center area or an alley, a planter shall be required separating the service station from such shopping
center area or alley. The planter as herein specified shall comply with Subdivision 19 hereof. Openings in such
planter may be made to allow access to and from said adjacent shopping center area. However, such openings may
only be permitted upon approval by the city engineer to insure that no traffic hazard may be created thereby.

*For automatic service stations, a six foot-high decorative masonry wall on all interior property lines is required, except
where an existing building is situated on a property line of the site. (Ord. No. 4118, § 17.)
16.

Utilities. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be placed underground.

17.

Parking. Permanent parking of vehicles on any service station site is required to provide off-street parking spaces
for and is limited to the following: Vehicles which are in the process of being serviced, vehicles belonging to
employees of the station, and no more than two trucks, other than rental trucks, when used by the business except

222/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

when permitted by the police department for tow truck service to the city. Regular parking of up to four tow trucks
and temporary overnight parking for customers' trucks or towed-in vehicles may only be allowed in super service
stations, and additional landscaping shall be required because of the increased parking area on the site.
Parking is prohibited where it will impede the view of traffic in the public streets. A "diagonal" shall be drawn from the inside
edge of the two-corner curb cuts, and no parking or commercial activities shall be allowed in the area between the "diagonal"
and the intersection. Any vehicle or equipment waiting for service or repair shall not be permitted to be parked for longer than
forty-eight hours on the station site. Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the site shall be provided with the minimum
amount of parking space as required by the zoning district in which it is located. All required parking shall conform to the
standards of Section .503-H.
18.

Lighting. For stations adjacent to residential areas, all lighting exterior of a building shall be of an indirect nature. It
shall be so arranged and shielded that there shall be no glare or reflection onto adjacent properties or public rightof-way. For all other locations (other than when adjacent to a residential area) the lighting shall be reviewed and
approved by the planning commission to insure that such lighting is compatible with the surrounding area and does
not create a nuisance.

19.

Landscaping. Final details of landscaping shall be approved through review of the precise plan of development by
the planning commission subject to the following standards: A minimum of five percent of the service station's lot
area shall be provided with landscaping. Planters of not less than four feet net inside dimension width shall be
located along street frontages, except for driveway areas. A planter of not less than one hundred fifty square feet
shall be located at the corner of the intersection of the street property lines where corner sites are required. ln
reverse station design, the entire area between the back of the station building and street intersection corner shall
be provided in planters of not less than four feet net inside dimension in width to be placed along interior property
lines and around perimeter of building. Planters around the building perimeter shall not be less than two feet net
inside dimension. However, the landscaping may be provided in such a manner so that it will not be located to the
rear of the station building unless it abuts a residential zone, in which case additional trees shall be planted to serve
as a buffer behind the station building. Planters shall be protected by a masonry curb not less than six inches in
height. All planters shall be equipped with a permanent irrigation system as specified by the city parks department.
All plantings shall be maintained by the operator of the station. Planting materials with low heights such as shrubs
and ground covers shall be such that will not achieve a height of more than thirty inches, not be of a spiked or
thorny type, and be maintained not to droop over the perimeters of the planter when in locations abutting the
public right-of-way. Plants achieving a greater height shall be required along interior property lines, but shall be
reduced in height where access is permitted to an abutting alley or shopping center area twenty feet on each side
of such entrance. Trees subject to parks department approval shall be planted in all planters except in the planter
at the corner intersection. Trees shall be planted at a maximum distance of thirty feet apart unless an alternate plan
which yields a similar effect is approved by the parks department.

20.

Limitation of service equipment. Automobile, super or trucking service stations may be constructed in conjunction
with a restaurant, providing parking is provided for the customers in an area separate from the area required for
that particular type of service station and that access to the restaurant is safe and not in conflict with the service
station.

21.

Abandoned service stations. The property owner shall remove at his expense any gasoline dispensing devices, signs
and storage tanks that are situated at a facility that has been vacant for a continuous period of one hundred eighty
days or more.

22.

No person shall convert any building or facility of a service station or car wash to a different use unless such
conversion shall have been approved by a conditional use permit.

23.

The planning commission may require any other standards or criteria it finds necessary to protect the safety and
welfare of the surrounding property owners or the public.

E.

AUTOMATIC SERVICE STATION: Automatic service stations shall be allowed only in the C-4 and M-1 zoning districts and
then by a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit is also required for the conversion of an existing service
station to an automatic service station. In granting the conditional use permit, the planning commission shall find that
the facility meets the following criteria and standards:
223/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

1.

All automobile service station standards of Section .5804.

2.

The major use at the site is the sale of motor fuel and oils.

3.

The distance between dispensing units on the same pump island shall be a minimum of twenty feet.

4.

A six-foot solid masonry wall on all interior property lines except where an existing building is situated on a
property line of the site.

5.

Any other standards or criteria the planning commission finds is necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the
surrounding property owners or the public.

6.
F.

All conditions of the Pomona Fire Code.

NONCONFORMING STATIONS: Any service station constructed and used as such prior to the enactment of the ordinance
(November 18, 1968) adding this section and which does not meet the standards of this ordinance shall be deemed a
nonconforming use.

(Ord. No. 2688, § 1; Ord. No. 2236, § 1; Ord. No. 2394, § 2: Ord. No. 2485, § 3.)

Sec. .5805. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3137.
Sec. .5806. - Commercial coach.
A.

No commercial coach, mobile home, or any other portable unit may be used except for the following purposes and time
periods and in a zone district which such coaches would otherwise be allowed:
1.

Construction offices to completion of project.

2.

Health, educational and recreational units authorized or sponsored by an agency for the public welfare or public
information.

3.

Carnivals and other outdoor entertainment concession mobile units for a maximum duration of ten days at any one time,
but not to exceed twenty days in any one year.

4.

Uses allowed within the Los Angeles County fairgrounds.

5.

Temporary office or sales room in a commercial coach or residence in a mobile home may be allowed by a building
permit for a specified time period during construction or remodeling of permanent buildings.

B.

USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.
1.

Any residential use in a commercial coach, mobile home or other portable unit other than those permitted in a mobile
home park or residential uses as listed in the uses permitted section.

2.

Nonresidential uses in mobile homes, travel trailer, or any other mobile or temporary structure not classified as a state
approved commercial (trailer) coach.

C.

USES ALLOWED BY CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.

Uses in commercial coaches not listed above, shall be allowed only by an approved conditional use permit on a six-month basis. Before
approving the conditional use permit, the planning commission shall find that the requested commercial coach is not detrimental to the
surrounding area and that all requirements of the code of the city of Pomona are met. The planning commission may extend the allowable
time period up to an additional six-month period upon written request by the applicant at least thirty days prior to the expiration date.
(Ord. No. 2470, § 1.)

Sec. .5807. - Signi cant commercial and industrial development requiring conditional use permit.
All new commercial and industrial development shall require a conditional use permit under the following conditions:
A.

Commercial facilities of four or more commercial units or more than twenty thousand square feet of lot area in any "C"
zone.

B.

Industrial facilities of over twenty thousand square feet of gross floor area or a lot greater than one acre in area in any
"M" zone.

(Ord. No. 3599, § 2.)

224/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. .5808. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3717.
Sec. .5809. - Special uses.
1.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 4114.

2.

Repealed by Ordinance No. 4114.

3.

Theatres. Theatres shall be allowed by conditional use permit only in the C-3, general commercial district, upon the following
criteria and standards:
a.

All new theatres to be allowed only in new buildings designed for live performances or the showing of films.

b.

Before granting a conditional use permit for a theatre, the following findings shall be made:
1.

That the proposed theatre development is compatible with existing commercial development in the area.

2.

That the proposed location is sufficiently removed from any existing or proposed residential development or zoning
so as not to be detrimental to the residential area.

3.

That the proposed building and site are adequate to accommodate the proposed use and that the design of the
facility is such that a minimum of conflict will occur with adjoining uses.

(Ord. No. 2466, § 4; Ord. No. 3385, § 37.)

4.

Off-sale and on-sale alcoholic establishments shall be allowed by conditional use permit only subject to all
restrictions of each zoning district and upon the following development standards.

(Ord. No. 3335, § 12 (part).)

(a)

Plot plans, landscape and irrigation plans, floor plans and elevations shall be approved by the planning
commission.

(b)

Off-Street Parking: For on-sale one parking space shall be provided for each four persons of occupancy load as
defined in the Uniform Building Code, city of Pomona. For off-sale one parking space shall be provided for 100
sq. ft. of gross floor area.

(Ord. No. 3335, § 12 (part).)

(c)

Parking Lot Standards: Parking lots, including the landscaping and lighting thereof shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with city standards.

(d)

Repealed by Ordinance No. 3625.

(e)

Area Compatibility: The proposed on-sale liquor establishment shall be compatible with existing development
in the area.

(f)

Proximity: The proposed location shall be sufficiently removed from any existing residential development or
zoning and any religious facility, school, park or playground so as not to be detrimental to that use. (Ord. No.
4114, § 3.)

(g)

The planning commission may add additional conditions required to protect the health, safety and general
welfare.

(Ord. No. 2626, § 5.)

5.

SKILL GAME CENTERS.
A.

Definitions:
1.

Skill Game Machine shall mean any machine, apparatus, contrivance, appliance, or device which may be operated
or played upon the placing or depositing therein of any coin, check, slug, ball, or any other article, and involving in
its use either skill or chance for the purpose of game, entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to
achieve either a high or low score, which by comparison to the score of other players, whether currently playing or
not, demonstrates relative skill or competence, or indicates in any other way competitive advantages of player or
team over another. It shall include all electronic, mechanical, and video games, or any other similar machine or
device.

2.

Amusement Machine shall mean any machine, apparatus, or device which may be operated by depositing a coin,
token or similar device, which is used for amusement, and shall include such items as a juke box, children's rides, or
225/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

other equipment, where no competition, score, skill, or chance is involved.
3.

Skill Game Center shall mean a group of ten or more skill game machines in the same place, location, or premises
for use by and to the amusement of the public. This does not include facilities storing or displaying skill game
machines strictly for the purpose of manufacture, retail sales, rentals, or service, or where the use of such machines
is not made available to the general public; or where the skill game machines can be classified as an accessory use
as defined below. Skill game centers shall be permitted by conditional use permit procedures.

4.

Accessory Use. The placement and operation of the skill games shall be considered as an accessory use to the
primary business activity if the following criteria is applicable:
a.

If the gross floor area of the business is less than six thousand square feet, then no more than five percent of
this G.F.A. shall be allocated to the skill games.

b.

If the gross floor area of the business is equal to or greater than six thousand square feet, then no more than
two percent of this G.F.A. shall be allocated to the skill games. Skill game machines placed and operated as an
accessory use, regardless of numbers, shall be subject to the provisions of subsection F of this section only.

B.

Application: For any nonresidential zone the provisions of this section regulating the installation and operation of skill
game machines shall be applied according to the total number of machines made available for use based on the
following schedule:
(1)

1-4 skill games—No development requirements.

(2)

5 or more skill games—Shall conform to standards of development pursuant to subsection F of this section.

(3)

10 or more—When defined as a skill game center, pursuant to subsection A(3) of this section, shall be allowed by
conditional use permit, pursuant to subsection E of this section.

C.

Intent and Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide a minimum standard of development to be applied to the
installation of skill game machines to insure that the public health, safety, and welfare is maintained, and that their use
will be functionally related and compatible with adjacent commercial uses, and will not be a detriment to surrounding
land uses.

D.

Business Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any business proprietor to install or operate any skill game machine
without first having obtained a business permit from the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of and pursuant to
Chapter 14 of Ordinance No. 1673, as amended pursuant to Ordinance No. 3121 and any further amendments thereto.

E.

Skill Game Center Requirements: Skill game centers shall be permitted in the C-3, C-C, and C-4 zoning districts and shall
be allowed by conditional use permit, subject to all restrictions of each zoning district, the standards of development
contained in subjection F of this section, and the following criteria:
1.

Skill game centers located within one thousand three hundred twenty feet of any public or private primary or
secondary school shall not operate during normal school hours (seven a.m. to three p.m.). except on weekends and
school holidays. This distance shall be measured from the entrance of the commercial facility to the nearest school
property line.

2.

Skill game centers shall not be located within five hundred feet of any residential zone located along the same
street frontage. This distance shall be measured from the entrance of the commercial facility to the nearest
boundary of the adjacent residential zone.

3.

Business operating hours shall be limited to between the hours of nine a.m. to twelve midnight.

4.

The possession, consumption, or sale of alcoholic beverages and/or tobacco or other similarly smoked products
within the premises of a skill game center is prohibited. Readily visible signs indicating this prohibition of drinking
and smoking within the premises are to be prominently displayed throughout the skill game center and shall be
enforced by supervisory personnel on the site.

5.

This permit is nontransferable. Any change in tenants or operators of the premises shall require a new conditional
use permit

6.

The installation of skill game machines in excess of the number approved per the conditional use permit shall
require planning commission approval of a modification to the conditional use permit.

(Ord. No. 3385, § 38.)

226/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

F.

Standards of Development: These standards apply to the installation of five or more skill game machines in any nonresiden
1.

Adequate space shall be provided for each machine so as to allow its use without overcrowding. The floor area
devoted to the placement of skill game machines shall be a minimum of one machine for every twenty-five square
feet of game floor area. Where machines are located along one side of an aisle, said aisle shall be a minimum of six
feet in width and shall be unobstructed. When machines are located on both sides of any aisle, the aisle shall be a
minimum of nine feet in width and shall be unobstructed.

2.

In skill game centers, or if the skill games are operated as a single use business, the game area shall be located
entirely within an enclosed building open to public view. All exterior windows are to be left unobstructed to
facilitate outside surveillance of the premises. When the skill game machines are not operated as a single use
business, they shall be located in a separate room, or within a single concentrated space, separated from other
uses on the premises and from pedestrian circulation to and from such other uses.

3.

At least one adult supervisor, twenty-one years of age or older, shall be provided and be present on the premises
during all hours of operation. Additional adult supervisors may be required.

4.

The layout of the building interior shall be designed in a manner such that surveillance of the entire game room is
possible from the employee's primary work position.

5.

Interior lighting of the game room shall be maintained at or above the minimum standard of one watt per square
foot of game floor area.

6.

Exterior lighting of the premises shall be maintained at or above the minimum level of one and one-half footcandles
per square foot of paved surface adjacent to all exterior walls of the building or portion thereof where the games
are located. The lighting shall be properly directed and shielded to prevent stray light from falling on adjacent
properties.

7.

If the premises are used primarily for the serving or consumption of alcohol, the use of skill game machines by
persons under the age of twenty-one is prohibited at all times. Readily visible signs indicating this prohibition shall
be prominently displayed throughout the premises. This restriction shall be enforced by supervisory personnel on
the site.

8.

Persons under the age of sixteen not accompanied by and under the supervision of a responsible adult shall be
prohibited from using the games during the normal academic year for Pomona public schools before the hour of
three p.m., except during school holidays and on Saturdays and Sundays, nor after the hour of ten p.m. on all days
preceding school days. Readily visible signs indicating this prohibition shall be prominently displayed throughout
the premises. This restriction shall be enforced by supervisory personnel on the site.

9.

Public restroom facilities for both men and women shall be provided and made available on-site within the same
premises where the games are located.

10.

Adequate change and/or tokens used to operate the games shall be maintained and made available on the
premises where the games are located.

11.

A designated bicycle parking area shall be provided near the entrance to the skill game facility.

12.

Waiting area shall be provided within the premises where the games are located to prevent waiting clientele from
interfering with adjacent and off-site uses.

(Ord. No. 2731, § 5; Ord. No. 3173, § 1.)

6.

The establishment or expansion of trucking facilities as defined in Section .062, shall be allowed by conditional use permit only
in the M-l, M-2, light and general industrial zone districts, subject to all the restrictions of those zones, and in compliance with
the following special standards and criteria:
A.

Findings: Before granting a conditional use permit for a trucking facility the planning commission shall make the
following findings:
1.

That the proposed trucking facility development is compatible with and will not be detrimental to any existing use
or business in the area;

2.

That the proposed location is sufficiently removed from any existing or proposed residential development or zoning
so as not to be detrimental to the residential area;

227/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

3.

That the proposed buildings and site improvements are adequate to accommodate the proposed use and that the ove
facility is such that a minimum of conflict will occur with adjoining uses;

4.

That the surrounding streets and their abutting uses are adequate and will not be adversely impacted by the
proposed use.

B.

Special Standards: Because of the extensive effects of trucking facilities on surrounding properties, on city streets and
highways, and on the economic well-being and physical growth of the community, the following special standards shall
apply to these facilities:
1.

The total area of the premises utilized as trucking facilities shall not exceed five acres or be less than one acre.

2.

Expansion of an existing trucking facility may be permitted, provided that the total area of the facility (after
expansion) does not exceed five acres.

3.

The required twenty-five-foot front yard may be used for the parking of employees' and customers' passenger
vehicles, but shall not be used for the parking or storage of trucks, truck trailers, or truck tractors or other
specialized equipment associated with the trucking facility.

4.

All areas used for parking or storage of trucks or truck trailers shall be surfaced with an all-weather surfacing
material. Areas where trucks are serviced or parked for short periods of time shall be paved with asphalt, asphalticconcrete, or concrete. Areas used for the storage or parking of trailers may be surfaced with a minimum of five
inches of slag or crushed rock. All paving and surfacing shall be reviewed by the building and planning divisions for
compliance.

5.

All trucking facilities shall have a building or buildings containing offices, restrooms, and changing rooms for the
truckers. Minimum floor area used for these purposes shall be one thousand square feet.

6.

All major repair of engines or other components shall be done inside a totally enclosed building. Other work on
vehicles may be conducted outside of a totally enclosed building provided such area is paved and covered by a
canopy or other structure built in conformance with the Uniform Building Code. Such area shall be immediately
available to a totally enclose building or repair garage where tools and parts are stored.

7.

All areas behind the twenty-five-foot front yard setback shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot high fence. A sixfoot high solid masonry wall with opaque gates shall be erected at or behind the twenty-five-foot front yard setback
where visible from a public street.

8.

Property owners displaced by action of the city of Pomona redevelopment agency would be allowed to relocate on
a parcel of like size provided that all other development standards conform to the standards herein contained
except that a conditional use permit shall not be required. Such relocation shall occur on or before eighteen
months from the date of the redevelopment agency action. However, in emergency situations, an additional
eighteen months may be granted at the discretion of the city administrator and/or the director of community
development.

(Ord. No. 3226, § 1.)

7.

BILLIARD OR POOL HALL.
A.

Defined. A public poolroom is a commercial establishment, open to the public, where fifty percent or more of the floor
area is for the playing of pool, billiards or other table games.

B.

Conditional Use Permit Required. No person shall operate a public poolroom (poolroom) unless he has been granted a
conditional use permit by the planning commission pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section .580.

C.

Requirements. A poolroom, to be eligible for a conditional use permit, must meet the following requirements:
1.

No alcoholic beverage shall be sold or consumed on the premises;

2.

Such poolroom shall be open to public view;

3.

Such poolroom shall not be open for business between the hours of ten p.m., and the time of sunrise the following
day, providing that such establishment may be opened for business until the hour of twelve midnight on Friday and
Saturday evenings.

D.

Approval by Police Chief. The planning commission shall not approve such conditional use permit application for a
poolroom unless it receives written notification that the police chief has determined, following an investigation that the
228/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

applicant is of good moral character and is a proper person to conduct such business. The decision of the police chief
shall be final unless appealed to city council within fifteen days of notification of action. The decision of city council shall
be final. Fees for investigation and appeal shall be set by city council.
(Ord. No. 3629, § 4.)

Sec. .5809-4(B). - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3335.
Sec. .5809-5. - Adult-oriented businesses.
A.

Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City by
regulating Adult-Oriented Businesses. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not
the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.

B.

Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this subsection:
1.

Adult-Oriented Businesses. "Adult-oriented businesses" means any one of the following:
a.

Adult Arcade. The term "adult arcade" as used in this section, is an establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by one (1) person per
machine, that are used to show films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

b.

Adult Bookstore. The term "adult bookstore" as used in this section, is an establishment that has thirty (30) percent
or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and or
specified anatomical areas.

c.

Adult Cabaret. The term "adult cabaret" as used in this section, means a restaurant/nightclub, or similar business
establishment which: (1) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly
features persons who appear semi-nude; and/or (3) shows films, computer-generated images, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

d.

Adult Hotel/Motel. The term "adult hotel/motel" means a business establishment offering public accommodations
for any form of consideration which: (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, film,
computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period, or (3) rents, leases,
or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four (24) hour period, or (4) allows a tenant or occupant to rent
or sub-rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than six (6) hours.

e.

Adult Motion Picture Theater. The term "adult motion picture theater" as used in this section, is a business
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

f.

Adult Theater. The term "adult theater" as used in this section, means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
establishment which, for any form of consideration regularly features live performances which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

g.

Modeling Studio. The term "modeling studio" as used in this section, means a business which provides, for
229/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward figure models who, for the purposes of
sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed,
painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio" does not include
schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. "Modeling studio" further does not
include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and
which does not provide, permit, or make available "specified sexual activities."
h.

Adult Merchandise Store. The term "adult merchandise store" as used in this section, means an establishment
which is used for the sale of sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia such as reproduction of human sex
organs, dildos, vibrators, sex organ simulators, apparatus alleged to assist in or improve human sexual
performance, or other devices or products distinguished or characterized by their exclusive orientation toward
"specified anatomical areas" excluding contraceptives and items with generally accepted medical, scientific or
academic benefits.

i.

Sexual Encounter Center. The term "sexual encounter center" as used in this section, means a business or
commercial establishment, that as one of its important business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a
place where two or more persons may engage, associate, or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities"
or the exposure of "specific anatomical areas" or semi-nude. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not
include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.

2.

Adult-Oriented Entertainer. "Adult-oriented entertainer" shall mean any person who, with or without compensation or
any other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business.

3.

Applicant. A person who is required to file an application for a permit under this section, including an individual owner,
managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented
business.

4.

Business License Division. The term "business license division" as used in this section, is a division which processes
applications and issues business permits to perspective adult-oriented business and employees.

5.

Chief of Police. The chief of police of the city of Pomona or the authorized representatives thereof.

6.

Church. The term "church" as used in this section, is a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related
religious activities. It includes, but is not limited to churches, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which are used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.

7.

City. "City" means the city of Pomona, California, and any subdivision thereof.

8.

Day Care. The term "day care" as used in this section is a building or portion thereof used primarily for the daytime care
of children.

9.

Distinguished or Characterized by An Emphasis Upon. As used in this section, the term "distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis upon" shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose
dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical
areas.

10.

Employee. "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a
full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said
business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.

11.

Figure Model. "Figure model" means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses
in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.

12.

Individual Viewing Area. "Individual viewing area" means any area designed for occupancy by only one (1) person at any
time for the purpose of viewing live performances, pictures, movies, videos, or other presentations.

13.

Not Limited. The term "not limited" as used in this section, shall mean those definitions, uses or activities that have no
230/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

restraints.
14.

Nudity or a State of Nudity. "Nudity or a state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.

15.

On-Sale Alcohol. For the purposes of this section, on-sale alcohol is defined as any commercial establishment licensed by
the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.

16.

Operator. "Operator" means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of
any permitted adult-oriented business.

17.

Park. The term "park" means public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not
limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, or similar public land
within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park department.

18.

Permittee. "Permittee" means any person issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit or an adult-oriented
business employee permit pursuant to Chapter 14.5 of the Pomona City Code.

19.

Person. "Person" means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation,
or combination of the above in whatever form or character.

20.

Planning Division. The planning division is a division of the economic development department of the city of Pomona,
and oversees the implementation of the general plan and zoning ordinance for existing and future land uses and
development.

21.

Police Department. The term "police department" as used in this article is a department of the city of Pomona that
enforces the city code and state laws to protect the public, health, safety and welfare of its citizens.

22.

Regularly Features. The term "regularly features" means a regular and substantial course of conduct. A regular and
substantial course of conduct exists if one of the following conditions exists:
a.

At least thirty percent (30%) of the stock-in-trade is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult entertainment
merchandise, or both; provided, however, that his criteria shall not apply to mail order business or wholesale
businesses with no patrons on the premises;

b.

At least thirty percent (30%) of the total display area is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult
entertainment merchandise, or both; provided, however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order businesses
or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises;

c.

The business presents any type entertainment or performance, live or otherwise, characterized by an emphasis
upon specified sexual activities or featuring any nude or semi-nude person on two (2) or more separate days within
a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more separate days within a sixty (60) day period; or seven (7) or more separate
days within a one hundred eighty (180) day period.

23.

Residential Zone. "Residential zone" shall mean an area zoned for the use of single family homes, multi-family residential,
mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks as defined in the city of Pomona zoning ordinance.

24.

School. The term "school" means any facility or institution used for learning, whether public or private, including
kindergarten, preschool, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, vocational schools, and
continuation schools.

25.

Semi-Nude. "Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or the areola of the female breast.

26.

Sensitive Uses. The term "Sensitive Uses" shall refer to property zoned residential, churches, schools, parks/open space
center, and day care uses.

(Ord. No. 3962, § 2.)

27.

Shopping Center Property Line. The term "shopping center property line " as used in this section shall mean the property
line which encompasses the entire boundary of the real property of a shopping center.

28.

Specified Anatomical Areas. As used herein, "specified anatomical areas" shall mean and include any of the following:
a.

Less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or pubic region; (ii) buttocks; and (iii) female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
231/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

29.

b.

Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

c.

Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subdivisions a. or b. above.

Specified Sexual Activities. As used herein, "specified sexual activities" shall mean and include any of the following,
whether performed directly or indirectly, through clothing or other covering, by oneself or others, are prohibited as
follows;
a.

The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

b.

Sex acts, actual or simulated, including but not limited to intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

c.

Masturbation, actual or simulated;

d.

Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subdivision a. through c.
of this subsection.

30.

Substantial Enlargement. Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas
occupied by the business by more than fifteen percent (15%), as the floor areas exist on the date the ordinance codified
in this section takes effect.

31.

Transfer of Ownership or Control. "Transfer of ownership or control of an adult-oriented business" means and includes
any of the following:
a.

The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;

b.

The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or
similar means; or

c.

The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the
business, except for the transfer by bequest of other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.

32.

Zoning Ordinance. The "zoning ordinance" is the comprehensive zoning ordinance for the city of Pomona, Ordinance No.
1466.

C.

Permitted zones.
1.

Adult-oriented business shall be established or permitted in the City's M-1 (light industrial) and M-2 (general industrial)
zones.

D.

Minimum proximity requirements.
1.

No adult-oriented business shall be established or located within certain distances of certain specified land uses or zones
as set forth below:
a.

within 750 feet of any other Adult-Oriented Business in the city or adjacent city or shopping center property line; or

b.

within 1,000 feet from any existing residentially zoned property or sensitive use in the city or cities adjacent to the
city.

(Ord. No. 3962, § 3.)

c.

For the purpose of measuring distance between adult-oriented businesses and residential zones, sensitive uses,
shopping centers and other adult-oriented businesses, measurements shall be made in a straight-line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the property where the adult-oriented
business is located to the nearest property line of the premises of the sensitive uses or other adult-oriented
business.

d.

For the purpose of measuring the minimum proximity requirements, the existence of sensitive uses and shopping
centers shall be determined at the time the application for the Adult-Oriented Business permit is submitted to the
Business License Division pursuant to Chapter 14.5 of the City Code.

E.

Adult-oriented business development standards.
1.

Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance
with the fire department and building regulations and standards adopted by the city of Pomona.

2.

Parking Lot Lighting. All off-street parking area and premises entries of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated
from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
232/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

illumination of one (1) foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is
established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidents of vandalism and criminal
conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
3.

Noise. The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing
insulation so that noise generated inside said premises are not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public
right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building.

4.

All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except rest rooms, shall be open to
view by the management at all times.

5.

On-Site Signs. The operator shall post "No Loitering" and "No Consumption of Alcohol on the Premises" signs in the
parking lot area and on the exterior wall of the proposed building

6.

Additional Regulations for Adult Arcades. Any adult-oriented business which is also an "adult arcade," shall also comply
with the following provisions:
a.

Interior Configuration. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video or television equipment. If the premises
has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of
sight from the manager's station.

b.

The view area shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all
times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted.

c.

The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no
holes between any two booths such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow
physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths.

(Ord. No. 3880 § 1 (part).)

d.

The maximum size of a viewing booth shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area. The walls or partition between
the viewing booths must be suspended sixteen (16) inches above the ground, not to exceed four (4) feet in height
from the ground up.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 1 (part).)

7.

Interior Lighting. All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles,
minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

Area

Foot-Candles

Bookstores and other retail establishments

20

Theaters and cabarets

5
(except during performance, at which times lighting shall be
at least 1.25 foot-candles)

Arcades

10

Modeling studios

20

8.

Rest Room Facilities. The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male
233/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using
the rest room(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for
males, except to carry out the duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall
be free from any adult-oriented material. Rest rooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or
video projection, recording or reproduction equipment.
9.

Additional Regulations for Adult Cabaret and Adult Theaters. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult
cabaret and adult theaters:
a.

No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least
eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest
area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within six feet of the stage while the stage is occupied
by an entertainer.

(Ord. No. 4031, § 2.)

b.

The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively
dedicated to the entertainers' use. Guest and/or customers shall be prohibited from entering the dressing room
facilities at any time.

c.

The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit
used by patrons.

d.

The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which
is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically possible, the adult-oriented
business shall provide a minimum three (3) foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area
and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and entertainers capable of (and which
actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

e.

Fixed rail(s) at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between
entertainers and patrons required by this subsection.

10.

All development standards for the M-1 or M-2 zone, depending on the location of the proposed site zoning district shall
apply to all adult-oriented businesses.

11.

Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area for an adult book store, adult merchandise stores, modeling studio shall
have a minimum gross floor area of one thousand square feet. All other adult-oriented businesses such as adult motion
picture theaters, live entertainment, cabaret, arcades shall have a minimum floor area of three thousand (3,000) square
feet.

12.

Maximum Height. The maximum height of an adult-oriented business structure shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirtyfive (35) feet.

The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business regulatory permit
approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension and/or revocation of the permit
issued pursuant to Chapter 14.5.
F.

Operational standards.
1.

No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any activities depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any
location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign,
show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time
while the business is open.

2.

The on-sale of alcohol is prohibited at all times during the operation of an adult-oriented business without approval of a
conditional use permit.

3.

Hours of operation. Adult-oriented retail stores shall operate between 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday,
and all other adult-oriented businesses, except adult motels/hotels, shall operate between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
12:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday.

4.

No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted within an adult-oriented business. The building entrance to
234/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18)
years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of
the community development director or designee.
(Ord. No. 3880, § 2.)

5.

Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials depicting or describing "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities" or displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection
with "specified sexual activities" shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian
sidewalks, or walkways, or from other areas, public or non-public. All proposed signage shall comply with all
development standards from the sign ordinance, Section .503-K of the zoning ordinance.

6.

Additional Regulations for Adult Arcades. Any adult-oriented business which is also an "adult arcade," shall also comply
with the following provisions:
a.

No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at a time.

b.

Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from
remaining in the common area of such business, other than the rest rooms, who are not actively engaged in
shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall
be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.

c.

The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste
and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of
criminal activity, improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions
may justify suspension or revocation of the owner and operator's license to conduct the adult-oriented
establishment.

7.

Additional Requirements for Adult Cabaret or Adult Theaters. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult
cabaret establishments or adult theaters:
a.

No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity or tips to any adult-oriented entertainer and no entertainer shall
solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.

b.

No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business (as that term is defined herein)
shall permit any employee on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque
covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

c.

No entertainer, either before, during or after any performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no
patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such
entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

d.

No individual viewing area showing or displaying live entertainment may be occupied by more than one person at a
time.

8.

Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the
following standards:
a.

Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least two (2) state licensed security guards
from a state or city licensed security patrol company at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of
the premises increases, the applicant shall provide one (1) additional security guard for each thirty-five (35) persons
per occupancy increased.

b.

Security guards for other adult-oriented businesses may be required if it is determined by the chief of police or his
or her designee that their presence is necessary in order to prevent disorderly conduct or conduct or any specified
criminal acts from occurring on the premises.

c.

Security guards(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the
requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily
identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be license by the state as a security guard applicable to the
provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket
seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard.
235/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business regulatory permit
approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension and revocation of the permit issued pursuant
to these regulations.
G.

Nonconforming adult-oriented business uses. Any use of real property existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this section, which does not conform to the provisions of subsections C, D, and E of this section, but which was constructed,
operated, and maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a nonconforming use.
1.

Any nonconforming use that is nonconforming as to subsection E of this section shall only be permitted to continue as a
non-conforming use for three (3) years from the effective date of this ordinance, unless the nonconforming use is sooner
terminated pursuant to subsection G(2) of this section.

2.

Abandonment. If any such nonconforming adult-oriented business use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six
(6) months or one hundred eighty (180) days, shall lose its nonconforming status, and any future use of said building
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.

3.

The Annexation of Property. Any adult-oriented business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property
and which is located in the city, but which does not conform to the provisions ordinance shall be regarded as a
nonconforming use.

4.

Such nonconforming uses, while nonconforming, shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the
use may be changed to a conforming use.

(Ord. No. 3873 § 2.)

Sec. .5809-7. - Repealed by Ordinance No. 3723.
Sec. .5809-8. - Health dubs.
Health clubs shall be allowed by conditional use permit only in the C-3 and C-4, General and Highway Commercial Districts, subject to all
the restrictions of the related zoning district, and in compliance with the following standards and criteria:
(a)

Definitions. A Health Club shall mean any place, location, or premises used primarily for physical activities involving
bodily exertion for the purpose of physical fitness, sport, or game, or for the pursuit of recreational amusement. Health
clubs shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, -gymnasiums, racquet clubs, weight training facilities, and similar
athletic establishments. Spa, sauna, and similar accessory uses, with the exception of massage services, may be
permitted, but only as an ancillary addition to the primary use as a health club.

(b)

Findings. Before granting a Conditional Use Permit, the following findings shall be made:
(1)

Size, shape, dimensions and area of the site and the buildings shall be found to be conducive to accommodate the
proposed business in a way that is harmonious with the surrounding development and will not function as an
impediment to the traffic flow, both vehicular and pedestrian, serving this development.

(2)

The amount of off-street parking on the site shall be adequate and well located so as not to cause problems on the
site or to adjacent properties.

(3)

The proposed facility is located and designed such that its establishment will not be detrimental to any adjacent
residential development or zoning.

(Ord. No. 2937, § 4; Ord. No. 3013, § 1; Ord. 3141, § 2.) _

Sec. .5809-9. - Maintaining of animals.
A.

Definitions.
1.

Domestic Animal. Includes horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats and all other domestic animals normally found in
continental United States of America except swine and household pets.

2.

Household Pets. Includes dogs, cats, canaries, parrots and other birds and animals, ordinarily kept as household pets.

3.

Poultry. Poultry means and includes chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, pigeons and other fowl.

4.

Poultry Ranch. Any premises where fifteen or more poultry are kept by any person.
236/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

5.

Rabbits. This term includes, hamsters, chinchillas, guinea pigs and all types of rodents.

6.

Rabbit Ranch. Any premises where eight or more rabbits are kept by any person.

7.

Stockyard or Stock Corral. Any premises where more than two domestic animals are kept by any person for any purpose.

B.

Applicability. This section shall not be applicable to any property zoned "F."

C.

Prohibition of Dairies, Stockyards, Public Stables, and Rabbit and Poultry Ranches. No person shall construct, conduct or
maintain any dairy, stockyard, public stable, rabbit or poultry ranch or homing pigeon loft in any zone within the city except
when said use is expressly permitted in that zone by the zoning ordinance.

D.

Keeping of Animals.
(1)

Minimum Area. No domestic animals shall be maintained on an area of less than one acre, and the number of animals
shall not exceed two adult animals and their immature offspring.

(2)

Distance of Residence and Area of Enclosure. All open enclosures for domestic animals shall not be less than two
hundred feet from the nearest school, church, hospital or dwelling used for human habitation, other than the residence
to the owner of such animal; provided further, that each such open enclosure shall contain not less than six hundred
twenty-five feet of surface for each animal so kept.

(3)
E.

Setback Lines. All open enclosures shall be set back at least thirty feet from any street except an alley.

Rabbits and Poultry.
(1)

No person shall keep or maintain any poultry or rabbits in any residential district except in accordance with the following
provisions:
a.

All poultry and rabbits shall be kept to the rear of all front yard setbacks.

b.

No poultry or rabbits shall be kept within twenty-five feet of any street, except an alley.

c.

All poultry and rabbits shall be kept not less than five feet from all side rear property lines, unless there is a solid
fence, solid side of a structure not less than five feet in height between such poultry or rabbits and the adjoining
property.

H.

Homing Pigeons.
(1)

Homing Pigeon Defined. The term "homing pigeon" means a pigeon trained to return home from a distance and
identified by a seamless leg band issued by the American Racing Pigeon Union and marked with the letters "AU" and the
figures designating the year issued.

(2)

Keeping of Homing Pigeons. Homing pigeons may only be kept subject to conformance to the following standards:
a.

Homing pigeons shall not be kept less than twenty-five feet from any door, window or other opening of any
dwelling.

b.

The lofts or pigeon houses where the homing pigeons are kept shall be soundly constructed, properly maintained
and adequately landscaped to blend with and conform to the surrounding area.

c.

The keeping of homing pigeons shall at all times be conducted in conformance with all relevant sanitary and health
regulations.

(Ord. No. 3224, § 1.)

Sec. .5809-10. - Hotels and motels.
A.

Hotels, motels, and apartment hotels shall be any commercial establishment as defined per Section .062 of the Zoning
Ordinance.

Hotels, motels, and apartment hotels shall be permitted in the C-3, C-4, C-IND, H-R, M-l, and M-2 zone districts subject to the granting
of a conditional use permit pursuant to the procedure in Section .580 of the Zoning Ordinance.
B.

When considering such conditional use permit, the commission and city council shall use the following standards and criteria
on judging these permits:
1.

The specific site shall be appropriately situated on a major traffic thoroughfare.

2.

The design for site development shall be such as to render proper regard for safe circulation for the patrons and for the
traveling public within and adjacent to the site.
237/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

3.

The amount of off-street parking on the site shall be adequate and well located so as not to cause problems on the site or to
properties.

4.

The division of the site from other uses shall be accomplished by wall, setback, and planting areas as deemed necessary.

5.

Fencing off or securing of on-site parking areas shall be provided as deemed necessary.

6.

Size, shape, dimensions and area of the site and the building shall be conducive to accommodate the proposed use in
such a way that is harmonious with the development and traffic movement in the surrounding area.

7.

Signing shall be designed to be compatible with surrounding development.

8.

The entire ground area of the site, except for building and planting areas, shall be paved with asphaltic concrete and/or
concrete to standards set by the engineering and building departments.

9.

All trash, debris, garbage and other similar material shall be stored within a designated and enclosed trash storage area.
All trash storage areas shall be surrounded by a six-foot-high solid wall which is to be constructed of noncombustible
materials compatible with the main building. All trash enclosure openings shall be gated by a solid, double swinging gate.
As an alternative, an interior trash storage area may be provided subject to conditions imposed by the planning
commission or city council to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

10.

All exterior lighting shall be so designed, located and shielded such that there will be no glare or reflection onto adjacent
properties or public right-of-way and to protect such lighting from creating a nuisance. The planning commission or city
council may specify the maximum lumens permitted.

11.

A minimum of ten percent of the site area shall be provided with landscaping which shall include trees, shrubs, and
ground cover. Landscaping schemes shall take into consideration visual sight distance requirements at entryways and
street and alley intersections. Planters shall be protected by masonry or equal curbing not less than six inches in height,
shall be equipped with a permanent irrigation system and shall be maintained by the operator of the business. The
landscaping of the premises shall be designed to achieve the following objectives:
a.

Adequate dispersion throughout the parking area to provide shade, act as traffic diverters, and to create an
attractive surrounding by preventing monotony of design.

b.

Act as a buffer between the site, adjacent properties and from the public thoroughfare by screening undesirable
views, and by reducing the effects of wind, dust, heat, noise and glare.

c.

Accent entryways and street frontages through the use of berming, decorative garden walls, etc., along with the use
of large-galloned trees, shrubbery, and ground cover.

d.
12.

Plans an attractive landscaping which does not provide harborage for violent people.

Such other safeguards and conditions as found by the planning commission (or city council on appeal) to be necessary to
protect the health, safety and general welfare in the district.

C.

Before granting a conditional use permit for a hotel/motel business, the following findings shall be made:
1.

That the proposed hotel or motel business is compatible with and shall be in no way detrimental to surrounding
development.

2.

That the proposed hotel or motel business will not produce nor result in any significant negative environmental effects
for the surrounding community.

3.

That the size, shape, dimensions and area of the site and the design of the proposed hotel or motel development shall
be conducive to accommodate the proposed use in such a way that it is harmonious with the development and traffic
movement in the area.

(Ord. No. 3254, § 9.)

Sec. .5809-11. - Satellite dish antennas and amateur/ham radio antenna towers.
A.

Defined. Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices of various sizes, materials and shapes including
but not limited to solid or wire-mesh dish, horn, spherical or bar configured arrangements used for the transmission,
reception or both, of electromagnetic radiation waves.

B.

Applicability. This section shall pertain to satellite dish antennas and amateur/ham radio antenna towers utilized as an
accessory use only.
238/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

C.

Number and use. No more than one (1) satellite dish and amateur ham radio antenna tower shall be permitted per lot.

D.

Satellite dishes shall be permitted in all zoning districts as a permitted accessory use provided all requirements set forth below
are satisfied.

Requirements. Satellite dishes shall meet the following requirements:
1.

The maximum height shall be twelve (12) feet above the average finished grade of the subject site. No roof mounted
satellite dish shall be allowed.

2.

The diameter of the satellite dish shall be no greater than ten (10) feet.

3.

Satellite dishes shall be screened from view from adjacent properties by fences, walls, and/or landscaping, per approval
of the city planner.

4.

Satellite dishes shall not be allowed within the required front yard and street side yard setback areas. In addition to the
aforementioned, all portions of satellite dishes shall meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure.

5.

The finish of a satellite dish shall be in a color (e.g., white, beige, light brown, green or black) which blends in with its
surroundings so as not to be visually obtrusive to surrounding properties.

6.

No commercial advertising material shall be allowed on any satellite dish, except for requisite safety text and other
labeling required by law.

7.

Satellite dishes shall not be mounted on any wall visible from the public right-of-way.

8.

A building permit shall be obtained prior to installation. Approval of permits shall not be deemed as approval by a
homeowners' association pursuant to any covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC & Rs).

9.

All satellite dish antennas shall be maintained in proper working order, and any graffiti shall be removed within twentyfour (24) hours.

10.

Antennas installed prior to the effective date of this section shall be deemed legal nonconforming and shall be subject to
the provisions of Section .553.

E.

Amateur/ham radio antenna towers shall be permitted by right in all zoning districts, provided all requirements set forth
below are satisfied.

Requirements. Amateur/ham radio antenna towers shall meet the following requirements:
1.

Any amateur/ham radio antenna tower greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height above the average finished grade of the
subject site, when fully retracted, shall require the approval of a conditional use permit. Retractable towers shall be
retracted when not in use. All antenna towers shall be the self-supporting type, with no supporting guy wires.

2.

Amateur/ham radio antenna towers shall not be allowed within the required front yard or street side yard setback areas.
In addition to the aforementioned, antenna towers shall meet all setback requirements for an accessory structure.

3.

Any equipment on the base of an antenna tower shall be screened with materials such as, but not limited to, shrubs,
wood or block, per approval of the city planner. Anti-climb devices shall be installed at the base of the antenna tower.

4.

No commercial advertising material shall be allowed on any amateur/ham radio antenna tower, except for requisite
safety text and other labeling required by law.

5.

No wall or roof mounted antenna tower shall be allowed.

6.

A building permit shall be obtained prior to installation. Approval of permit shall not be deemed as approval by a
homeowners' association pursuant to any covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC & Rs).

7.

All antenna towers shall be maintained in proper working order, and any graffiti shall be removed within twenty-four (24)
hours.

8.

Amateur/ham radio antenna towers installed prior to the effective date of this section shall be deemed legal
nonconforming and shall be subject to the provisions of Section .553.

(Ord. No. 3712, § 2.)

Sec. .5809-12. - Self-storage facilities.
A.

Purpose and intent. The purpose of this subsection is to serve the need for storage of goods at self-storage warehouse
239/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

operations, also known as "mini-warehouses," while guaranteeing protection to surrounding properties and their values
through consideration of physical treatment, aesthetics and compatibility with surrounding properties.
B.

Conditional use permit required in the C-4 (highway commercial) zone. No self-storage facility shall be operated in the C-4
(highway commercial) zone unless a conditional use permit is granted by the planning commission pursuant to the procedure
set forth in Section .580.

C.

Requirements.
1.

Residential quarters may be provided for a manager or caretaker within the development. The unit size for the
residential quarters shall be a minimum of one thousand square feet and a maximum of two thousand five hundred
square feet.

2.

The site shall be entirely paved, except for structures and landscaping.

3.

The off-street parking requirement shall be a minimum of eight parking spaces and shall be located in close proximity to
the rental office. The parking requirement for the residential manager's/caretaker's unit shall be two spaces.

4.

Trash enclosure(s) shall be provided consistent with Section .503-C of the zoning ordinance.

5.

The site shall be completely enclosed with a six foot high solid decorative masonry all (e.g., slump-stone, split-face, block,
etc.) except for points of ingress and egress, which shall be gated for security purposes. The gate(s) shall be maintained
in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use.

6.

All storage, including vehicles, shall be within a fully enclosed structure(s).

7.

No business activity shall be conducted other than the rental of spaces for storage use.

8.

No flammable or otherwise hazardous materials shall be stored on-site.

9.

All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary and directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-ofway.

10.

Aisle widths shall be a minimum of twenty-six feet between buildings to provide unobstructed and safe circulation.

11.

Hours of operation shall be restricted to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily. A security guard shall be provided during
hours of non-operation.

12.

All signage shall be consistent with Section .503-K of the zoning ordinance.

13.

Landscaping shall be provided and maintained, consistent with Section .503-J of the zoning ordinance.

14.

Barbed wire, razor wire and concertina fencing shall be prohibited.

15.

Inspections for vermin and pest control shall be conducted annually.

(Ord. No. 3756, § 7.)

Sec. .5809-13. - Historic preservation.
A.

Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to preserve the city of Pomona's cultural, historical, and architectural
heritage and resources as living parts of community life which will benefit and enrich the lives of its present and future
residents. To these ends, this section is intended to accomplish the following:
1.

Preserve the diverse architectural styles reflecting phases of the city of Pomona's history and encourage complementary
contemporary development to inspire a more livable urban environment;

2.

Build civic pride by promoting the understanding, appreciation, and enjoyment of the city's rich heritage and cultural
resources;

3.

Enhance property values and increase economic and financial benefits to the city;

4.

Enhance the city of Pomona for residents, tourists and visitors thereby stimulating business and industry; and

5.

Conserve valuable material and energy resources by fostering ongoing use and maintenance of the existing built
environment.

B.

Applicability. This section shall apply to all designated historic landmarks on private and public property, and to all designated
historic districts (which may include private and public property) within the city of Pomona.

C.

Definitions.
1.

"Alteration" means any exterior change or modification, through public or private action, to the character-defining or
240/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

significant physical features of properties affected by this section. Such changes or modifications may be made to
structures, architectural details, or visual characteristics, grading or surface paving. Also, changes or modifications may
include the addition of new structures; cutting or removal of trees, landscaping, or other natural features; disturbance of
archaeological sites or areas; and the placement or removal of visually or architecturally significant signs, plaques, light
fixtures, street furniture, walls, fences, steps, plantings, or landscape accessories.
2.

"Applicant" means an individual or an organization (private or public) submitting an application for a certificate of
appropriateness for any proposed work on any designated historic landmark, or on any building, structure, or
improvement on private or public property within a designated historic district.

3.

"Certificate of appropriateness" is a certificate issued by the historic preservation commission approving such plans,
specifications, statements of work, and any other information which is reasonably required by the commission to make a
decision on any proposed exterior alteration, restoration, rehabilitation, construction, removal, relocation or demolition,
in whole or in part, of or to a designated resource, designated site, or to a building or structure within a historic district.

4.

"Commission" shall mean the historic preservation commission of the city of Pomona.

5.

"Conservation zone" means an area within the city of Pomona, whether commercial, residential or institutional, including
streets, sidewalks, public parks, public streetscape, public buildings and public structures with a majority of buildings and
structures fifty years old or older, which the city of Pomona wishes to maintain and revitalize so as to emphasize such
buildings' and structures' importance to the past, present, and future of the city of Pomona.

6.

"Construction" shall mean the act of constructing an addition to an existing building or structure or the erection of a new
principal or accessory structure or building on a lot or property.

7.

"Contributor" shall mean any property which contains an improvement or natural feature included in the application for
an historic district which provides substance to the district's character. A contributor shall be considered an historic
landmark in all respects.

8.

"Cultural resource" means improvements, buildings, structures, signs, features, sites, scenic areas, views and vistas,
places, areas, landscapes, trees, or other objects of scientific, aesthetic, educational, cultural, architectural, archaeological
objects, or historical significance to the citizens of the city of Pomona, the state of California, the Southern California
region, or the nation which may be eligible for landmark status, and therefore, appropriate for historic preservation by
the historic preservation commission and the city council, pursuant to the provisions of this section.

9.

"Demolition" means any act or process that destroys in part or whole an individual cultural resource, a contributor to an
historic district, or any other primary structure legally constructed prior to 1945.

10.

"Design guidelines" are the principles contained in a document which illustrate appropriate and inappropriate methods
of rehabilitation and construction. The purpose of using a set of design guidelines is to aide design and decision-making
with regard to retaining the integrity of scale, design intent, materials, feeling, patterns of development, and historical
character of a landmark building or historic district. These principles are listed in the Secretary of Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation, set forth by the United States Department of the Interior.

11.

"Designated historic landmark" means any improvement or natural feature that has special historical, cultural, aesthetic,
or architectural character, archeological importance, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage or history of
the city of Pomona, the state of California, or the nation, that has been designated a historic landmark of the city of
Pomona and placed on the Pomona historic register.

12.

"Development standards," as set forth in Section .5809-12-G-4 F-5, are standards or regulations for new construction in
historic districts or in areas where several historic landmarks exist in close proximity.

13.

"Economic hardship" shall mean a substantial economic burden placed upon the property owner in order to comply with
a certificate of appropriateness. Such a hardship shall be determined by the commission/council based upon a showing
of extreme financial impact or deprivation in accordance with the procedures and findings of this section.

14.

"Exempted properties" means properties which are specifically exempted by the city council during consideration of a
historic district designation. For purposes of determining district boundaries, such properties shall be considered part of
the subject historic district. Property owners at the time of exemption shall be exempt from the provisions of the historic
preservation ordinance so long as they retain ownership of the property. Transfer of ownership between relatives shall
constitute a change of ownership.
241/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

15.

"Historic district" means any area containing a concentration of improvements that has a special character, archeological im
historical interest, or aesthetic value, which possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling,
or which represents one or more architectural periods or styles typical to the history of the city of Pomona, and that has bee
historic district pursuant to this section or has been placed on the National Register of Historic Places.

16.

"Improvement" means any fixture or emblements affixed to public or private real property such as a building, structure,
fence, gate, landscaping, tree, wall, parking facility, streetscape, sidewalk, paving, street light, street sign, bollard, park
furniture, work of art, or other object constituting a physical feature of real property or any part of such feature.

17.

"Natural feature" means any tree, plant life, or geographical or geological site or feature subject to the provisions of this
section.

18.

"Noncontributing structure" means any building or structure which is located within a designated historic district but
does not contribute nor add to the district's historic character.

19.

"Ordinary maintenance and repair" means any work for which a building permit is not required by law, in which the
purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration of or damage to a structure or any part thereof and to
restore the same to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration or damage.

20.

"Potential historic landmark or historic district" means a building or district which is listed on the Pomona historic
resources survey as having the potential for achieving landmark status, but which has not been officially placed on the
Pomona historic register. It may also mean a building or district that could be placed on the register when: (1) more
research becomes available regarding its eligibility; or (2) the resource is restored to its original condition and integrity; or
(3) the resource becomes one of the few remaining examples of its type in the city.

21.

"Preservation" means the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation, or acquisition of historic landmarks.

22.

"Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation" means the guidelines prepared by the National Park Service of the
United States Department of the Interior for rehabilitating historic buildings.

23.

"Significant feature" means the natural or man-made elements which are indicative or representative of an historic
landmark's exterior style, type, design, or general arrangement including, but not limited to, the kind, and texture of the
building materials, and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, and other fixtures which are a part of such
improvement.

24.

"Sponsor" means an individual or an organization (private or public) submitting an application for designation of an
historic landmark or an historic district to the city's planning division.

D.

Historic Landmark Designation Criteria. For the purposes of this section, an improvement, natural feature, or site may be
designated an historic landmark by the historic preservation commission and city council and any area within the city of
Pomona may be designated an historic district pursuant to subsection E of this section, if the building or majority of buildings
(in a district) are fifty (50) or more years old or of exceptional quality if less than fifty (50) years old, and it meets one or more
of the following criteria:
1.

It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city of Pomona's cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic,
engineering, architectural, or natural history;

2.

It is identified with persons or events significant in local, state, or national history;

3.

It embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period, or method of construction, or is a valuable example of the
use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship;

4.

It contributes to the significance of an historic area, being a geographically definable area possessing a concentration of
historic or scenic properties or thematically related grouping of properties which contribute to each other and are unified
aesthetically by plan or physical development;

5.

It is the work of a notable builder, designer, landscape designer or architect;

6.

It has a unique location or singular physical characteristics or is a view or vista representing an established and familiar
visual feature of a neighborhood, community, or the city of Pomona;

7.

It embodies elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship that represent a significant structural or
architectural achievement or innovation;

8.

It is similar to other distinctive properties, sites, areas, or objects based on an historic, cultural, or architectural motif;
242/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

9.

It reflects significant geographical patterns, including those associated with different eras of settlement and growth, particu
transportation modes, or distinctive examples of park or community planning;

10.

It is one of the few remaining examples in the city of Pomona, region, state, or nation possessing distinguishing
characteristics of an architectural or historical type or specimen.

E.

Designation Procedures. Historic landmarks and historic districts shall be established by the city council in the following
manner:
1.

Designation of an improvement as an historic landmark or the designation of an historic district is begun by a sponsor
who may be an individual or organization submitting an application for such designation to the planning division of the
economic development department. The application for designation shall contain sufficient documentation and
information indicating how the building meets the criteria for designation contained in this section. The commission may
also initiate such proceedings on its own motion.
a.

For designation of historic landmarks for single family structures, the owner of the property shall be notified by
certified and first class mail if he or she is not the applicant for designation. The owner's consent must be obtained
prior to scheduling a public hearing.

b.

For designation of historic landmarks for nonresidential structures, the owner of the property shall be notified by
certified and first class mail if he or she is not the applicant for designation. The owner's consent must be obtained
prior to scheduling a public hearing. It is the city council's discretion to override a property owner objection with a
5/7′s majority vote provided a finding can be made that the structure is of unique value and of special interest to
the entire community.

c.

For designation of historic districts all property owners within the proposed district shall be notified of the
application by first class mail as described in section E 4 of this ordinance. As part of the application for historic
district designation, the sponsor shall provide a set of mailing labels containing the names and addresses of all
property owners of properties within the proposed historic district as shown on the latest equalized Los Angeles
County assessment rolls.

2.

The planning and development services manager shall make a preliminary determination as to the completeness of the
application within thirty (30) days of its receipt and shall notify the sponsor(s), owner(s) and/or resident(s) of this
determination. Inaction by the city on the determination of completeness of the application within thirty (30) days of its
receipt shall automatically deem it as complete. A public hearing shall be scheduled before the commission within thirty
(30) days of staff's acceptance as complete, any application for landmark or district designation. Such hearing need not
be held within thirty (30) days, but shall be scheduled within such period.

3.

In the case of a proposed historic landmark or cultural resource site, notice of the date, place, time, and purpose of the
hearing shall be given by first class mail to sponsor(s), owners and occupants of the building or site at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date of the commission public hearing and legal notice shall be provided at least ten (10) days prior to
the public hearing in a newspaper of local circulation. The site shall be posted with a sign at least 8 ½″ × 14″ stating that
the property is under consideration for historic designation for a period of at least (10) days prior to the public hearing
date.

4.

In the case of a proposed historic district, the notice of the proposed district shall be mailed to all property owners thirty
(30) days prior to the first scheduled public hearing date. The notice shall include:
a.

A map illustrating the boundaries of the proposed historic district;

b.

An explanation of how individual properties will be affected by the adoption of an historic district including any
additional review processes that may be required as a result of district designation;

c.

A description of the historic district designation process including the date, time and place of scheduled public
hearings;

d.

An explanation of how property owners can request that their property be exempted from the provisions of the
proposed historic district;

e.

A form to be returned to City Hall fifteen (15) days prior to the first scheduled public hearing date if the property
owner opposes district designation and would like to be exempted from the provisions of the district.

5.

Fifteen (15) days prior to the first scheduled public hearing date on the historic district designation application, the
243/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

returned responses shall be counted. No application for historic district designation shall be noticed for public hearing if
fifty percent (50%) of the property owners plus one (1) property owner within the proposed district respond in writing
opposing historic district designation of their property.
6.

Legal notice of the public hearing shall be provided in a daily newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days
before any public hearing.

7.

If the historic district is approved, the following properties will automatically be exempted from the provisions of the
historic district designation until such time as the property ownership changes ownership.
a.

Properties owned by persons, trusts, institutions or businesses that returned the form indicating their opposition to
the proposed historic district designation.

b.

Properties owned by persons, trusts, institutions or businesses that expressed their opposition to the proposed
historic district in writing or verbally at any time prior to the approval of the designation.

c.

No other properties shall be exempted from the provisions of the historic district designation.

d.

Within 30 days after City Council approval for the establishment of an historic district within the City of Pomona, the
City Council may, upon recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission, approve a request by a property
owner residing in the historic district to withdraw from the historic district only if the property owner can submit
proof that they did not receive a "Notice of Application" as outlined in Section .5809-13.E.1 of the—Zoning
Ordinance.

(Ord. No. 4009, § 2.)

8.

No exterior building, demolition, or relocation permits for any improvement, building, or structure within the proposed
historic district or relative to a nominated historic landmark shall be issued while the nomination process, including
public hearing, is pending.

9.

At the conclusion of the public hearing, but in no event more than fifteen (15) days from the date set for the commission
public hearing for the designation of a proposed historic landmark or historic district, the commission shall recommend
approval in whole or in part, or disapproval of the application in writing. The commission's recommendation shall include
findings of fact relating to the criteria for designation contained in this subsection that constitute the basis for its
decision. The commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council, the property owner(s), sponsor(s), and
the occupant(s).

10.

Approval of Commission Recommendations.
a.

For designation of a historic district, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the recommendations from the commission,
the city council shall by resolution, approve the nomination in whole or in part, or shall by resolution disapprove it
in its entirety.

b.

For designation of a historic landmark, if the property owner's written consent to the historic landmark designation
is on file, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the recommendations from the commission, the city council by majority
vote of those present shall by resolution approve the nomination in whole or in part, or shall by resolution
disapprove it in its entirety.

11.

The nominated building, site, or district, after being officially designated by the city council, shall be placed on the
Pomona historic register.

12.

The commission shall not recommend that a resource be removed from the Pomona historic register unless it is
discovered that the information relied on by the commission and the city council in making the original designation was
erroneous or false, or that circumstances wholly beyond the owner's control have rendered the resource ineligible for
designation based on the criteria listed in this subsection and it would be infeasible to restore the resource. However, in
the case of the moving of the building to another location or the deliberate destruction of the historic and architectural
integrity of the resource, the commission may, after a public hearing, remove the resource from the official list.

13.
F.

Designations shall be recorded with the Los Angeles County recorder's office.

Certificate of Appropriateness.
1.

No work including exterior alteration and demolition, may be conducted on a designated historic landmark, on existing
or new buildings, public streets, public streetscape, public sidewalk, public structures, public buildings, spaces and public
works projects within a designated historic district without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the city.
244/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

Application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed by an applicant with the planning division.
Applications for all work shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, including drawings that show the relationship
of the work to surrounding historic features and properties.

3.

Applications for certificate of appropriateness are divided into two (2) categories: (a) minor projects which will be
reviewed by the planning and development services manager for administrative denial or approval; and (b) major
projects which will be reviewed by the historic preservation commission.
a.

Minor projects shall include replacement of an element of a structure with similar elements or the addition of
elements which are part of a site but not an integral part of an historic landmark structure and shall also include
minor repair or replacement work on public buildings, public structures, public sidewalks and public streetscape. A
single element of a structure could include replacing windows, replacing exterior doors, replacing a decayed fascia
board, replacing a garage door, etc. Adding an element to the site could include a perimeter fence, tiling a patio,
placing a new walkway, etc. This category shall also include demolition and/or replacement of accessory structures.
Applications for minor alterations shall include the following submittal:
(1)

An application form signed by the owner(s)' designated agent. Three (3) copies or descriptions or renderings of
the replacement material(s) or of elements being added. These shall be of sufficient detail to reasonably
determine compliance with the ordinance requirements. For example in many cases specification sheets or
catalog pictures are sufficient for submittal purposes.

(2)

In the event that distinctive features are being replaced such as distinctive doors, windows, a picket fence or
trim, then two (2) photographs or detailed renderings of the existing features shall be required for submittal.

b.

Major projects shall include changes which significantly alter the following: height, proportions, the relationship of
the building mass and space, roof shape, scale or distinctive facades of the structure. Examples of major projects
shall include, but not be limited to room additions, adding dormers, expanding a garage, adding a porch, removing
distinctive shutters or part or all of a structure. This category also includes demolition and/or replacement of
primary use buildings or structures, and construction/installation of new buildings, structures, new public
sidewalks, new public streetscape improvements, new street lamps, new public buildings and structures, and
development of new public spaces within an historic district. Additional examples shall be established at a later
time by the commission. Applications for major projects shall include the following submittal:
(1)

One copy of application form signed by the property owner or his authorized representative;

(2)

Ten (10) sets of scaled plans including site development plan, floor plan, and building elevations, all
individually folded to eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches (8 ½″ × 14″) size;

(3)

One eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8 ½″ × 11″) clear film transparency set of plans; and

(4)

A materials sample board, manufacturer's catalogue cut sheets, and/or rendering(s) adequately depicting the
nature of the proposed change(s).

4.

Procedure.
a.

For minor projects, the planning and development services manager shall review the application for certificate of
appropriateness and determine within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of a completed application whether
to approve or deny the request, and shall make the appropriate findings.

b.

For major projects, the commission shall review the application for a certificate of appropriateness no less than ten
(10) days after notice of such hearing has been mailed by first class mail to each applicant and take action on the
request no later than seventy-five (75) days from receipt of a completed application by the planning division.
Inaction by the commission within the seventy-five (75) day period will deem the application approved. The
commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny issuance of the certificate of appropriateness for major
projects, and shall make the appropriate findings.

5.

Design Review. In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness for exterior alterations or new
construction, the planning and development services manager and the commission shall be guided by the following
general standards in addition to the most current edition of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation:
a.

Height. The height of any proposed construction shall be compatible with the height and bulk of surrounding
structures and in conformance with the maximum allowable height for the applicable zoning district.
245/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

b.

Proportions of Windows and Doors. The proportions and relationships between doors and windows shall be compatib
architectural style and character of the surrounding structures, and be of an appropriate material.

c.

Relationship of Building Masses and Spaces. The resulting relationships between proposed structures and created
spaces, or between remodeled structures and created spaces, shall be consistent with the shapes and setbacks of
existing adjacent structures.

d.

Roof Shape. The designs of the roof shall be compatible with the architectural character and style of the
surrounding structures. Gables, turrets, and other roof forms shall be incorporated when appropriate to
accomplish design compatibility with adjacent structures.

e.

Scale. The scale of the structure shall be compatible with the architectural character and style of the existing
buildings. The new building shall blend in with surrounding buildings through the sensitive use of proper scale and
materials.

f.

Directional Expression/Facades. Facades in an historic district shall blend in with other structures with regard to
directional expression. Structures in an historic district shall be compatible with the dominant horizontal and
vertical expression of surrounding structures.

g.

Architectural Details. Architectural details, including materials and textures shall be treated so as to make any new
construction compatible with the architectural style and character of the historic district.

h.

Architectural Rhythm and Articulation. All proposed structures or facade remodeling shall show sufficient and
rhythmic repetition of architectural details so as to be compatible with the facade articulation of existing adjacent
buildings.

i.

New additions and adjacent related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.

j.

All exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened from view with appropriately designed screens, parapet walls,
landscaping or any other form of screening which the commission or the planning and development services
manager may deem acceptable. The design, style, color and texture of the required screening method shall be
compatible with the existing or proposed building/facade design.

6.

Findings. The planning and development services manager shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for minor projects,
or for any form of emergency work necessary to remedy any condition determined to be imminently dangerous and
unsafe by the fire department or the building division. The commission shall issue same for major projects, based upon a
determination that the following findings can be made with regards to the proposed work:
a.

The proposed change will not adversely affect any significant historical, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic features
of the concerned property or the historic district in which it is located.

b.

The proposed change is compatible in architectural style with existing adjacent contributing structures in an historic
district.

c.

The proposed change is consistent with the architectural style of the building as specified in subsection 5 herein,
Design Review.

d.

The scale, massing, proportions, materials, textures, fenestration, decorative features, and details proposed are
consistent with the period and/or compatible with adjacent structures.

e.

In case of demolition, the applicant must show that demolition of the subject structure(s) will not adversely affect
any significant historical, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic features of the concerned property or the historic
district in which it is located.

7.

Noncontributing Structures. The commission is not charged with the obligation to induce noncontributing structures in
an historic district to conform to the special character or aesthetic value of the historic district. The commission is
charged with assuring that significant exterior alterations or additions to noncontributing structures would not markedly
detract from the special character, historic interest or aesthetic value of the historic district. If a building permit
application is filed for a noncontributing structure within an historic district, staff shall review the permit for its potential
to significantly alter the special character or aesthetic value of the district. If the exterior alterations or additions are
deemed to have significant impact, then a hearing for a certificate of appropriateness would be required. No fee will be
charged for this type of certificate of appropriateness application. Types of improvements would include:
246/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

8.

a.

The remodeling of, and/or construction of additions to existing structures;

b.

The remodeling and/or construction of garages; guest houses and other similar accessory structures.

c.

New construction.

Special Considerations Regarding Demolition of Pre-1945 Nondesignated Structures.
a.

All applications for demolition of structures built prior to 1945 submitted to the building division shall be
considered by the Pomona historic preservation commission for a certificate of appropriateness even if the
structure is not a designated historic landmark.

b.

Notice of the date, place, time, and purpose of the hearing shall be given by first class mail to the applicants and
property owners of the nominated property and all property owners directly adjacent to, or directly across the
street from the site at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the commission public hearing using the name and
address of such owners as shown on the latest equalized Los Angeles County assessment rolls and legal notice shall
be provided at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of local circulation.

c.

In making such a determination the commission shall first consider if the property would likely meet the criteria
used in historic landmark designation thus deeming it of historical significance.

d.

If the property is deemed to be of historic significance, then a structure would be denied a certificate of
appropriateness for demolition unless it meets the criteria for economic hardship.

G.

Appeal Procedure. In accordance with the following provisions, any applicant or other interested person dissatisfied with any
decision on the application for a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such decision.

Decisions of the planning and development services manager or designee may be appealed to the commission. Decisions of the
commission may be appealed to the city council.
Unless otherwise indicated, all appeals shall be made in writing stating the reason(s) for appeal. Such appeals shall be filed with the
planning division within twenty (20) days of the decision on the application for a certificate of appropriateness. The receipt of a written
appeal shall stay all actions, or put in abeyance all permits or other discretionary approvals which may have been granted, pending the
effective date of the decision on the appeal.
Appeals shall be scheduled for the earliest regular meeting of the hearing body, not less than fifteen (15) days or more than fortyfive (45) days after the date of filing an appeal, consistent with the agenda preparation procedures and scheduling of the commission
and city council meetings as the case may be.
H.

Economic Hardship. The commission shall not issue certificates of appropriateness which are not in compliance with
subsection F-6 unless the findings for economic hardship are met. Application for economic hardship shall be made on a
form(s) provided by the planning division and may be filed concurrent with the application for a certificate of appropriateness.
1.

The commission shall schedule a public hearing concerning the application and provide notice in the same manner as in
subsection F of this section and any person may testify at the hearing concerning economic hardship in the same
manner as provided in subsection H-3.

2.

The commission shall review all evidence and information required of an applicant for economic hardship and make a
determination within fifty (50) days of receipt of the application whether the denial of a certificate of appropriateness has
deprived, or will deprive, the owner of the property of the reasonable use of, or economic return on the property.
Written notice of the determination shall be provided in the same manner required by subsection F of this section.

3.

If the applicant presents facts and clear evidence demonstrating to the commission that failure to approve the
application for certificate of appropriateness will cause immediate and substantial economic hardship, the commission
may then approve in part or in whole the application based upon economic hardship. Economic hardship is defined as a
substantial cost to the owner of the property which is patently unreasonable in comparison to the benefit conferred to
the community should the owner be limited to following guidelines for preserving or protecting the property. The
commission shall hold a public hearing in order to determine whether a certificate of appropriateness shall be approved
or denied when economic hardship is involved. If the certificate of appropriateness is approved in such a case a written
determination shall state that economic hardship is the reason for its findings.

4.

The commission shall weigh the following factors as appropriate, in evaluating applications for economic hardship:
247/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

a.

Denial of the application will affect the value of the subject property so as to diminish substantially its value;

b.

The sale or rental of the property is impractical when compared to the cost of holding such property for uses
permitted in this zone;

c.

An adaptive reuse study has been conducted and found that utilization of the property for lawful purposes is
prohibited or impractical;

d.

Rental at a reasonable rate is not feasible;

e.

Denial of the certificate of appropriateness would damage the owner of the property unreasonably in comparison
to the benefit conferred on the community; and

f.

All means involving city sponsored incentives such as tax abatements, financial assistance, building code
modifications, amendments to the zoning ordinance, loans, grants, and reimbursements have been explored to
relieve possible economic hardship.

5.

The commission shall be authorized to request the applicant to furnish material evidence supporting his request for a
finding of economic hardship. Evidence shall consist of any of the following as deemed necessary by the commission:
a.

Cost estimates of the proposed work and estimate of the additional cost(s) that would be incurred to comply with
the recommendations of the commission.

b.

A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of
any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation.

c.

Fair market value of the property from an appraiser in its current condition, estimated market value after
completion of the proposed construction, exterior alteration, demolition, or removal; after any changes
recommended by the commission; and in the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing
property for continued use.

d.

In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect, an appraiser, or other professional
experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation, relocation, or reuse of the existing
structure on the property.

e.

For income-producing properties, information on the annual gross income, operating and maintenance expenses,
depreciation deductions, and annual cash flow after debt service, and current property taxes.

f.

Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any, for
the previous two years and any appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant.

g.

Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party from whom purchased, including a description of
the relationship between the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property was purchased;
any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked, and offers received, if any, within the previous two years.

h.

Assessed value of the property according to the most recent assessments and property taxes for the two previous
years.

i.

Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, limited partnership, joint venture or
other.

j.

Any other information considered necessary by the commission to make a determination of economic hardship,
and to determine whether the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners.

6.

In considering an application for economic hardship, the commission shall make a finding that without approval of the
proposed demolition, exterior alteration, remodeling, removal, or construction, the reasonable use of or return from a
designated landmark or property within an historic district will be denied a property owner. In this context, personal
financial difficulties or loss of quantifiable anticipated profits may be considered, but are not alone justifiable hardships.
In the case of a proposed demolition, the commission must make a finding that the designated landmark cannot be
remodeled or rehabilitated in a manner which would allow a reasonable use of or return from the property to the
property owner.

7.

In the case of a finding of economic hardship, this finding shall be accompanied by a plan developed by the city of
Pomona and/or applicant to relieve economic hardship. This plan may include, but is not limited to, property tax relief,
loans, or grants from the city of Pomona and other sources, acquisition by fee purchase or eminent domain,
248/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

redevelopment funds, development fees for historic preservation, changes in applicable zoning regulations, transfer of
unused development rights or relaxation of the provisions of this section sufficient to allow reasonable beneficial use or
return from the property. The commission shall within sixty (60) days, from the date of receipt of a completed
application, make recommendations to develop and adopt a plan in order to relieve economic hardship and to allow the
applicant a reasonable use of and economic return from, the property or otherwise preserve the subject property.
Inaction by the commission on the request within the sixty (60) day period shall result in the request for economic
hardship being deemed automatically approved.
8.

If, by the end of the aforementioned sixty (60) day period, the commission finds that without approval of the proposed
work the property cannot generate a reasonable economic return, then the commission shall issue a finding of economic
hardship approving the proposed work.

9.

If the commission finds otherwise, it shall deny the application for a finding of economic hardship and notify the
applicant by mail of the final denial.

10.

If approval of a finding of economic hardship will result in the demolition of a nominated or designated historic
landmark, the applicant shall be required to provide documentation of the resource proposed for demolition to the
standards of the Historic American Buildings Survey. Such documentation may include photographs, floor plans,
measured drawings, archaeological survey, or other documentation stipulated by the commission and shall be submitted
prior to issuance of a demolition permit.

I.

Historic Preservation Participation Incentives. In order to foster the preservation of Pomona's historic built environment, the
following incentives for participation are only available to historic landmarks and contributors to historic districts:
1.

State Historic Building Code. Any exterior alteration made for preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, or relocation of
such properties shall be made according to the standards of the State Historical Building Code pursuant to the California
Health and Safety Code Section 18950 et seq.

2.

Mills Act Contracts. The city council authorizes the use of California Government Code Section 50280 et seq., alternately
known as the Historical Property Contracts or Mills Act. Such contracts, which shall be administered by the economic
development department, may be entered into at the sole discretion of the city council based on the recommendations
of the commission in a form to be approved by the city attorney. The intent of such contracts shall be the continued
preservation of historical properties. The subject property must be on the Pomona historic register or located within a
designated historic district to which it is a contributor.

3.

Recognition. The commission shall establish a program to recognize historic properties with special plaques, signage etc.

4.

Financial Benefits. Owners of such properties are eligible to apply for local, state and federal financial benefits as
available.

J.

Duty to Keep in Good Repair. The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge of an historic landmark or an
improvement, building, or structure in an historic district shall keep it in good repair at all times. All exterior portions of such
improvement, building, or structure shall be properly maintained. All of the interior portions thereof of certain public
buildings, when such control is specifically designated, shall be properly maintained, when such maintenance is necessary to
prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior architectural feature.

K.

Unlawful Demolition.
a.

The owner of any structure which is demolished without obtaining a required certificate of appropriateness shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding the amount of five dollars ($5.00) per square foot up to the maximum fine allowable
by law of structure or portion of structure which was demolished.

b.

The amount of penalty to be imposed shall be reviewed for potential adjustment every five (5) years, and if not
reviewed shall remain at the level last determined.

(Ord. No. 3789, § 2; Ord. No. 3871, § 2.)

Sec. .5809-14. - Group care facilities.
Group care facilities, as defined in Subsection A, serving six (6) or fewer persons shall be considered a residential use of property for the
purposes of this section. Group care facilities are permitted according to the provisions of Table 1 in Subsection B. All group care facilities
serving six (6) or fewer persons shall be in compliance with Subsection C. All group care facilities serving seven (7) or more persons shall be in
249/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

compliance with Subsection D.
A.

Group Care Facility Types.

Group care facilities shall include both residential and nonresidential facilities that provide care and services to children and
adults, according to the following definitions:
1.

Day care home - any residential unit that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision to fourteen (14) or
fewer children or adults, as incidental to the use of the unit as a residence, for periods of less than twenty-four (24)
hours per day

2.

Day care center - any day care facility, other than a day care home, that provides nonmedical care, protection, and
supervision to children or adults for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day

3.

Residential care facility - a facility licensed by the State of California at which care, services, or treatment is provided
to children or adults living in a community residential setting

4.

Residential service facility - a residential facility, other than a residential care facility or a single housekeeping unit,
at which the operator receives compensation for the provision of personal services in addition to housing including,
but not limited to, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, training, therapy, or other non-medical care

B.

Applicability.

Group care facilities shall be permitted in various land use districts throughout the City. Table 1 below specifies the zones in
which group care facilities are allowed and the applicable permit requirements.
TABLE 1: LAND USE PROVISIONS FOR GROUP CARE FACILITIES

Low Density

Medium Density

Administrative/

Residential1

Residential2

Professional

Commercial4

Industrial5

Open Space6

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

O ce3
Day Care

P

P

P

P

P

P

CUP

CUP

CUP

P

P

P

CUP

CUP

P

P

Home ≤ 8
Day Care
Home 914
Day Care
Center
Residential
Care
Facility ≤ 6
Residential
Care
Facility > 6
Residential

P

Service
Facility ≤ 6

250/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Residential

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Service
Facility > 6

Editor's note—
NOTE: Provisions are subject to requests for Reasonable Accommodation, as provided for in Subsection E.
Editor's note—
P = permitted
Editor's note—
CUP = conditional use permit required
Editor's note—
1

Includes R-1 and R-2 zones as well as single family residential districts of specific plan areas.

Editor's note—
2

Includes R-3, R-4, and R-MHD zones as well as multiple family residential districts of specific plan areas.

Editor's note—
3

Includes A-P, K-P1, and K-P-2 zones as well as office and institutional districts of specific plan areas.

Editor's note—
4

Includes C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-C zones as well as commercial and mixed use districts of specific plan areas.

Editor's note—
5

Includes M, M-l, and M-2 zones as well as business park districts of specific plan areas.

Editor's note—
6

Includes O and F zones as well as the park and open space districts of specific plan areas.
C.

Development Standards for Group Care Facilities Serving Six (6) or Fewer Persons.

Each group care facility shall conform to all property development standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
D.

Development Standards for Group Care Facilities Serving Seven (7) or More Persons.
1.

Each group care facility shall conform to all property development standards of the zoning district in which it is
located.

2.

Group care facilities shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of another such facility.

3.

Day care homes, as defined in Subsection A of this section, serving nine to fourteen (9-14) children shall be required
to provide an on-site outdoor play area of not less than seventy-five (75) square feet per child, but in no case shall
less than four hundred and fifty (450) square feet of on-site play area be provided. The outdoor play area shall not
be located in the front yard.

4.

Day care centers shall provide passenger loading areas at the rate of one (1) on-site passenger loading space per
each twenty-five (25) parking spaces, with a minimum of one (1) loading space required. In addition, any day care
center serving adults shall provide at least one (1) parking space for vans.

5.

All group care facilities shall provide a six (6) foot high solid decorative block wall along all property lines, except in
the front yard. Walls shall provide for safety with controlled points of entry and shall incorporate decorative
materials and features including, but not limited to, "split-face " block, cobblestone, or slumpstone.
251/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

6.

On-site landscaping shall be consistent with that prevailing in the neighborhood and shall be regularly maintained, inc
irrigation.

7.

All on-site lighting shall be stationary and shall be directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
Intensity shall be no greater than one footcandle of illumination.

8.

No signs for group care facilities within any residential zones shall be permitted. Signs for group care facilities
within nonresidential zones shall comply with Section .503-K of the Zoning Ordinance.

9.

Each group care facility shall provide fire extinguisher and smoke detector devices, and shall meet all standards
established by the Los Angeles County fire marshal.

10.

Outdoor activities shall be conducted only between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m. per Section 14.9-5 of the
Pomona City Code.

11.

All group care facilities shall be operated according to all applicable state and local health and safety regulations.

12.

No indoor furniture shall be allowed outdoors.

13.

All group care facilities shall be in conformance with the Uniform Building Code. A certificate of occupancy shall be
obtained from the Building Division prior to occupancy of group care facilities.

14.
E.

Group care facilities shall obtain a business license.

Requests for Reasonable Accommodation.
1.

Policy:

The City of Pomona recognizes that disabled individuals may benefit from the ability to live in group care facilities and that
strict adherence to provisions of the Zoning Ordinance could result in the exclusion of such a facility from a location particularly
suitable to meeting the needs of certain disabled persons. Therefore, it is the policy of the City of Pomona to provide reasonable
accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking fair access to housing in the application of regulations, policies, and
processes set forth in Zoning Ordinance Section .5809-14, Subsections A-D. A person with disabilities is someone who has a
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities. Laws that protect
persons with disabilities against discrimination include within their protection persons who are recovering from addictions to
alcohol or narcotics so long as such persons are not currently using the substances.
2.

Procedures
a.

Application
i.

The owner of a proposed group care facility serving persons who, because of disabilities, require
reasonable accommodation in the application of a zoning law that may be acting as a barrier to fair
housing opportunities may submit a request for such accommodation on a form provided by the
Planning Division.

ii.

If the project for which the request is being made also requires other planning permits or approval, then
the applicant shall file the request along with the application for such other permit or approval.

b.

Notice of Request for Accommodation

Written notice of a request for reasonable accommodation will be given as follows:
i.

If no other entitlement is being sought, notice of the request for reasonable accommodation will be
mailed to the owners of all properties located along both sides of the street, within the same block as the
subject property.

ii.

If the request is being made in conjunction with another process, the notice will be mailed along with the
notice of the other proceeding.

c.

Grounds for Accommodation

The following factors will be considered regarding the reasonableness of the requested accommodation:
i.

Special need created by the disabilities

ii.

Benefits that may result from the requested adjustment of a regulation or policy

iii.

Potential impacts on surrounding uses
252/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

iv.

Physical attributes of the subject property and structures

v.

Alternative accommodations that may provide equivalent benefits

vi.

Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on
the City

vii.

Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration of the nature of a
program

d.

Decision Process
i.

The Planning Manager shall review each application for completeness within 5 days of its having been
submitted.

ii.

Within 10 days after a letter of completeness has been mailed, notice of the Planning Manager's
proposed decision will be mailed in the same manner described above under Notice of Request for
Accommodation.

iii.

Within 10 days of the date that the notice was mailed, any person may request a Planning Manager's
hearing regarding the proposed decision. If no request for a hearing is made, the proposed decision will
become final.

iv.

If a request for a hearing is made, the Planning Manager will conduct a hearing within 20 days of the
request at which all reasonable evidence and credible testimony will be considered.

v.

Within 10 days of the hearing, the Planning Manager will issue a decision granting the request, granting
the request with conditions, or denying the request. A notice of decision containing the Planning
Manager's findings, conclusions, and reasons for the decision will be mailed in the same manner as
described above.

vi.

Within 20 days after the Planning Manager's notice of decision is mailed, any person may file an appeal in
writing to the Planning Commission. The application will contain a statement of the grounds for the
appeal. After mailing notice as described above, the Planning Commission will hold a public hearing to
consider the appeal at the next available regularly scheduled meeting.

vii.

Any person may appeal the Planning Commission's decision to the City Council in accordance with the
appeal process provided for in Zoning Ordinance Subsection .580-F.

(Ord. No. 3787, § 7: Ord. No. 3971, § 2.)

Sec. .5809-15. - Wireless communication facilities.
A.

Purpose and Intent. The purpose of these requirements is to regulate the location and design of wireless communication
facilities (WCF) to promote the public health, safety, and community aesthetics consistent with the goals and objectives of the
city of Pomona General Plan. The regulations are also intended to minimize visibility and the number of freestanding
structures in the city, while establishing minimum guidelines and expedited processing for well-designed proposals in
appropriate locations. These regulations also take into account the rapid pace of technological advances and establish
guidelines for the timely removal of abandoned facilities.

B.

Definitions.

Abandonment—Wireless communication facility shall be considered abandoned if the use is discontinued for ninety days or more,
notification to the city by permittee of abandonment, or presentation to the city of evidence demonstrating abandonment.
Administrative wireless communication facility permit—A wireless communication facility permit that can be approved by staff and
requires no public hearing.
Antenna—Equipment used to transmit and receive radio waves carrying conversation, signals, and/or data.
Co-location—The location of more than one wireless communication facility antenna on a single support structure. Subcategories of
co-location include approved facility, non-conforming facility, and multiple users.

253/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Co-location, approved facility—Support structure designed to accommodate more than one facility. Facilities approved must be
consistent with this title. An approved facility is constructed by a single provider but may become a "multiple user" facility if a second
permittee is installed on the site.
Co-location, non-conforming facility—Location on a wireless communication facility constructed before current section. Project must
be designed to use existing support structure and area for support equipment.
Concealed antenna—A wireless communication facility that is designed to resemble part of a building structure or landscape feature.
Subcategories of concealed antenna include: building mounted, freestanding structure.
Concealed antenna, building mounted—Architecturally screened roof-mounted wireless communication facility or attached to the
building. Bell tower, clock tower, steeples, parapets, false windows, and other types of architectural features that are designed to
camouflage the wireless communication facility and are completely connected to the architectural building.
Concealed antenna, existing freestanding structure—Wireless communication facility that is to be located on an existing freestanding
structure such as monopole, freestanding sign, clock tower, water tower and other types of existing structures that are not buildings or
utility support structures.
Concealed antenna, new freestanding structure—Wireless communication facility that is camouflaged as part of a sign or other
freestanding structure. Examples include "tree" monopoles, which may appear to be palms or pines ("monopalms" and "monopines");
bell tower, clock tower; freestanding signage; flagpoles, light poles and other types of concealed freestanding structures.
Equipment shelter—A room, cabinet, or building used to house support equipment for utility or service providers.
Major wireless communication facility permit—Any wireless communication facility that requires public hearing by the planning
commission.
Micro WCF—Communication antenna and support equipment, such as "microcells," "micropanels," and "shoebox" installations, that
are not greater than sixteen by twenty-two by eight inches.
Minor wireless communication facility permit—Any wireless communication facility permit that requires public noticing, but does not
require discretionary review.
Monopole—A freestanding structure composed of a single spire, pole, or tower used to support antennas or related equipment.
Property owner—Means the individual or institution who owns the real property on which a WCF is located or proposed.
Slim line, unipole—A freestanding structure composed of a pole where the support antenna is mounted onto the pole and concealed
by a circular metal ring that is no greater than ten inches in diameter.
Support equipment—Communications equipment installed within an equipment shelter installed on the ground or on a building or
other structure.
Utility mounted—Means an antenna attached to a public utility structure.
Wireless communication facility (WCF)—A facility which serves to provide wireless telecommunication service, including but not
limited to, cellular, ESMR, PCS, paging, e-mail, and data transmission.
Wireless communication facility permittee—means the individual or entity that is licensed to install and operate a wireless
communication facility. Subsequently referred to as permittee.
C.

Wireless Communication Facility Permit Required. A wireless communication facility permit is required for all WCFs or wireless
communications facilities in the city and must be obtained prior to operation of the facility.

D.

Applicability. Wireless Communication facilities shall be pemiitted in various land use districts throughout the city. The
following table specifies the zones in which wireless communication facilities are allowed, and the applicable permit
processing for each.
Table D-1. WCF as a Permitted Use and Required Processing.
254/322

7/11/2019

Types of Land

Pomona, CA Zoning

Wireless Communications Facility Types
Mono-

Concealed Antenna

Co-location

pole, Slim
Line,

Building

Existing

New Free-

Approved

Non-

Unipole,

Mounted

Free-

standing

Facility

conforming

Not

standing

Utility

Micro

Mounted

WCF

Facility

Concealed
Residential

Prohibited

Zones

Minor WCF

Minor

Admin.

(Non-

WCF

WCF

residential)

Permit

Permit

(non-

(non-

residential

residential

site only)

site only)

Minor WCF

Minor

Major WCF

Admin. WCF

Major WCF

Minor

Admin.

Permit

WCF

Permit

Permit

Permit

WCF

WCF

Permit

Permit

Roof
coverage
exceeds

Not Applicable

Minor WCF

Admin.

Permit

WCF
Permit

25%, Major
WCF
required
Commercial

Prohibited

Zones

Permit
Admininstrative/

Minor WCF

Minor

Major WCF

Administrative

Not

Minor

Admin.

Professional

Permit

WCF

Permit

WCF Permit

Applicable

WCF

WCF

and O ce

(non-

Permit

Permit

Permit

Industrial Zone

Open Space

Prohibited

Prohibited

Prohibited

(non-

residential

residential site

site only)

only)

Minor WCF Permit

Administrative

Major WCF

Admininistrative

WCF Permit

Permit

WCF Permit

Minor WCF

Minor

Major WCF

Major WCF

Not

Minor

Admin.

Permit

WCF

Admin.

Permit

Applicable

WCF

WCF

Permit

Permit

Permit

1. Residential Land use—Includes residential districts in Speci c Plan areas and R-I, R-2, R-3, R-4 zoning districts.
2. Commercial Land Use—Includes Commercial and Mixed Use Speci c Plan areas and C-I, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-C, C-IND zoning
districts.
3. Admininistrative/Professional and O ce Land Use—Induding O ce, Institutional Speci c Plan Areas and A-P, K-P-1, K-P2 zoning districts.
4. Industrial Land Use—Induding Business Park area of Speci c Plans and M, M-1, M-2 zoning districts.
255/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

5. Open Space Land Use—Induding Fairground and Open Space areas of Speci c Plan and F, O zoning districts.

E.

Development Standards. Wireless communication facilities permittees are encouraged to design and develop facilities that are
aesthetically sensitive to the project property and the surrounding neighborhood. In doing so, facilities must meet established
minimum requirements.
1.

General Development Standards. The following table provides general development standards applicable to all wireless
communication facility permits:
Table E-1. General Development Standards

Feature

Requirement

Screening of

All support equipment shall be screened so that it is not visible from public view.

Support
Equipment
Fencing

All required fencing shall be decorative block or wrought iron. Chain-link fencing is prohibited except in
areas where not visible from public right-of-way.

Access

Access to the wireless communications facility lease area shall have a minimum width of ten feet.

Support

All equipment building, cabinets, cables, air conditioning units, shall be painted and textured to match

Structures

the surrounding physical area in order to minimize visual impacts.

Signs

No signs shall be placed on any facilities or equipment unless required by law.

Easement

The property owner shall le an easement granting the city access to the property for rehabilitation
purposes a er a wireless communication facility is abandoned. Proof of recordation shall be led with
the Building Division prior to nalizing the building permits.

Location

All proposed wireless communication facilities shall be located so as to minimize their visual impact to
the maximum extent feasible, considering technological requirements, by means of placement,
screening and camou age, to be compatible with existing architectural elements, building materials,
and other site characteristics.

Multiple Use

All new freestanding facilities must be designed to accommodate more than one service provider.

Maximum

Maximum height may exceed the height of the roof by 10 feet if the facility is properly screened.

Height of RoofMounted
Antenna
Support

Micro WCF—25 feet minimum height.

Structure

All other Types—Maximum height ten feet above height allowed for underlying zoning.

Height

256/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Maximum

Ground Mounted—No higher than 10-feet above grade with screening.

Height Support

Roof Mounted—No higher than ten feet above the roof.

Equipment
Setback

Utility-Mounted and Micro WCF No setback required.

Requirements

All other Types—Same as underlying zone.

Minimum

Micro WCF, building-mounted concealed antenna—0 feet.

Distance from

All other Types—250 feet.

Residential uses
in a Residential
Zone
Maximum

Slim Line or Unipole WCF—10 inches diameter

Antenna Size

Non-Conforming—No greater than existing
Micro WCF 16″ × 22″ × 8″
Approved Facility—Consistent with approved WCF Permit
All other Types—None

Colors

Colors shall be matte and chosen to minimize visibility.

Complementary

Slim-line, Unipole Freestanding Concealed Antennas WCF and Approved

Design

Facilities—Designed to be compatible with surrounding environment (Additional landscaping may be
required).
All types except Slim-line, Uni-pole WCF—Designed so that the antennas are not distinguishable from
rest of structure or disguised to be consistent with the intent of the structure.

2.

Exceptions to Development Standards. A major wireless communication facility permit shall be required if a proposed
project does not comply with standards described in subsection (E) of this section or at the discretion of the planning
manager.

F.

Operational Standards.
1.

Maintenance Requirements.
a.

Property Maintenance. All wireless communication facilities including landscaping and surface areas shall be
continuously maintained free of weeds, debris, litter or temporary signage.

b.
2.

Graffiti. All graffiti shall be removed from the premises within twenty-four hours of discovery.

Business License Required.
a.

All wireless communication facility permittees shall demonstrate to the planning division that they have a business
license for operating a wireless communication facility site prior to finalization of building permits.

b.

All property owners shall demonstrate to the planning division that they have a business license for property rental
before finalization of building permits.

3.

Business License Renewal and Certification. Certification of continued use of each approved facility shall be submitted on
a yearly basis at the time of the facility operator's business license renewal for as long as the facility remains in
operation. The certification shall indicate that the facility is operating as approved and that the facility complies with the
most current Federal Communication Commission (FCC) safety standards. Facilities, which are no longer in operation,
shall be removed within ninety days after the date of discontinuation.
257/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

4.

Cash Bond Requirement.
a.

Prior to the finalizing of building permit for the construction or modification of a wireless communication facility,
the applicant shall be required to provide to the city a cash bond or for the removal of the facility and any accessory
equipment, and rehabilitate the site if that facility is abandoned. The bond amount shall be determined by the chief
building official and shall be no less than fifteen percent of construction cost.

b.

The bond shall be deposited in an interest bearing account with the city named as co-depositor.

c.

No more than once a year, the permittee may petition to the chief building official for release of a portion of the
funds. The petition must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the chief building official that the value of the account
exceeds the amount required to remove the WCF and rehabilitate the site. The amount remaining in the account,
after release of funds, must be equal to or greater than the amount required to remove the WCF and rehabilitate
the site.

d.

Prior to release of funds, the permittee must demonstrate that the WCF is operating in compliance with the WCF
prdinance and the WCF permit.

G.

Wireless Communication Permit Review Process.
1.

Required Findings. All antennas permitted by this section shall be subject to the following findings.
a.

The wireless communication facility permittee has located on an approved co-location facility or has demonstrated
to the city a good faith effort to locate on an approved facility or has demonstrated that co-location is not
technically feasible due to coverage needs, potential interference, or other technical issues.

b.

There is adequate space on the property for the antenna and support equipment without conflicting with existing
buildings or other structures on the property, or reducing required parking, landscaping setbacks or other
development standards.

c.

The design and placement of the antenna and support equipment will not adversely impact the use of the property,
other buildings and structures located on the property, or the surrounding area or neighborhood.

d.

The antenna and support equipment as proposed are consistent with the intent of this part and comply with the
operational standards and any applicable special standards as noted above.

e.

The applicant has demonstrated that the wireless communication facility will have the least possible visual impact
on the environment taking into account technical, engineering, economic and other relevant factors.

2.

Types of Permits and Review Process. The following table summarizes the types of WCF permits, with respect to the
various review processes for each:
Table G-1. Wireless Communication Facility Permits and Review Process

Noticing

Administrative

Minor WCF

Major WCF

None

Property owner, occupants w/400 feet,

Property owner and occupant w/400 feet

planning commission and city council
Type of

None

hearing

Administrative public hearing before the

Public hearing before the planning

planning manager

commission

Planning manager

Planning commission

(1) City council

Approval

Planning

authority

manager

Appeal

(1) Planning

(1) Planning commission

commission

(2) City council

(2) City council

3.

Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval shall be imposed on any permit granted pursuant to this section to
258/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

ensure compliance with the intent of this part, the required standards and findings of this section, and the protection of
the public health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics. The permit shall not become effective until all applicable
conditions of approval have been met. All conditions of approval shall be observed throughout the duration of the
permit.
4

Appeal Process. All written appeals shall be subject to the procedures set forth in Section .580-F of the city of Pomona
Zoning Ordinance.

H.

Environmental Review. The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires the city to consider potential environmental
effects from each new project. CEQA provides for varying degrees of review depending on the project's potential for
environment impacts. An environmental review may include a categorical exemption, negative declaration or an
environmental impact report.
1.

Aesthetic, visual and safety. Applicants must demonstrate that potential environmental impacts from the project will be
reduced to a level of insignificance through project design and placement.

2.

Radio Frequency Emissions.1 Applicants should provide evidence showing the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility complies with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules, regulations and standards governing
environmental effects of radio frequency emissions.

Editor's note—
1

Section 704 of Title 7 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (effective February 8, 1996), contains the following language: "(iv) No

state or local government or instrumentality thereof may regulate the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service
facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emission to the extent that such facilities comply with the Commission's
regulations concerning such emmissions."
I.

Removal of Abandoned Wireless Communication Facilities
1.

Written Notice of Abandonment. A written notice of the determination of abandonment shall be sent by first class mail,
to the permittee of the wireless communication facility at said operator's business address on file with the city business
license division.

2.

Response of Permittee. The operator shall remove all facilities within thirty days of the date of such notice, unless within
ten days of the date of said notice, the permittee appeals such determination, in writing, to the planning commission.

3.

Planning Commission Review of Abandonment. If the permittee appeals the notice of abandonment, the planning
manager shall schedule a hearing on the matter to be conducted before the planning commission at which time the
commission may affirm, reverse, or modify with or without conditions the original determination of abandonment and
shall make written findings in support of its decision.

4.

Appeal of Planning Commission Decision. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to city council per
Section .580-F.

5.

Removal by City.
a.

At any time after the thirty-day period from the date of notice or determination by planning commission or city
council of abandonment, the city may remove the abandoned facility, repair any and all damage to the premises
caused by such removal, and otherwise restore the premises as is appropriate to be in compliance with applicable
code.

b.

In removing the wireless communication facility, the city shall exercise the easement to enter the property and use
the bond proceeds to rehabilitate the site. At conclusion of the rehabilitation, the city shall remove the easement
and return the remaining bond money to the permittee or property owner as designated.

c.

The city may, but shall not be required to, store the removed facility (or any part thereof). The city may, in lieu of
storing the removed facility, convert it to the city's use, sell it, or dispose of it in any manner deemed by the city to
be appropriate.

6.

Thirty days from the date of notice of abandonment or determination by planning commission or city council of
abandonment, the WCF permit for the subject facility will be terminated.

7.

Violations and Penalty. Violations of this chapter shall be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by fine
259/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

or imprisonment or both. Each day the violation continues is punishable as a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 3931, § 3.)

Sec. .5809-16 - Used car sales lots.
A.

Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to serve the locational needs of used car sales lots while guaranteeing
protection of major commercial corridors, surrounding properties and their values through the implementation of
development and operational standards which will serve to minimize the impact of such uses on the community.

B.

Conditional Use Permit. A conditional use permit is required for used car sales lots in the C-4 (highway commercial) and C-IND
(commercial industrial) zone. No used car lots shall be operated in the aforementioned zoning districts unless a conditional
use permit is granted by the planning commission pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section .580. Such uses shall also be
subject to operational and development standards contained in this section.

C.

Nonconforming Uses. Legally existing used car lots at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, including
but not limited to those located in commercial, commercial-industrial, industrial or specific plan areas, shall be deemed
nonconforming if they fail to meet any of the development and operational standards contained herein and/or any other
applicable development requirements or design policy of the city including but not limited to those criteria contained in the
zoning ordinance and/or specific plans.

D.

Development/Operational Standards.
1.

Development Standards.

Development Standard

Requirement

Lot Size (for used car sales lots not legally existing prior to

12,000 sq. ft. minimum

the adoption of this ordinance)
O -Street Parking

1. One space per three hundred fty square feet of gross
oor area or a minimum of three spaces whichever is
greater. Designated customer parking areas shall be
accessible from a public street and shall meet parking lot
requirements pursuant to Section .503-H (O -Street
Parking).
2. All parking lot improvements shall be consistent with
Section .503-H.

Landscaping/Irrigation

1. A minimum ve (5) ft. wide landscape planter along the
front property line.
2. For new used car sales lots, landscape and irrigation
plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect or
engineer and submitted to the planning division prior to
occupancy. For used car sales lots legally existing on January
1, 2001, landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared by
a landscape contractor or other quali ed individual and
submitted to the planning division prior to certi cation of
compliance with the governing development and
operational standards of this section.

260/322

7/11/2019

Lighting

Pomona, CA Zoning

All on-site lighting shall be stationary and directed away
from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.
Temporary lighting including search light, ood lighting,
temporary power poles, string lighting, etc., shall be
prohibited.

Auto repair

Auto repair shall be permitted pursuant to Section .361-F
(Auto Repair) and .580 (CUP) of the Pomona zoning
ordinance. Service bay doors shall not directly face a public
street.

Building size (for new buildings only)

750 sq. ft. minimum.

All o ces

All business shall be conducted within an enclosed o ce
building. Portable o ce trailers and other similar temporary
structures shall not be permitted. All buildings shall be
attached to a permanent foundation.

Building type and design (shall apply to new construction

The design of new buildings shall be consistent with the

only)

surrounding neighborhood subject to the approval of the
economic development director or designee. The economic
development director or designee's review of the building
design shall include but not be limited to, building form,
mass, materials and architectural design.

Fencing

The height of permitted fencing shall be consistent with the
standards contained in the Section .503-I (Fences, Hedges,
and Walls) of the zoning ordinance. Chain link fencing and
barbed wire shall be prohibited.

Signs

1. One monument sign shall be permitted per used car
sales lot with a maximum sign area of 65 square feet per
sign face at a maximum height or 10 feet. A monument sign
shall be allowed for used car sales lots with a minimum of
12,000 square feet in lot area. Multiple used car sales lot
businesses located on the same lot shall be allowed only
one monument sign. If a site for a used car lot quali es for a
pole sign pursuant to the city's sign ordinance, such sign
may he substituted for a monument sign.
2. Vehicle windshield signage shall he permitted to cover up
to 50% of each vehicle windshield area.
3. All other signs shall be permitted pursuant to the Section
.503-K (sign ordinance) of the zoning ordinance.
261/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Temporary display risers

The location of temporary display risers shall be permitted
within sales lots with the location subject to the approval of
the planning division. The maximum height of display risers
shall be 4 feet. Temporary display risers shall be prohibited
within required landscape areas.

2.

Operational Standards.

Operational Standard

Requirement

Condition of landscaping

All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition. Any
weeds, dead or diseased landscaping shall be removed and
replaced at the request of the city within 30 days of
noti cation.

Property maintenance

Each site utilized for used car sales shall be maintained free
of trash and debris pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance.
All buildings, signs, fences, walls and other structures shall
be maintained in appropriate working order.

Vehicle storage/display

1. Vehicle display/storage areas shall be physically
separated from required parking/drive aisle areas and
marked and signed as such.
2. Display parking shall be paved with an improved parking
surface pursuant to the governing Uniform Building Code
and be limited to the areas delineated on the approved site
plan.
3. No part of any area designated for vehicle display/storage
shall be credited toward required o -street parking.
4. No vehicles to be displayed, sold, rented or repaired shall
be parked or stored on any street or alley or within the
required o -street parking or landscape area.

Auto repair

All permitted auto repair work shall be conducted within an
enclosed building.

Lighting

Existing light standards/ xtures shall be maintained in good
working order and condition free of rust, chipped paint, etc.
Inoperable light standards shall be repaired or removed
within 30 days of noti cation.

262/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Noise

Noise levels shall be consistent with the city's noise
ordinance. Public address systems shall not be permitted
unless it can be demonstrated that such noise will not
violate the city's noise ordinance.

Gra ti removal

Gra ti shall be removed within 24 hours of noti cation.

Ancillary sales

Ancillary outdoor sales not expressly permitted by the
governing zoning ordinance shall be prohibited. Retail sales
permitted by the governing zoning ordinance shall be
allowed within an enclosed building.

3.

Request for Correction. With the exception of graffiti, all city requests for corrections to violations of the development
operational standards listed above shall be completed within thirty (30) days of notification.

E.

Compliance Program for Nonconforming Uses.
1.

Where used car lot uses were legally existing uses on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, and are
not in conformity with the development and operational standards of this section, it is the intent and purpose of this
section to declare such use to be nonconforming (including existing used car lot uses which are located in zones or
specific plan areas which do not allow such uses), for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community.

2.

All uses rendered nonconforming with the development and operational standards shall be in compliance with the
provisions of this section by January 1, 2001, unless an extension, minor deviation variance or variance is requested and
granted by the planning division, planning commission or on appeal by the city council prior to that date.

3.

The owner or occupant of property per city business license records that is determined to be a nonconforming use under
this section shall receive a notice and order, in writing, of that determination. The notice and order shall identify specific
areas of noncompliance and shall require the nonconforming use to be in compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance by January 1, 2001. The notice and order shall furthermore provide that any person having any record, title or
legal interest in the nonconforming use may request a meeting with planning staff prior to January 1, 2001, to discuss
specific development standards and other issues of concern related to the subject business, provided the request is
made in writing.

4.

The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order shall be served upon the record owner. One
copy thereof shall be served on each of the following persons or entities, if known to the city or disclosed for public
records.
a.

The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or person or entity that has a lien or encumbrance of record;

b.

The owner or holder of any lease of record (business owner);

c.

The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to any building or land which is employed in the
nonconforming use;

d.

The failure of the city to serve any person required under this subsection to be served shall not invalidate any
proceeding under this section as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or
obligation imposed on him or her by the provisions of this section.

5.

Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto by first-class mail, a copy of such notice
and order, to each such person at the address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as
known to the city from business license records. If no address of any such person so appears, or is known to the city,
then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person at the address of the lot or building
involved in the proceeding. The failure of any such person to receive such notice and order shall not affect the validity of
any proceeding under this section.

263/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

6.

Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by written declaration, under penalty of pe
by persons effecting such service, declaring time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affix
the notice and order and retained by city staff.

7.

Any person entitled to notice and order herein, may before December 1, 2000, request an extension of the compliance
program date. Request for extension shall be in writing to the economic development director or designee, and shall
contain the following information:
a.

A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the persons requesting the hearing ("applicant") in the
nonconforming use;

8.

b.

A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the grounds for an extension of the compliance date;

c.

The signatures of all appellants and their official mailing addresses.

The economic development director or designee shall consider requests for extensions of the compliance program
pursuant to this chapter. The city shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the person requesting the extension,
with a copy to be retained by the city. If approved, the length of such extensions shall be at the discretion of the
economic development director or designee but shall not exceed six months.

9.

A variance or minor deviation variance if applicable, may be applied for to deviate from any of the development
standards contained in this section pursuant to Section .590 of the zoning ordinance. The planning commission and/or
economic development director or designee shall consider each application on a case-by-case basis.

10.

All used car lot uses deemed to be in compliance with this section shall continue to conform with the governing
development and operational standards.

F.

City Action for Noncompliance. If any applicant or property owner fails to comply with the compliance program and
development and operational standards set forth in this section, they shall be subject to enforcement action, including but not
limited to, revocation of business license, citations and court action.

G.

Infraction or Misdemeanor. A violation of any provision(s) of Section .5809-16 shall be an infraction or misdemeanor in
compliance with enforcement of the zoning ordinance.

H.

Partial Invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of this section shall be determined to be invalid, the remaining
portions which can be separated from the invalid unenforceable provisions shall continue in full force and effect.

(Ord. No. 3878, § 10.)

Sec. .5809-17. - Multi-family residential property standards.
A.

Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to enhance multiple-family residential units and improving the quality of life
for all citizens of Pomona by protecting surrounding properties and their values through consideration of aesthetics, property
maintenance, security, safety and compatibility.

B.

Applicability. This section shall apply to all multiple-family residential complexes including conforming and nonconforming
uses unless otherwise stated. Multiple-family residential complexes shall include all projects in which two or more attached
dwelling units are located. Multiple-family residential projects may be rental units or owner-occupied.

C.

Nonconforming Uses. Multiple-family residential complexes shall be deemed nonconforming if they fail to meet any of the
development and operational standards contained herein and/or any other applicable development requirements or design
policy of the city including but not limited to those criteria contained in the zoning ordinance and/or applicable specific plans.

D.

Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to all multiple-family residential development of 4
or more units:
1.

Trash Facilities. Multiple-family residential developments shall comply with trash and recycling storage areas pursuant to
Section .503-C of the zoning ordinance. Properties which are unable to provide trash facilities due to property constraints
(e.g., size, shape and topography) may apply for a minor deviation variance pursuant to Section .560-J or a determination
of infeasibility pursuant to Subsection F-11 of this section. A site plan shall be prepared and submitted by the applicant
demonstrating that the subject property is unable to provide the required trash facilities.

2.

Security Lighting. All parking lot areas and walkways shall have a minimum lighting standard of 1 foot-candle power. All
exterior lighting shall be shielded to minimize the impact across property lines or into habitable portions of individual
units wherever possible. A site plan and photometric plan shall be submitted to the planning division for approval. Bare
264/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

bulbs shall not be permitted.
3.

Parking Lot Areas. All parking lot areas shall be maintained free of significant cracks and other similar damage. Parking
lots, drive aisles and driveways shall be constructed of an improved surface (asphalt, concrete, etc.) consistent with the
requirements of the governing Uniform Building Code. Vehicle parking on unimproved surfaces shall be prohibited.

4.

Circulation.
a.

Unless otherwise determined to be infeasible, each site shall control public access to and from the site by providing
safety gates or limiting the flow of traffic to one way subject to the approval of the planning division.

b.

Within the complex wherever feasible posting speed limits, speed bumps or other traffic calming measures shall be
employed to reduce vehicle speed.

5.

Mailboxes. Property owners shall be required to provide mailboxes with individual locks to prevent theft of mail or
located in a secure area as determined by the economic development director or designee.

E.

Operational Standards. The following operational standards shall apply to all multiple-family residential development unless
stated otherwise:
1.

Occupancy Limits.
a.

The following occupancy limits shall apply to prevent overcrowding conditions: Two (2) persons per each living or
sleeping roam, consistent with Pomona housing authority occupancy standards.

b.

When a manager's unit is provided, a sign shall be posted on the premises, within a rental office or in close
proximity to the manager's unit which states these occupancy limits. Tenants which exceed the permitted
occupancy in excess of 14 days within a 6 month period shall be subject to eviction.

2.

Condition of Existing Buildings/Fences/Walls/Garages and Accessory Structures. The following situations shall be
corrected immediately:
a.

Damage to structures including but not limited to, cracked stucco, wood siding, window framing, and other
conditions related to the physical condition of the building.

b.

Broken windows, screens, doors, railings, stairs, porches and balconies.

c.

Any condition which the chief building official could deem a structure(s) to be a threat to the health, safety and
general welfare of the community.

d.

Damage to existing roofing or wall materials which could cause leaks.

e.

Deteriorated/damaged fences including but not limited to, block walls, wrought iron and chain link fencing in
disrepair.

f.
3.

All graffiti shall be removed within 24 hours of notification.

Property Maintenance.
a.

Prohibited Conditions. The type and nature of prohibited conditions include (e.g., keeping or depositing on,
scattering over, or allowing to exist on the premises any of the following:
(1)

Neglected or improperly maintained landscaping and site improvements (e.g., grass, ground cover, hedges,
shrubs, and trees) in conflict with the provisions of Section .503-L (Landscape/Irrigation). This shall include
dead, overgrown, or weed infested vegetation, or vegetation dying as a result of physical damage, disease,
insect infestation, or lack of water, and any required landscaping removed without proper city approval;

(2)

Debris, junk, lumber, trash, shopping carts, or salvaged materials visible at ground level from a public street,
alley, or adjoining property;

(3)

Garbage, trash, or refuse bins, boxes, cans or other containers stored for more than 24 hours on the public
right-of-way or within the required front or side yards;

(4)

Abandoned, discarded, or unused cabinets, freezers, furniture, refrigerators, sinks, stoves, toilets, or other
household structures or equipment on the subject site;

(5)

Construction equipment or machinery of any type or description, parked or stored on a residential property
when the equipment is visible to the general public, except while construction, demolition, or excavation
operations covered by an active building permit are in effect on the subject, or immediately adjoining,
property;
265/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(6)

Clothing, laundry, linens, rugs, towels, tarps, and other similar materials hung on bushes, fences, railings,
ropes, trees, structures, or walls in the front or side yards or visible from the front or side property lines;

b.

Public Nuisance. All structures, and the land upon which the structures are located in the city that is maintained in a
condition that results in the following, shall be deemed a public nuisance and a violation of the zoning ordinance. A
public nuisance:

c.

(1)

Is detrimental to the property of others;

(2)

Is a hazardous, inappropriate, and/or unsightly condition; and/or

(3)

Causes a reduction in the value of adjoining properties.

Nuisance Prohibited. A person who owns, maintains, or possesses a structure or land in a condition identified
above, shall not allow the nuisance condition to exist.

d.

Maintenance of Laundry Facilities. The property owner shall maintain existing laundry facilities in good working
order.

4.

On-Site Manager Required.
a.

All multiple-family residential complexes of eight (8) or more units shall have an on-site residential manager
appointed by the property owner.

b.

An on-site manager shall be an individual(s) who occupies a dwelling unit at the subject multi-family residential
development. It is strongly recommended that property owners/management companies hire on-site managers
with basic maintenance skills.

c.

Within a condominium development, a homeowners association (HOA) may appoint an individual to act as the onsite manager requirement. An officer or representative from the HOA shall be designated as the responsible party
for emergency purposes.

d.

The manager's unit shall be clearly designated with a sign on his/her front door (for apartments only).

e.

The manager or representative (for HOAs) shall meet with and receive training from the Pomona police department
abatement coordinator relating to his/her responsibility to screen prospective tenants, reporting crimes to the
police department, eviction process etc.

f.

As part of the business license process, the landlord and manager shall acknowledge the reading of this section and
other related materials by signing a statement reflecting this fact.

g.
5.

Encourage the property manager to provide tenants with a copy of the multi-family housing ordinance.

Contact Person. All property owners of multiple-family residential units shall provide, on a yearly basis at the time of the
business license renewal, the Pomona police department with an emergency contact person (preferably an on-site
manager). Property owners, managers and residents are encouraged to participate in local and regional crime
prevention programs.

6.

Crime Free and Drug Free Environment. Property owners/landlords should contribute to the goal of maintaining their
multiple-family residential complexes in a drug and crime free state as determined by the Pomona police department. If
multiple-family residential complexes are deemed not in compliance with this provision, the city may, with reasonable
notice to property owner suggest corrective action including but not limited to providing additional lighting, posting of no
loitering signs, eviction of tenants and as a last resort, requiring security guards.

7.

Tenant Screening and Agreement.
a.

All property owners/landlords shall be strongly encouraged to screen tenants through credit checks, public court
records for criminal convictions and evictions and verification of prior occupancy.

b.

In addition, all property owners/landlords shall be strongly encouraged to have tenants sign, an addendum to their
lease/rental agreement stating that tenants will contribute to the goal of making the property drug and crime free
and shall not commit crime or use/manufacture/sell drugs on the premises. The original addendum shall be
maintained with the manager's file and a copy shall be provided to the tenant.

8.

Public Telephones Prohibited. Public pay telephones shall be prohibited at all multi-family residential complexes except
within the manager's unit or rental office.

9.

Trash Pick-Up. Adequate trash pick-up shall be provided for each multi-family residential complex. If the economic
266/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

development director or designee determines that service is inadequate, the property management shall be informed
and required to correct any deficiencies which may include but not be limited to, providing additional trash receptacles
and increasing the number of times per week that trash is picked-up and removed from the premises.
10.

Property Management. If the economic development director or designee determines that the management of a
property is inadequate in any respect, the property owner may be notified of specific inadequacies and provided a list of
corrective measures to rectify the condition, including if necessary, changing the management company. All corrective
actions shall be completed within thirty (30) days of notification.

11.

Physical Security Design.
a.

Garages. To ensure that garages are not used by unauthorized individuals, all garages shall be able to be secured.
Doors and locks shall be operable at all times.

b.

Alleys. To orient police and fire personnel when responding to emergency situations, apartment complexes that are
located adjacent to an alley shall have the addresses of the units permanently displayed on garages, walls or fences
that border the alley per approval of the city. The addresses shall be in typeface no less than six inches high.

c.

Wall Landscaping. To discourage easy access for graffiti vandals, if the economic development director or designee
determines that a primary or accessory structure, fence or wall is a high risk area for graffiti, he/she may require
corrective action to reduce the potential for future graffiti including but not limited to, the addition of trees, shrubs,
climbing vines or other graffiti reduction measures.

d.

Landscape Pruning. To permit residents and emergency personnel a clear view of the site and eliminate potential
hiding spaces, low landscaping, groundcover and shrubbery, within the site shall be pruned so that it does not
exceed thirty (30) inches in height. Trees shall be pruned so that the lower branches are a minimum of seven feet
above the ground. Perimeter landscaping, vines, and landscaping located directly adjacent to a wall shall not be
subject to these requirements.

12.

Request for Correction. All city requests for corrections to violations of the development and operational standards shall
be completed within thirty (30) days of notification unless stated otherwise.

F.

Compliance Program for Nonconforming Uses.
1.

Where uses were legally existing uses on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, and are not in
conformity with the development and operational standards contained in this section, it is the intent and purpose of this
section to declare such use to be nonconforming, for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community.

2.

All uses rendered nonconforming by this section shall be in compliance with the provisions of this section by January 1,
2001, unless an extension, minor deviation variance or variance is requested and granted by the planning division,
planning commission or city council.

3.

The owner of property and management company (per city business license records) that is determined to be a
nonconforming use under this section shall receive a notice and order, in writing, of that determination. The notice and
order shall state the grounds for the decision and shall require the nonconforming use to be in compliance with the
provisions of this section by January 1, 2001. The notice and order shall furthermore provide that any person having any
record, title or legal interest in the nonconforming use may request a meeting with planning staff prior to January 1, 2001
to discuss specific development and operational standards and other issues of concern related to the subject property or
use, provided the request is made in writing.

4.

The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order shall be served upon the record owner as
shown on business license records. One copy thereof shall be served to each of the following persons, if known to the
city or disclosed for public records.
a.

The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or has a lien or encumbrance of record;

b.

The failure of the city to serve such notice and order to any person required under this subsection shall not
invalidate any proceeding under this section as to any other person duly mailed or relieve any such person from
any duty or obligation imposed on him or her by the provisions of this section.

5.

Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto by first-class mail, a copy of such notice
and order, to each such person at the address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as
267/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

known to the city from business license records. If no address of any such person so appears, or is known to the city,
then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person at the address of the lot or building
involved in the proceeding. The failure of any such person to receive such notice and order shall not affect the validity of
any proceeding under this section.
6.

Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by written declaration, under penalty of
perjury, executed by persons effecting such service, declaring time, date and manner in which service was made. The
declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the notice and order and retained by city staff.

7.

Any person entitled to notice and order herein may, before December 1, 2000, request an extension of the compliance
program date. Request for extension shall be in writing to the economic development director or designee, and shall
contain the following information.
a.

A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the persons requesting the hearing ("applicant") in the
nonconforming use;

8.

b.

A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the grounds for an extension of the compliance date;

c.

The signatures of all appellants and their official mailing addresses.

The economic development director or designee shall consider requests for extensions of the compliance program
pursuant to this chapter. The city shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting business, and shall render
all decisions and findings in writing to the person requesting the extension, with a copy to be retained by the city. If
approved, the length of such extension shall be at the discretion of the economic development director or designee but
shall not exceed six months.

9.

A variance or minor deviation variance if applicable, may be applied for to deviate from any of the development
standards contained in this section pursuant to Section .590 of the zoning ordinance. The planning commission and/or
economic development director or designee shall consider each application on a case-by-case basis.

10.

All applicable uses deemed to be in compliance with this section shall continue to conform with the governing
development and operational standards and shall demonstrate such compliance on an annual basis via a letter of
compliance.

11.

A property owner or designated representative of a legally existing multi-family residential development as of January 1,
2001, may apply for a determination of infeasibility if a development standard contained in this section cannot be met.
The determination of infeasibility shall be applicable to development standards only and shall be subject to the
procedure described below:
a.

The economic development director or designee may approve a determination of infeasibility if findings can be
made to justify deviation or elimination of the development standard due to the physical characteristics of the
subject property.

b.

The economic development director or designee shall have the discretion to either eliminate the development
standard, allow a deviation from the development standard or deny the request.

c.

The decision of the economic development director or designee may be appealed to the planning commission
within 5 days of the decision.

d.

An appeal of the decision made by the economic development director or designee shall be subject to the
governing appeal fee.

e.
G.

An application for a determination of infeasibility shall not be approved based on economic hardship.

Infraction or Misdemeanor. A violation of any provision(s) of Section .5809-17 shall be an infraction or misdemeanor in
compliance with enforcement of the zoning ordinance.

H.

City Action for Noncompliance. If any applicant or property owner fails to comply with the compliance program and
development and operational standards set forth in this section, they shall be subject to enforcement action, including but not
limited to, revocation of business license, citations and court action.

I.

Partial Invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of this section shall be determined to be invalid, the remaining
portions which can be separated from the invalid unenforceable provisions shall continue in full force and effect.

(Ord. No. 3879, § 7.)

268/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. .5809-18. - Senior citizen housing overlay district.
A.

Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the section is to facilitate the development of quality affordable housing for senior citizens
while at the same time enhancing the appearance and value of the property that is to be developed. The provisions of the
section are intended as follows:
1)

To provide various incentives that are consistent with the State of California Density Bonus, to developers of senior
citizen housing projects;

2)

To ensure that adequate affordable housing is provided to very low and moderate income senior citizens consistent with
the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) dictated by the State of California, Department of Housing and
Community Development;

3)

That the senior citizen housing projects are superior in functional design, quality of construction, appearance, and
operational standards;

4)

That senior citizen housing developments are compatible with the surrounding community and complementary to the
surrounding land uses.

B.

Establishment—The Senior Citizen Housing Overlay District may be applied in Combination with underlying zoning districts via
the Change of Zone Application Process. A Senior Citizen Housing Overlay District shall be indicated in the Zoning Map by the
letters "SH" after the reference letters identifying the base district.

C.

Target Population—The target population group served by the units constructed in the Senior Housing Overlay District are
senior citizens who meet the following criteria:

For tenants, residents or occupants who are married or registered domestic partners, one shall be 55 years or older.

D.

1.

In single person households, the occupant must be 55 or older;

2.

In multiple household all residents must be 55 or older except as provided above;

3.

For married or domestic partners at least one member must be 55 or older.

Applicability—The Senior Citizen Housing Overlay District requires the presence of certain conditions before it can be attached
to a specific parcel of land. In order to adequately and satisfactorily serve the target population that this district has been
created to serve, any proposed project must meet the following conditions and features.
1.

Appropriate commercial or residential base district.

2.

Size - The minimum size lot for a senior citizen housing project shall be two acres

3.

Surrounding area - Land uses in the immediate area, current and projected must be compatible with the living
environment required by senior citizens and must be free of health safety and noise problems.

E.

Development Incentives.

A ordability

Density

Parking Requirement

269/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Consistent

40 unit per acre

with the

.7 parking spaces per dwelling unit + 1 guest space
for every 10 units

most recently
adopted
percentage
of the
Regional
Housing
Needs
Assessment
for low
income
individuals in
the Housing
Element of
the General
Plan
In

50 units per acre

compliance

.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit + 1 guest space
for every 10 units

with the
State of
California
requirements
for a Density
Bonus
Project

F.

Standards.
1.

Site character.
a.

Existing amenities (e.g., views, mature trees, etc.) that are unique to the site should be preserved and incorporated
into the project's design whenever possible.

b.

Structures that are historic or are otherwise distinctive because of their age, cultural significance, or unique
architectural style, as determined by the Council, should be preserved and incorporated into development
proposals.

c.

When a senior housing project adjoining residential and commercial uses can mutually benefit from connection
rather than separation, appropriate connective elements (e.g., walkways) should be provided.

2.

Site planning.
a.

Site access. Developments with more than 200 parking stalls that are located on arterial highways should
coordinate access points with median openings and existing driveways on the opposite side of the roadway. Final
locations shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Development Services Manager. Developments with
more than 200 parking stalls, that are located on arterial highways maybe required to provide deceleration lanes
adjacent to their major entry.

b.

Building setbacks.
270/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

1.

Frontage - The building setback for property line adjacent to street frontage shall be 20 feet.

2.

All other property lines—all other setbacks shall be ½ the height of the building wall which fronts the subject
property line.

c.

Building design layout.
i.

The Minimum Dwelling Size for each unit shall be as follows:

studios—475 square feet
1 Bedroom—525 square feet
Bedroom—700 square feet
ii.

Multiple buildings in a single project should provide a functional relationship with one another to achieve a
"village" scale by use of the following techniques:

3.

(a)

Cluster buildings around open plaza areas or courtyards, not parking lots.

(b)

Provide open plaza areas and courtyards with landscaping and other pedestrian amenities.

(c)

Provide convenient pedestrian circulation between buildings, and open parking areas.

(d)

Link buildings together visually using trellis structures, arcades, and enhanced paving.

Architectural style. No specific architectural style or design theme is required. A variety of architectural characteristics
should be considered to add to the City's overall image. However, while variety in design is generally encouraged,
compatibility of new projects with their surroundings should also be a priority.

4.

Design consistency.
a.

Building design should demonstrate a consistent use of colors, materials, and detailing throughout all elevations of
the building. Piecemeal embellishment should be avoided.

b.

Elevations that do not directly face a street should not be ignored or receive only minimal architectural treatment.
Each facade should be designed for public view and should be appropriately landscaped.

5.

Form and mass. Designs should provide a sense of human scale and proportion. Structures should be designed to avoid
a "box-like," impersonal appearance by use of the following techniques:
a.

Facade and roof articulation. Separations, changes in plane and height, and the inclusion of elements including
balconies, porches, arcades, dormers, and cross gables mitigate the barracks-like quality of flat walls and roofs of
excessive length. Secondary hipped or gabled roofs covering the entire mass of a building are preferable to flat
roofs, mansard roofs, or pitched roof segments applied on only some portions of the building.

b.

Provide architectural detail through the use of columns, three-dimensional decorative cornice bands, recessed
entries and windows, and awnings and canopies.

c.

Provide full roofs with substantial overhangs.

d.

Incorporate decorative parapets where roof overhangs are not provided

e.

Structures containing 3 or more attached dwellings in a row should incorporate at least one of the following:
(i)

For each dwelling unit, at least one architectural projection not less than 2 feet from the wall plane and not
less than 4 feet wide should be provided.

(ii)
6.

A change in wall plane of at least 3 feet for a distance of at least 12 feet for each 2 units.

Materials. Exterior materials should be very durable and require low maintenance. Piecemeal embellishment and
frequent changes in materials should be avoided. Exterior wall colors should harmonize with the site and surrounding
buildings.

7.

Colors.
a.

Facade colors should be neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black, or
fluorescent colors is prohibited.

b.

Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors.

c.

The transition between base and accent colors should relate to changes in building materials or the change of
building surface planes. Colors should not meet or change without some physical change or definition to the
271/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

surface plane.
d.

The blending of compatible colors in a single facade or composition is a good way to add character and variety,
while reducing, or breaking up the lines of a building.

e.

Unusual patterns and color schemes should be avoided.

f.

Color and finishes on building exteriors of all elevations of a building should be coordinated to provide a total
continuity of design

8.

Entries. Entries should be protected from the elements and should create a focus and sense of entry for the building by
use of at least two of the following:

9.

a.

Wall recesses.

b.

Roof overhangs.

c.

Canopies and awnings.

d.

Arcades.

Balconies, porches, and patios. The incorporation of balconies, porches, and recessed patios is encouraged for both
practical and aesthetic values. These elements should be integrated into structures to break up large wall masses, offset
floor setbacks, and add human scale to buildings.

10.

Dwelling unit access. The use of long, monotonous access balconies and/or corridors that provide access to 5 or more
units should be avoided. Instead, access points to units should be clustered in groups of 4 or less. The use of distinctive
architectural elements and materials to denote prominent entrances is strongly encouraged.

11.

Exterior stairs. Simple, clean, bold projections of stairways are encouraged to complement the architectural massing and
form of the structure. Thin-looking, open metal, prefabricated stairs are discouraged.

12.

Mechanical and utility equipment. All mechanical equipment, either mounted on the roof, or ground, should be screened
from view. Utility meters and equipment should be placed in locations that are not exposed to view from the street.
Screening devices shall be compatible with the architecture and color of the adjacent structures.

13.

Compatible roof shapes. Rooflines of buildings should be designed to be compatible with surrounding building forms.
Clashes in roof styles should be avoided in multifamily/cluster developments. The objective in determining roof shape is
to establish a visual order to building clusters.

14.

Roofing materials. Roofing materials shall consist of tile or simulated tile with a fire rating of Class A.

15.

Support facilities. Support structures (e.g., laundry facilities, recreation buildings, and sales/lease offices) should be
consistent with the architectural design of the overall complex.

16.

Solid waste bins. Trash bins should be fully enclosed with a masonry enclosure, wood simulated gates and a trellis roof.
The enclosure shall be finished with colors and materials that are consistent with the rest of the structures. Enclosures
should be screened with landscaping on their most visible sides.

17.

Utility and mechanical equipment.
a.

All mechanical equipment (e.g., compressors, air conditioners, heating and ventilating equipment, chillers, stand
pipes, solar collectors, etc.) shall be concealed from view. Screening devices should be compatible with the
architecture and color of the adjacent buildings.

b.

Mechanical equipment should not be located on the roof of a structure unless the equipment can be screened by
building elements that are designed for that purpose and that are an integral part of the building design.

c.

Utility equipment (e.g., electric and gas meters, electrical panels, and junction boxes) should be located in utility
rooms within the structure or utility cabinets with exterior access.

18.

Service areas. Service areas shall be functional, appropriately screened and isolated from living areas and public right of
way.

19.

Laundry facilities. One washer and dryer shall be provided for every 20 dwelling units.

20.

Elevator. For structures 2 stories or more in height, a minimum of one elevator shall be provided. Additional elevators
may be required based on the design of structures. The elevator shall be centrally located and in close proximity to
entries.

272/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

21.

Minimum dwelling amenities. At a minimum, each unit shall be provided with the following amenities:
a.

Central heating and air conditioning;

b.

Built-in dishwashers;

c.

Fully enclosed, securable storage closet not less than 100 CF in area;

d.

Clothes washer and dryer electrical and gas hookups for standard washer and dryer appliances, and a
bachelor/studio unit may provide facilities for stackable washer/dryer appliances;

e.
22.

Call system with capability of 24 hour monitoring.

Driveway approaches. Driveway approaches serving senior citizen housing developments shall be delineated with
enhanced paving treatment, such as interlocking pavers, textured and color; pigmented concrete, or stamped concrete.

23.

Parking and circulation.
a.

Project entries. Project entries should provide the resident and visitor with an overview to the project. They should
provide an open window with landscaping, recreational facilities, and/or project directories. Special attention should
be given to hardscape and landscape treatments to enhance the overall image of the project.

b.

The principal vehicular access should be through an entry drive rather than a parking drive. Colored, textured
paving treatment at entry drives together with lush landscaping strongly is encouraged.

c.

If parking attached to the residential structures is not provided, dispersed parking courts are the desired
alternative.
(i)

A parking court should not consist of more than 2 double-loaded parking aisles (bays) adjacent to each other.

(ii)

The length of a parking court should not exceed 14 stalls. Parking courts should be separated from each other
by dwelling units or by a landscaped buffer not less than 20 feet wide.

(iii)
d.

Parking areas should be visible from the residential units, which use them to the greatest degree possible.

Off-Street Parking Accessibility. Parking courts shall be located within 150 from the dwelling unit (front or rear door)
for which the parking space is provided.

24.

Pedestrian access.
a.

Drop-off points (i.e., wider aisles) should be provided near major building entries and plaza areas for projects with
more than 50,000 square feet of building area.

b.

Parking areas should be designed so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars in parking aisles. The project
should be designed to minimize the need for the pedestrian to cross parking aisles and landscape islands to reach
building entries.

c.

All projects should provide a clear connection between the on-site pedestrian circulation system and the off-site
public sidewalk.
(i)

Parking lots with over 200 stalls should provide a well-defined pedestrian walkway from the public sidewalk to
the main on-site pedestrian circulation system. The walkway may be painted; however on large projects, a
raised sidewalk may be required.

(ii)

When a pedestrian circulation route crosses a vehicle circulation aisle adjacent to a building entrance, the
pedestrian crossing should be emphasized by extending the sidewalk to the back of the parking spaces (if they
exist) and by painting a crosswalk through the traffic aisle.

25.

Landscaping. Landscaping should serve to frame, soften and embellish the quality of the environment; buffer units from
noise or undesirable views; visually reduce or break up building mass, break up large expanses of parking and hardscape
and provide shading and climatic cooling of adjacent units.
a.

All areas not covered by structures, drive aisles, parking or hardscape should be appropriately landscaped.

b.

Landscape planters minimum 25-feet in width shall be provided adjacent along portions of proposed parcels that
front a public street. Said planter shall consist of turf and also include the following:
(i)

6″ high berms;

(ii)

Mature trees (36″ box or larger) planted 20 foot on center;

(iii)

Accent landscaping at driveway entries including developed trees of a species which is tall in height.
273/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

c.

Corner lots shall include accent landscaping and a focal point such as waterfalls or other hardscape and perennials wit
landscape area.

26.

Recreational facilities. Recreational facilities shall be provided throughout the facility. The recreational facilities shall
consist of open or enclosed areas for residents of the facility to congregate, for recreation and leisure. The following
standards shall be utilized for recreational facilities:
a.

The design and orientation of these areas should take advantage of available sunlight and should be sheltered from
the noise and traffic of adjacent street or other incompatible uses.

b.

Each recreational facility shall have a focal point. The focal point may consist of, but need not be limited to, water
fountains, landscape planters, monuments, waterways, ponds, artwork, trellises or gazebos. The focal point of all
recreational facilities shall complement one another by maintaining a common theme, consistent furnishing and
signage

c.

Recreational facilities shall be categorized as either "Major Recreational Facilities" or "Minor Recreational Facilities."
Major and Minor recreational facilities shall be designed to complement one another and be physically linked to
one another by pedestrian walkways and directional signage. Major and minor recreational facilities shall be
provided throughout senior citizen projects as stipulated in the following table:

Major
Recreation

0-80 units

80-150 units

150-200 units

200-250 units

250+ units

1

1

2

2

3 + 1 per every 100
units

Facilities. A
major
recreation
facility is
intended to
be a
signi cant
recreation
node or
focal point
for
residents,
and include
recreation
buildings
swimming
pools,
tennis
courts, spas
or saunas
and other
such
amenities
requiring
signi cant
investment
274/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

and
appropriate
to serve
project
residents,
as
determined
by the City.
The
minimum
area for a
major
recreational
facility shall
be 2,000
square feet
Minor
Recreation

2

2

3

3

4 + 1 per every 100
units

Facilities. A
minor
recreation
facility is
intended to
augment
the variety
and
availability
of
recreation
facilities,
and include
rest areas,
picnic and
barbecue
areas,
gazebos
and other
such
amenities
requiring a
less
signi cant
investment
275/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

than major
facilities
and
appropriate
to serve
project
residents,
as
determined
by the City.
The
minimum
area for a
minor
recreational
facility shall
be 625
square feet.

27.

Private open space. Each dwelling unit within a multiple unit residential development shall be provided a private open
space area, free and clear of any attached or detached accessory structures, as follows:
a.

Ground level units shall be provided a 100 Square feet private yard at grade level, with a minimum interior
dimension of 10 feet.

b.
28.

Upper level units shall be provided a 100 SF balcony, with a minimum interior dimension of 8 Feet.

Pedestrian Paths. Pedestrian paths shall be clearly separated from vehicular traffic and be designed so as to take
advantage of topography, views, and the natural features of the site. Furthermore, the path system should link buildings,
major and minor recreational areas, parking areas, entrances to the development and off-site connections to nearby
public transportation and surrounding commercial establishments.

29.

Lighting. Lighting should provide illumination for the security and safety of on-site areas, such as parking, recreational
facilities, building entries, and pathways. The following standards shall be utilized.
a.

The design of light fixtures and their structural supports should be architecturally compatible with the main,
structures on the site. Light fixtures should be architecturally integrated into the design of a structure.

b.

The location of light fixtures should correspond to anticipated use. Lighting of pedestrian ways should illuminate
changes in grade, path intersections, staging areas and any other uses along the movement path that, if left
unlighted, would create an unsafe situation.

c.

All lighting fixtures must be shielded to confine light spread on-site.

d.

Night lighting of buildings is encouraged, but should be accomplished in a selective manner, avoiding overall
building illumination that produces an undesirable look. Night lighting of buildings may be used to highlight special
building features, emphasize repeated or decorative features, and use the juxtaposition of light and shadow to
articulate the building façade.

30.

Public transportation amenities.
a.

On site—Sheltered bus stop with canopy.

b.

Off site—In cases when a public bus stop is located within the frontage of a proposed property, a bus stop
enclosure or cover shall be provided with architecture consistent with project.

31.

Security considerations.
276/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

a.

Provide clear, unobstructed sightlines from entries to the street or parking lot.

b.

Provide clear sightlines to outdoor open areas from doorways and windows.

c.

Light exterior spaces and internal common spaces with energy-efficient, vandal-proof lamps and fixtures. Light
fixtures that provide warm light should be used. They appear noninstitutional and increase the feeling of ownership
as well as provide for visibility.

d.

Locate laundry facilities in an area where they can be observed and where access can be effectively restricted.

e.

Create privacy for the ground-level units by using landscaping or fencing to buffer them from the street or parking.
Do not place landscaping too close to windows as this may provide a place for an intruder to hide.

f.

Make paths to the entry, the parking, and the trash deposit area well-defined, well-lighted, and free from dense
shrubs.

g.

Eliminate hidden recesses in hallways, entryways, and stairways. Ensure that there are no entrapment areas
between buildings.

h.

Design common spaces to encourage a sense of belonging. Design common open spaces to relate to a discrete
number of units so that these spaces become "their" recreational area.

i.

Define the transition from the public street to the building so that the yard next to the building reads as belonging
to the building. Landscaped gardens and see-through fences create the sense of ownership and boundaries without
compromising visibility.

j.
G.

Provide peepholes, strike plates, and deadbolts in unit doors.

Maintenance.
a.

Continued good appearance depends on the extent and quality of maintenance. Materials and finishes shall be selected
for their durability and wear, as well as for their beauty. Proper measures shall be taken for protection against weather,
neglect, damage, and abuse.

b.

Provision for washing and cleaning buildings and structures, and control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in the
design. Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate leaves, dirt, and trash shall be avoided.

H.

Affordability.
1.

At least 30% of the dwelling units developed shall be available at affordable housing cost to persons and families of low
and moderate income.

2.

At least 40% of the 30% described above shall be available at affordable housing cost to very low-income households.

3.

The restrictions must remain available for the longer of 30 years or the period of land use controls established in the
redevelopment plan for the project area where the development is located, if within a project area. The City and/or the
Redevelopment Agency of the City of Pomona shall be named specifically in the Covenants, Conditions, & Restrictions
(CC&R's) having the right to enforce the affordability restrictions.

4.

The City reserves the right to require more stringent low-moderate income requirements under circumstances where the
City or the Redevelopment Agency deems that the City/Agency has participated in financially assisting the development.

5.

The City Manager's office and Planning Division shall agree to the selected management firm based on experience and
services provided.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 5.)

Sec. .5809-19. - Cyber cafes.
A.

Applicability.

Cyber cafes, as defined in Subsection B, are permitted in the C-3 (General Commercial), C-C (Community Shopping Center
Commercial), and C-4 (Highway Commercial) zones. Cyber cafes shall not be permitted in a specific plan area unless explicitly listed as a
permissible use. All cyber cafes shall comply with the development and operational standards outlined in Subsections C and D of this
section.
B.

Definitions.

277/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

"Cyber cafe" is defined as an establishment whose primary purpose is to provide computer access including, but not limited to,
access to the Internet, e-mail, video games, or computer software programs that are networked (via LAN or WAN, which functions as a
client/server program, or via other electronic devices) in exchange for money or other compensation. "Cyber cafe" is synonymous with
"PC cafe," "Internet cafe," "cyber center," and similar terms, but does not include "cyber learning center."
"Cyber learning center" is defined as an establishment that provides computer access and is operated by the City of Pomona, a
school district, a college district, or a university, or is operated by a non-profit organization without monetary charge.
C.

Development Standards.
1.

Each cyber cafe shall conform to all property development standards of the zoning district in which it is located.

2.

Each cyber cafe shall provide vehicle parking as required by Section .503-H (Off-Street Parking) of the Zoning Ordinance.

3.

Each cyber cafe shall provide bicycle parking at the rate of one (1) space for every four (4) computers. Bicycle parking
facilities shall consist of sturdy metal racks to which bicycles can be secured in a manner that will deter theft. Bicycle
parking facilities shall be provided near the main entrance of the building in a location that does not block pedestrian or
vehicle circulation and that is highly visible from public areas.

D.

Operating Standards.
1.

Cyber cafes shall be closed to the public between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.

2.

A waiting area with a minimum of one (1) seat for every four (4) computer workstations shall be provided inside a cyber
cafe for customers waiting to use a computer. Outside waiting and seating areas are prohibited.

3.

Minors (under 18 years of age) shall not be permitted to enter or remain in a cyber cafe from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, or after 10:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday. Notice of these hours of restriction shall be posted
at the building entrance in lettering at least two (2) inches high.

Exception: The above daytime hours of restriction shall not apply to minors during school vacations or holidays established by
any public school district or private school operating in the City of Pomona, or to minors who are accompanied by a parent or
guardian (when the guardian is able to show proof of guardianship).
4.

There shall be a minimum of one (1) employee over the age of twenty-one (21) managing a cyber cafe whenever it is
open to the public. If a cyber cafe has more than thirty (30) computers, an additional employee over the age of eighteen
(18) must be on the premises. During working hours, each employee must wear a badge providing the business name
and the employee's first and last name.

Exception: The above requirement for an additional employee shall not apply to periods that public schools are in session,
generally, Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
5.

The Chief of Police is authorized to require the owner/operator to provide a California licensed, uniformed security guard
on the business premises during specified hours of operation in the event that the number of calls for service related to
homicide, assault, gang activity, weapons offences, and/or juvenile crime exceed an average of two (2) calls per month for
any three (3) month period.

In addition to the foregoing, in the event that the Chief of Police determines that public safety at any particular cyber cafe, or
within one-mile therefrom, necessitates greater security at that cyber cafe, then the Chief of Police is authorized to require a security
guard at such cyber cafes as described immediately above. In so authorizing, the Chief of Police shall produce written findings
concerning the public safety concerns necessitating the need for a security guard (whether gang activity, criminal activity, or other
public safety concerns) and describing how requiring a security guard will address these concerns.
A decision of the Chief of Police regarding a security guard may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days
following the date of the decision. All appeals shall be filed in writing with the Planning Division and the City Clerk, and shall specify
in what respect the Chief of Police committed an error of decision. Upon receipt of the written appeal, the Planning Division shall set
the matter for hearing by the City Council. The City Council may, after a public hearing, affirm, reverse, or modify the original
decision within the limits imposed by this section of the Zoning Ordinance.
Any decision of the Chief of Police to require a security guard as provided herein shall not be stayed pending appeal to the City
Council, except as may be voluntarily stayed by the Chief of Police.
278/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

6.

There shall be a camera/video surveillance system capable of delineating upon playback of the system the activity and phys
people within a cyber cafe. The system shall cover all entrances, exits, and interior spaces, except for restrooms and private
times, the system shall be maintained in good working order so as to provide for the continuous recording of video images.
recordings shall be maintained for a minimum period of seventy-two (72) hours. The system shall be subject to inspection b
time during the hours of operation for the cyber cafe.

7.

"No loitering" signs shall be posted at the front and rear of a cyber cafe.

8.

Interior lighting shall be maintained at a minimum of thirty (30) footcandles. Exterior lighting within sixty (60) feet of the
cyber cafe and within all required parking areas for the use shall be maintained at a minimum of one (1) footcandle.

9.

The owner/operator shall receive approval for an exit plan from the Fire Department. The plan shall address all
requirements of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code.

10.

The maximum occupancy shall not exceed that specified by the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code. The
occupancy limit shall be prominently posted within the cyber cafe and monitored at all times.

11.

Windows shall not be tinted or covered in any way that obstructs a clear view of the interior of the premises from the
exterior. Window blinds and/or other coverings will be allowed as needed to provide shade from direct sunlight during
daylight hours only.

12.

There shall be no pay telephones equipped to receive incoming calls installed within the enclosed portion of a cyber cafe
or any outdoor area under the control of the owner/operator.

13.

Consumption of alcohol is prohibited within the enclosed portion of a cyber cafe or any area under the control of the
owner/operator.

14.

Pool tables and skill game machines, as defined in Section .5809.5 of the Zoning Ordinance, are prohibited.

15.

Any adult entertainment is prohibited unless specifically approved pursuant to the requirements of Zoning Ordinance
Section .5809-5 and Pomona City Code Section 14.5-9.

(Ord. No. 4010, § 2.)

Sec. .5809-21. - Retail tobacco stores (smoke shops).
A.

Applicability.

Retail tobacco stores, as defined in Subsection B, are conditionally permitted in the C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial), C-2
(Neighborhood Shopping Center Commercial), C-3 (General Commercial) C-C Community Commercial, C-4 (Highway Commercial) zones.
Retail tobacco stores shall not be permitted in a specific plan area unless explicitly listed as a permissible use. All retail tobacco stores
shall comply with the development and operational standards outlined in Subsections C and D of this section.
B.

Definitions.

Retail tobacco stores for the purposes of this ordinance shall be defined as follows:
"Retail tobacco store" means a retail store where at least twenty percent of the annual gross receipts are from the sale of tobacco
products and smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
As used in the definition above, the term "tobacco product" will be defined as follows:
"Tobacco product" means any substance containing any tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco,
snuff, chewing tobacco and smokeless tobacco.
C.

Development Standards.
1.

Each retail tobacco store shall conform to all property development standards of the zoning district in which it is located.

2.

Each retail tobacco store shall provide vehicle parking as required by Section .503-H (Off-Street Parking) of the Zoning
Ordinance.

3.

Each retail tobacco store shall not be located within 1,500-feet from other such businesses, residential areas, as well as
from public or private schools and parks.

4.

Any proposed retail tobacco stores shall be subject to a Conditional Use Permit in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-C, and C-4.

279/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

D.

Operating Standards.
1.

Retail tobacco stores shall only operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

2.

No on sale or off sale of alcohol shall be permitted.

(Ord. No. 4025, § 2.)

Sec. .5809-22. - Tattoo establishments.
A.

Purpose and Intent: The general purpose and intent of the tattoo establishment regulations are to protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare by requiring that all tattoo establishments conform to Los Angeles County health and safety
regulations pertaining to tattoo parlors and to City regulations that will minimize impacts to surrounding properties.

B.

Applicability.

Tattoo parlors and facilities, as defined in Subsection C, are permitted in the C-4 (Highway Commercial) zone with approval of a
conditional use permit and subject to the development and operational standards contained in Section .5809-22 D.
The requirement for a conditional use permit shall not be applicable to exhibitions and/or trade shows involving tattoo parlors and
facilities, as defined in Section .5809-22, located in the F (Fair) Zone.
C.

Definitions.

Tattoo parlors and facilities:
Tattoo parlors and facilities shall mean any establishment at which tattooing is conducted or occurs, whether on a temporary,
interim, regular, or long-term basis.
Tattooing:
Means to insert pigment under the surface of the skin of a human being, by pricking with a needle or otherwise, to produce an
indelible mark or figure visible through the skin.
D.

Development and operational standards.
(1)

Business operating hours shall be limited to the hours 9:00 am and 10:00 pm.

(2)

The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on the premises is prohibited.

(3)

No tattoo parlor or facility shall be located within 500 feet of another tattoo parlor or facility, church, school, public park,
day care center, or community center.

(4)

All tattoo parlors and facilities, as defined in Section .5809-22C, are subject to the provisions of Los Angeles County Code
Chapter 11.36—Body Art Establishments as currently written, or as may from time to time be amended, and Los Angeles
County Code Environmental Health Regulations Part 1, Chapter 36—Body Art Regulations as currently written or as may,
from time to time, be amended.

(5)

Before issuance of a zoning clearance/business license from the City of Pomona, each person proposing to establish a
tattoo parlor or tattoo facility shall provide proof to the Planning Division that they have obtained a public health facility
permit from the County of Los Angeles.

(Ord. No. 4052, § 3.)

Sec. .5809-23. - Oak tree preservation.
A.

Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Section is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the
preservation of mature Oak trees located within the City. Such Oak trees enhance neighborhood aesthetics, provide shade, aid
in erosion control and generally enhance the quality of life.

It is the intent of this Section to establish regulations for the protection of mature Oak trees located on public and private property
that are not currently protected under existing regulations so as to retain as many of these trees as possible consistent with the
reasonable enjoyment of such property.
B.

Definitions.

280/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Deadwood - means any limbs, branches or portion of a tree that contains no green leaves during a period of the year when they
should be present.
Historic District - means any area that has been designated as a historic district pursuant to Section .5809-13 of the Zoning
Ordinance and placed on the historic register.
Historic Landmark - means any improvement or natural feature that has been designated a single historic landmark of the City of
Pomona pursuant to Section .5809-13 and placed on the historic register.
Specimen Tree - means any tree designated as a "specimen tree" pursuant to City Council Resolutions No. 62-65 and No. 73-68.
Table 1: Oaks Currently Designated as Specimen Trees

Number

Common Name

Location

Address

4

California Live Oak

Old City Hall

200 block W. Mission

1

California Live Oak

Mt. San Antonio Gardens

900 E. Harrison

yard
1

Deciduous Oak

Old City Hall

200 block W. Mission

1

Southern Live Oak

Front yard

1837 Berkshire

C.

Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall apply to Oak trees of all species that have a diameter greater than eight (8)
inches as measured 4.5 feet above the mean natural grade, are located outside of designated Historic Districts and Historic
Landmarks and have not been designated as Specimen Trees. Such Oak trees may be located on either public or private
property.

D.

Permit Process. No person shall trim, prune, cut, relocate or remove any Oak tree subject to the provisions of this Section
unless a valid Major or Minor Oak Tree Permit has been issued by the City pursuant to provisions of this Section.
1.

Major and Minor Oak Tree Permits. Minor Oak Tree Permits are subject to administrative review by the Planning
Manager and City Arborist. Major Oak Tree Permits are subject to a public hearing before the Planning Commission. Not
less than ten (10) days before the date set for the Planning Commission hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published
in a daily newspaper of general circulation and mailed to owners and occupants of property located within a radius of
four hundred (400) feet from the external boundaries of the property described in the OTP application.

Table 2 below outlines permit requirements for various project types.
Table 2: Required Oak Tree Permits (OTPs)

Project Type

Private Property

City Property

Trim one or more Oaks

Minor OTP

Exempt*

Relocate one or more Oaks

Major OTP

Major OTP

Remove one or more Oaks

Major OTP

Major OTP

Editor's note—
* Exemption applies to City Arborist initiated trimming. For additional exemptions, see Subsection E below.
281/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

Review and Recommendation by City Arborist. All applications for Major and Minor Oak Tree Permits are subject to review a
recommendation by the City Arborist before final approval of an Oak Tree Permit by the Planning Commission or Planning M

3.

Trimming. All Oak trees subject to the provisions of this Section shall be trimmed under the direction of a certified
arborist in a manner that is consistent with the adopted trimming policies outlined in the City of Pomona Street Tree
Policy Manual and ISA standards.

4.

Application Requirements for Minor Oak Tree Permits. On forms available in the Planning Division, an application for a
Minor Oak Tree Permit for trimming shall be submitted, together with any required fee, to the Planning Division. The
application shall include recent photos of each Oak tree proposed to be trimmed.

5.

Application Requirements for Major Oak Tree Permits. An application for a Major Oak Tree Permit for relocation or
removal shall be submitted, together with any required fee, to the Planning Division. The application shall contain the
following information and items:
a.

A statement as to the reasons for the proposed relocation or removal;

b.

The number, species and size (diameter measured 4.5 feet above the mean natural grade) of the Oak tree(s)
proposed to be relocated or removed;

c.

A site plan showing the location of all trees on the subject property in relation to existing and proposed structures
and improvements such as buildings, streets, sidewalks, fences, slopes, retaining walls, public right-of-way or
improvement, etc.;

6.

d.

Photographs of the Oak tree(s) proposed to be relocated or removed;

e.

Proposed method of removal or relocation;

f.

Identification of the relocation site and methods of site preparation; and

g.

Verification by the City Arborist of the health of any Oak tree declared diseased, infested or dying.

Findings for Major Oak Tree Permits. A Major Oak Tree Permit for relocation or removal may only be approved based on
the following findings:
a.

The proposed relocation or removal of the Oak tree(s) will not result in soil erosion through the diversion or
increased flow of surface waters which cannot be satisfactorily mitigated;

b.

The proposed relocation or removal of the Oak tree(s) is necessary as continued existence at the present location
impedes the planned improvement or proposed use of the subject property to such an extent that:
i.)

Alternative development plans cannot achieve the same permitted density or the cost of such alternative
would be prohibitive, or

ii.)

Placement of the Oak tree(s) precludes the reasonable and efficient use of such property for a use otherwise
authorized;

c.

The proposed trimming, cutting and pruning will be limited to the minimum necessary to promote the health of the
tree and protect the public safety, and whenever possible trees should remain in place or be moved only the
minimum distance necessary to preserve the health of the tree and protect the public safety.

d.

The Oak tree(s) proposed for relocation or removal interferes with utility services or streets and highways, either
within or outside of the subject property, and no reasonable alternative to such interference exists other than the
relocation or removal of the Oak tree(s);

e.

The condition of the Oak tree(s) proposed for removal with reference to seriously debilitating disease or danger of
falling is such that it cannot be remedied through reasonable preservation procedures and practices; and

f.

The proposed relocation or removal of the Oak tree(s) will not be contrary to or in substantial conflict with the
purpose and intent of the Oak Tree Permit process.

7.

Appeals. Within ten (10) calendar days of a determination on a Minor Oak Tree Permit by the Planning Manager or a
determination on a Major Oak Tree Permit by the Planning Commission, the application for an Oak Tree Permit may be
appealed to the Planning Commission in the case of the Planning Manager's decision or to the City Council in the case of
the Planning Commission's decision. The appeal shall be submitted to the Planning Division on forms available in the
Planning Division.

282/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

E.

Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the requirements of the Oak Tree Permit process:
1.

City Arborist initiated trimming of Oak trees located on City property only when the minimum amount of trimming
needed will be carried out to foster and preserve the health and aesthetics of the tree, or to correct or prevent a
potentially dangerous or hazardous condition posing an immediate threat to public health, safety and welfare subject to
all provisions of Section .5809-23 D 6. Findings for Major Oak Tree Permits;

2.

Removing the dead wood from Oak trees located on private and City property without damaging any living portions of
the trees;

3.

Trimming, relocation or removal of Oak trees planted, grown or held for sale by a licensed nursery or tree farm;

4.

Trimming, relocation or removal of Oak trees located on property within a rail road right-of-way;

5.

Trimming, relocation or removal of Oak trees located on property owned by Caltrans or the Los Angeles County Flood
Control District; and

6.

Trimming, relocation or removal of Oak trees that the City Arborist determines are dangerous or hazardous and pose an
immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare.

7.

Utility company or utility service trimming, relocating or removal of an Oak tree(s) when the City Arborist or a State
licensed, City approved arborist provides documentation that the trimming, relocation or removal is needed to correct or
prevent a potentially dangerous or hazardous condition posing an immediate threat to the public health, safety and
welfare. Said trimming, relocating or removal shall be proposed and completed in a manner to preserve, to the fullest
extent possible, the tree in place, with the minimum physical alteration needed to preserve the health of the tree and
protect public safety.

Within ten (10) days of completing said trimming, the City Arborist or the State licensed, City approved arborist shall perform a
field inspection of the completed work on the tree(s) in question and shall provide written documentation that the work was
completed in conformance with all standards and requirements contained within Section .5809-23 "Oak Tree Preservation."
F.

Permit Expiration. An approved Major or Minor Oak Tree Permit shall be valid for not more than thirty (30) calendar days from
the date of Permit approval. One (1) thirty (30) day extension may be granted by the Planning Manager without fee.

G.

Final Oak Tree Permit Inspection. Within seventy-two (72) hours of the completion of any trimming, cutting, pruning, relocation
or removal of an Oak tree(s) under an approved Major or Minor Oak Tree Permit, the permittee shall contact the Planning
Division to request a final inspection. Said inspection shall be completed by the City Arborist within seventy-two (72) hours of
the Planning Division's having received the inspection request to verify that all work was performed in conformance with the
approved Oak Tree Permit and this Ordinance.

Unless a final inspection is requested and completed within thirty (30) calendar days following the approval of a Major or Minor Oak
Tree Permit, or an extension thereof, the City Arborist shall perform a field inspection to verify that all work was completed in
conformance with the approved Oak Tree Permit and this Ordinance.
If the final inspection determines that the work performed was not completed in conformance with the approved Oak Tree Permit or
the Ordinance, then the work shall be corrected within seven (7) calendar days following written notice from the Planning Manager of
said nonconformance, or within a time period approved by the Planning Manager. Failure of the permittee to complete the required
corrections shall be deemed to constitute a misdemeanor as noted in Subsection "I" herein for each tree identified within the Oak Tree
Permit which was not altered in compliance with said Permit and this Ordinance. Further, upon conviction of a misdemeanor for violation
of this section, if any Oak tree identified within the approved Oak Tree Permit dies within three (3) years of the date of conviction, then
the person so convicted shall be required to pay to the City the dollar amount for a replacement tree of equal size, including installation
costs. The dollar replacement value shall be determined by the criteria set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). Said
dollar value shall be remitted to the City and used only to install a new Oak tree(s) within the same City Council district where the dead
tree(s) was originally located.
H.

Oak Tree Replacement and Mitigation. The planting of replacement trees or other mitigation measures shall be included as
conditions of permit approval for the removal of Oak trees subject to the provisions of this Section.

For residential property, the removal of each Oak tree will require replacement with a minimum twenty-four (24)-inch-box Oak tree
on a one-to-one basis. For institutional, commercial or industrial property, the removal of each Oak tree will require replacement with a
minimum thirty-six (36)-inch-box Oak tree on a one-to-one basis. Additional or larger trees and other vegetation may be required as
283/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

conditions of permit approval, if they are determined to be necessary to compensate for the loss of the original Oak tree(s) and/or to aid
in erosion control or to otherwise protect the environment from the effects of the tree removal.
Replacement Oak trees must be planted on the property where the Oak trees were removed. However, if an appropriate replanting
location does not exist, the replacement trees may be donated to the City or their monetary value may be paid to the City to the
satisfaction of the City Arborist. Any monies paid shall be used to purchase an Oak tree(s) for planting within the City in a location(s)
recommended by the City Arborist.
I.

Penalties. Any person who trims, prunes, cuts, relocates or removes an Oak tree(s) tree with a diameter greater than eight (8)
inches as measured 4.5 feet above the mean natural grade in violation of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished as set forth in Section 1-7 (c) of the Pomona City Code. Further, if any
Oak tree(s) so trimmed, pruned, cut, relocated or removed dies within three (3) years of the date of conviction, then the
person so convicted shall be required to pay to the City the dollar amount for a replacement tree of equal size, including
installation costs. The dollar replacement value shall be determined by the criteria set forth by the International Society of
Arboriculture (ISA). Said dollar value shall be remitted to the City and used only to install a new Oak tree(s) within the same
City Council district where the dead tree(s) was originally located.

(Ord. No. 4076, § 2.)

Sec. .58010. - Development for hillside property.
A.

PURPOSE.

The purpose of this section is to encourage the orderly development of hillside areas by relating the number and distribution of
dwelling units and other buildings to the topography, so that the terrain will suffer minimum disfigurement by scarring from extensive
cut and fill. These regulations are also designed to minimize danger to life and property due to the hazards of fire, flood, soil erosion,
seepage and destruction of the natural topography and plant material of the area and in addition to those having to do with excavations
and fills generally in other regulations and ordinances.
B.

DEFINITION OF HILLSIDE AND APPLICATION OF THIS SECTION.

"Hillside areas" mean areas which in general have a median slope before grading of ten percent or more on fifty percent or more of
the site, or less steep lands which are strongly related to areas of greater slope.
Areas defined as hillside based on the above description shall be designated on the zoning map as an "H" overlay zone.
Before such "H" overlay zone is applied to such map, however, a hearing shall be held before the planning commission and evidence
presented to establish if such area qualifies as a hillside area under the definition set forth in this ordinance. Notice of such hearing shall
be given in the same manner as provided for a change of zoning district map, and final decision shall be made by the city council upon
further hearing after recommendation is made by the planning commission. The initiation of such hearings may only be by motion of the
planning commission or the city council.
The provisions of the base zone shall apply except for those regulations contained in the "H" zone, which shall have those in the base
zone. These additional requirements shall be those set forth in this section.
C.

DESIGNATION OF NATURAL SCENIC AREAS TO BE PRESERVED AS OPEN SPACES.

The city council, upon recommendation of the planning commission, may designate within a hillside area "natural and scenic areas."
No such areas shall be so designated until notice has been given and hearings held before the planning commission and the city council
in the same manner as that provided for a change of the zoning district map. Before such designation is made, however, evidence must
be presented, and upon such evidence, a finding must be made that the land is unusual in its natural state and will, if preserved,
enhance the surrounding property. Whenever an area has been so designated as a natural scenic area, such area shall not be considered
part of the required setback for any development of any lot and shall not be calculated as part of the minimum area for lot requirement
for any subdivided lot, and no building or structure may be constructed in such area. To compensate the owner of the land being
developed when part of such land being developed is designated as a natural scenic area, the loss of density may be made up through
application to the advisory review board. The advisory review board may designate the change in density to compensate for the loss of
the use of the natural scenic area for building purposes by reducing the lot size or density requirements in the remaining part of the
284/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

subdivision then being subdivided, and it may designate credits toward future subdivisions in an area designated by it. The
recommendations of the advisory review board in this regard shall be guided in such a manner as to spread the allowable density as
evenly as possible over the remaining property not consumed by the natural scenic areas. The recommendation of the advisory review
board on this subject shall be reported to the planning commission and the planning commission's decision shall, within ten days after
the announcement of its decision, be appealable to the city council.
D.

TENTATIVE SITE PLAN AND CERTAIN ASPECTS OF BUILDING DESIGN APPROVAL.

Plot plans and building designs for structures proposed to be erected within a hillside area shall be submitted to the planning
director who may at his discretion submit them for review by the advisory review board. However, such plot plans and building designs
shall be reviewed by the planning commission and the city council. The planning director or the advisory review board, if submitted to it,
may make recommendations concerning such plot plans and building designs to the planning commission, and it in turn shall make its
recommendations concerning them to the city council. The city council shall make the final decision in approving or disapproving such
plans or reuire for approval certain modifications or conditions. The purpose of such review and approval of such plans and designs shall
be for determining if, because of the plan or building design, the view of neighboring property will be severely curtailed or blocked, and if
by any reason of the site plan or building design, problems detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the surrounding
territory may be caused. It shall comply with:
1.

Minimum lot sizes based on the grade of slope prior to grading in the following manner:

Minimum Lot Size

Grade of Slope

7,200 sq. ft.

0—10%

10,000 sq. ft.

10—30%

20,000 sq. ft.

3 0—40%

1 acre

40% or more

a.

In the 10-30% grade of slope classification, 90% of the lots shall have 10,000 square feet or more and the average of
all lots shall be 10,000 square feet or over.

b.

In the 30-40% grade of slope classification, 90% of the lots shall have a minimum of 20,000 square feet or more and
the average of all lots shall be 20,000 square feet or more.

c.

In the 40% grade or more of slope classification, 90% of the lots shall be one acre or more and the average of all lots
shall be one acre or more.

d.

In all cases, where deviations from the minimum lot size are permitted, no lot shall be less than 7,200 square feet.

e.

In the consideration of planned unit or cluster type housing development, the planning commission can provide for
modification from the preceding lot size minimum standards.

f.

Grade of Slope Map. In order to determine the areas to which the various grade of slope classifications shall apply,
a hearing shall be held before the planning commission and city council in the same manner as for a change of
zoning district map, and final decision shall be made by the city council after recommendation is made by the
planning commission. The initiation of such proceedings may be by the planning commission, city council or the
property owner. The grade of slope map shall, when adopted, be made a part of the "H" overlay zone district and
shall dictate by zoning district designation the minimum lot sizes as contained in subsection D-l.

g.

Preparation of Grade of Slope Map T he classifications on the grade of slope map shall be determined by calculating
the change in elevation of the natural grade per one hundred feet of horizontal distance.

2.

Saving of natural rock features, when designated as a natural scenic area.

3.

The outside corners or edges of all cut and fill slopes except at the tops of slopes shall be required to be rounded to
eliminate the sharp corners and shall have a minimum curvature of radius of at least five feet.
285/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

4.

Cut and fill banks shall not exceed thirty foot height, vertically. In the cases of arterial streets, they may exceed thirty feet wi
of the city engineer.

5.

Building design shall accommodate to the hillside and to the specific site in question. The use of supporting stilts shall be
submitted for review and recommendation by the advisory review board. As a part of building design approval, the views
from neighboring buildings will be considered in relationship to the location of the new buildings so as to minimize any
loss of views.

6.
E.

In any land division in a hillside area, all downhill slopes shall be made part of the lot at the lower elevation.

LANDSCAPING.

The following criteria shall apply to all hillside areas where planting is required under E., "Landscaping."
1.

Design.

As a condition to the approval of and prior to the recordation of a final map or issuance of a building or grading permit,
whichever is first, landscaping plans including planting design and an irrigation system, all of which are prepared by a licensed
landscape architect, shall be submitted by the applicant and reviewed and approved by the advisory review board and the planning
commission, and may be appealed to and by the city council.
All cut, fill, and natural slopes shall be planted with deep rooted plants or other plants approved by the parks superintendent,
that are able to acclimate to their environment. To promote growth of the plants that protect the slopes against erosion, an
approved irrigation system shall be installed that will uniformly cover all planted areas.
In approving or denying the landscaping plans, the following shall be considered: The screening of parking areas in multiple
residential or non-residential developments, the planting of slopes for stabilization, and the fire resistance ability, durability, size,
and quality of the proposed plant material and the planting design. Proof of the ability of the soil to sustain the proposed plant
material may be required and if so required, the developer shall provide such proof at his own expense.
Slope planting and an irrigation system shall be provided by the owner on all slopes of three feet or more in vertical height. The
subject cut and fill slopes shall be adequately planted with landscaping consisting of one-third shrubs and trees and the other twothirds may be grass or ground cover and/or trees and shrubs. The final plans showing the landscaping and irrigation shall be subject
to the approval of the advisory review board. All irrigation systems and planting shall be complete and operative on an individual lot
basis before final approval of the finished grade and before occupancy of any building pursuant to the building code.
2.

Planting details.
a.

Plants consisting of grass, ground cover, shrubs and trees as recommended on the planting schedule in this
ordinance shall be used. Other plants recommended by landscape architects may be submitted to the parks
superintendent for approval.

b.

In addition to ground cover plants, approved shrubs having a minimum one gallon size at ten feet on center, in both
directions on the slope, or trees at twenty feet on center both ways may be used. A combination of shrubs and
trees may be utilized. This plant and planting pattern may be varied upon the recommendation of a landscape
architect and approval by the park superintendent.

3.

Irrigation details.

The owner shall water the slopes which have been planted at sufficient time intervals to promote growth.
a.

Minimum irrigation requirements for slopes of three feet or more in vertical height shall be as follows:
(1)

A sprinkler system which is operative on an individual lot basis shall be installed to adequately irrigate these
slopes prior to planting of the trees, shrubs, and ground cover.

b.

Special requirements for sprinkler systems.
(1)

Plans for the sprinkler system shall be submitted to and approved by the park superintendent prior to
installation.

(2)

Sprinkler systems shall be designed to provide a uniform water coverage at a rate of precipitation of not less
than one-tenth inch per hour nor more than three-tenths inch per hour on the planted slope. In no event shall
the rate of precipitation duration of sprinkling be permitted to create a saturated condition and cause an
286/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

erosion problem, or allow the discharge of excess water into any public or private street.
(3)

A check valve and balance cock shall be installed in the system where drainage from sprinkler heads will create
an erosion problem.

(4)

A functional test of the sprinkler system shall be performed by the installer for every sprinkler system prior to
approval.

4.

Approved plant list.

All plants required by this section shall be selected from the following list:
a.

Grasses or turf (to be planted at 5 to 10 lbs. per 1,000 sq. ft.)
(1)

Recommended mixture: Purple Vetch @ ½ lbs. per 1,000 sq. ft.; Fescue Goars, @ 5 lbs. per 1,000 sq. ft.; Trefoil,
@ 2 lbs. per 1,000 sq. ft.; Approved Native Plant and Wild Flower Seeds, @¼ lbs., per 1,000 sq. ft.

Each of the above grasses may be reduced by 20% by substituting one of the following grasses: Lolium Multiflorum—
Annual or Italian Rye Grass; Lolium perenne—Perennial Rye Grass.
(2)

Other grasses and percentages may be recommended by a landscape architect subject to approval by the park
superintendent.

b.

Ground cover plants (may be used in lieu of grasses—to be planted minimum 18″ on center).
(1)

Hadera canariensis (Algerian Ivy); 2. Immoea learl (Down-flower Morninglory); 3. Parthenocissus quinquefolia
(Virginia Creeper); 4. Parthenocissus tricuspidata (Japanese Creeper); 5. Baccharis pilularis (Kidneywart
Baecharis); 6. Hymenocyclus Croceus (Messembryanthemum crocenum); 7. Mesembryanthemum
floribundum; 8. Other deep-rooted ground cover plants recommended by a landscape architect, subject to
approval by the park superintendent.

c.

Evergreen shrubs.
1.

Acacia longifolia (Sydney Acacia); 2. Acacia cyclops (Cyclops Acacia); 3. Acacia latifolis (Broad leaf acacia 4.
Acacia aramata (Kangaroo Thorn); 5. Acacia saligna (Goldreath acacia); 6. Acacia verticilate (Star acacia); 7.
Ceanothus thyrsiflorus (Blue blossom Ceanothus); 8. Ceanothus grisesus horizontalis (Carmel Creeper 9.
Eriogonum iasciculatun; 10. Baccharis pilularis (Chapparal Broom or Kidneywart Baccharis); 11. Fremontia
californica (California Freemontia or Flannel-bush); 12. Cotoeasters dammeri, C. horizontalis, C. microphilla;
13. Fremontia mexicana (San Fremontia); 14. Grevillea lanigera (Wooly Grevilea); 15. Jasminum humile
revolutum (Italian Jasmine); 16. Jasminum mesnyll (Primrose Jasmine); 17. Melaleuca wilsonii (Wilson
Melaleuca); 18. Nerium oleander (Common oleander); 19. Rhamnus californica (California Buck-thorn); 20.
Hypericum calycinum (Aaronsbeard St. Johnswart); 21. Rhus laruina (Laurel Sumas); 22. Rhus intergrifolia
(Lemonade Sumac); 23. Rhus ovata (Sugar Sumac); 24. Rosmarinus officinalis (Prostrate Rosemary); 25. Sollya
Heterophyila (Australian Blue Bell Creeper); 26. Pyracantha crenato (Serrata Graber Graber Firethorn); 27.
Pyrancantha Santa Cruz (Prostrate Firethorn); 28. Spartium junceum (Spanish Broom); 29. Callistemon (Bottle
Brush); 30. Ptotinia arbutifolia (California Holly); 3 1. Prunus ilicifolia (Holly-leaved cherry); 32. Quercus dumosa
(Shrub Oak); 33. Cistus purpurea (Rock Rose); 34. Baccharis viminea (Mule Fat); 35. Genista sagittalis; 36.
Garrya èlliptica (Silk Tassel Bush); 37. Ceanothus obliganthus (Hairy Ceanothus); 38. Rhus trilobata (Squaw
Bush); 39. Eriodictyon trichocalyx (Yerba Santa); 40. Other deep-rooted plants as recommended by a landscape
architect, subject to approval by the park superintendent.

d.

Trees.
(1)

Eucalyptus lehmanni (Lehmann eucalyptus).
(a)

Eucalyptus viridis (Green Mallee Eucalyptus); (b) Eucalyptus preissiana (Preiss eucalyptus); (c) Eucalyptus
cornuta (Yate Eucalyptus); (d) Eucalyptus megacornuta (Dwart Yate Eucalyptus); (e) Eucalyptus
erythornema (Red Thread Eucalyptus).

(2)

Schinus terebinthifolia (Brazil Peppertree).

(3)

Schinus molle (California Pepper).

(4)

Pinus halepensis and other varieties (Alleppo Pine).
287/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

5.

(5)

Prosopis glandulosa reeseana (Honey Mesquite).

(6)

Umbellularia (California Laurel).

(7)

Cupressus arizonica and other varieties.

(8)

Juniperus chinensisand other varieties (Juniper).

(9)

Jugland californica (California Black Walnut).

(10)

Ceanothus arboreus (Tree Lilac).

(11)

Prunus lynoii (Catalina Cherry).

(12)

Other trees recommended by a landscape architect, subject to approval by the park superintendent.

Maintenance.

It shall be the responsibility of the developer to plant, water and maintain all graded slopes as required by this ordinance until
the properties within the development have been occupied. A landscape maintenance bond for one year's duration from the date of
acceptance of landscaping shall be required to guarantee that all plants shall be maintained, and replaced if necessary, until the
subject property is occupied. The landscape maintenance bonds shall not be released until the above conditions have been
approved by the building and planning officials, but may be reduced proportionately as each parcel is occupied or sold but it shall be
the responsibility of the owner to maintain the planting required in this section.
In order to provide access for proper maintenance of the slope banks, no fences or walls shall be built on property in this zone
which would divide the slope banks from the remainder of the lot or parcel, unless such fence or wall is provided with a gate having
a minimum width of three feet which would give access to said slope banks.
(Ord. No. 2465, § 1.)

F.

INCENTIVES.

In order to encourage developers to build in a manner more suitable to the hillsides, the following incentives are available:
1.

If the topographic or other natural conditions do not lend themselves to hillside development due to the provisions of
this ordinance, the developer may apply for a variance for approval of an alternate plan.

2.

The developer may apply for a variance to increase the density of a hillside development up to twenty-five percent in
consideration of his use of planned unit or cluster housing developments or high-rise buildings which are compatible to
their particular sites and surrounding land use, and where compensating increases in utilities, parks, schools and other
necessary services are provided.

3.

Building heights as permitted in the zoning ordinance may be increased by variance approval above that which is
normally allowed when they are compatible to the surrounding areas. The views from adjacent or neighboring parcels
shall not be adversely affected by such height increase.

G.

STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
1.

Arterial streets as designated in the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways shall have a maximum grade of eight
percent unless substantiating evidence has been submitted to the city engineer which justifies an increase.

2.

Collector and minor collector streets as designated in the Official Plan of Principle Streets and Highways shall have a
maximum grade of fifteen percent, unless substantiating evidence has been submitted to the city engineer which justifies
an increase.

3.

Local streets shall have a maximum grade of twenty percent, provided all grades over fifteen percent shall be improved
with six inches of Portland cement concrete pavement. Streets with grades in excess of fifteen percent shall be allowed
only for four hundred feet or less. The city engineer may modify the foregoing standards if substantiating evidence is
submitted to him justifying the request. Local street right-of-way width shall be a minimum of sixty feet and the width
between curbs shall be a minimum of thirtysix feet. Where exceptional grading and/or topographical conditions exist, the
right-of-way width may be reduced to fifty feet upon approval of the city engineer. Where the right-of-way has been
reduced to fifty feet in width, a five foot street tree easement shall be required on each side of the street. A local street
improvement width of thirty-two feet between curbs may be allowed where lots exist on only one side of the street.

4.

Design criteria shall be based on state highway standards for speed and sight distance, unless substantiating evidence is
submitted to the city engineer justifying a change.
288/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

5.

In all culs-de-sac more than six hundred feet in length, driveway aprons in the public right-of-way of cul-de-sac
turnarounds shall be of Portland cement concrete and designed to standards approved by the city engineer.

6.

Curbs and gutters.
a.

Minimum curb height shall be six inches. However, a higher curb shall be required when deemed necessary by the
city engineer.

7.

b.

Minimum gutter width shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city engineer.

c.

All curbs and gutters shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete.

Slope grading.
a.

All roadway cuts and embankments shall be required to be rounded at the top to the approval of the city engineer
in order to eliminate sharp corners.

H.

DRAINAGE.

No building permits shall be issued for construction on any site which does not have provisions for conducting water drainage from
the site to a natural drainage course, a drainage channel, or a public street in an approved manner.
I.

SEWERAGE TREATMENT.

Sewers for all dwelling units and other buildings which contain plumbing facilities shall connect to public sanitary sewer systems.
J.

EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING.

The following requirements shall be in addition to all other requirements which may from time to time be adopted by the city in
various building and engineering regulations, unless such regulations specifically repeal or state they supersede this ordinance.
1.

When required by the building code, a grading plan based on an accompanying report from a soils engineer and a
geologist who is licensed by the state of California shall be submitted for approval as part of the application for site plan
approval for a hillside development and said plan shall be approved by the advisory review board.

2.

No excavation shall be permitted on any hillside area prior to the approval of a site plan and a grading plan excepting to
drill holes and exploratory trenches for purposes of collecting geological and soils data.

3.

No hillside development shall be approved if a geology report prepared by a geologist who is licensed by the state of
California states that construction should be prohibited.

K.

FIRE PROTECTION.
1.

In fire hazardous areas, unobstructed fire protection equipment access easements shall be required to all parts of the
development and to adjacent areas which are potential fire hazards. The fire chief shall recommend to the planning
commission where such easements are needed.

2.

No ridge which is presently usable for fire fighting shall be graded in relation to hillside development unless an access
way is provided around the cut to the top of the ridge for fire fighting equipment.

3.

Water mains and water systems shall be sized to provide sufficient flow and pressure to meet the fire fighting
requirements of the area involved The, manager of the municipal water company and the fire chief shall review proposed
systems in relation to the American Insurance Association's standards for water systems and make recommendations to
the city council.

L.

BUILDING STANDARDS.

The following standards shall apply to those areas within two hundred feet of a high fire hazard zone:
1.

Any construction including stairs, balconies, porches and open structures under buildings which are not of incombustible
materials or materials approved by the building official as fire-retardant treated wood shall be protected with a surface
of one-hour fire resistive construction.

2.

All eaves shall be fully boxed in with exterior stucco or its equivalent fire resistive construction. Any necessary vents shall
be covered with one-fourth mesh or its equivalent.

In lieu of the above, sprinkler systems approved by the building official may be permitted.
M.

UTILITIES.
289/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

All utilities shall be provided as underground utilities. Transmission lines may not be required to be installed underground where the
public works director has determined that this is not economically feasible.
N.

HILLSIDE ADVISORY REVIEW COMMITTEE.

There is hereby created a five-member hillside advisory review committee to serve in an advisory capacity to the planning
commission. This is not a board or commission and may consist of members who reside in the Southern California area.
1.

Appointment. Members of this committee shall be nominated by the chairman of the planning commission and
approved by a majority vote of the commission.

2.

Qualifications. Four of the members shall possess special qualifications as follows: One shall be a certified engineering
geologist selected from the latest list approved by the Los Angeles County Engineering Geologist Qualification Board; one
shall be a landscape architect; one shall be a civil engineer who practices in soil mechanics and is familiar with the
methods of slope stability analysis; and one shall be an architect. The fifth member may be selected from any
background. Other members may be appointed by the planning commission as they deem necessary.

3.

Terms of office. The terms of office for members of the committee shall be four years, expiring on December thirty-first
of the fourth year of their terms, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. If vacancies should occur other
than by expiration of terms, appointment shall be for such unexpired terms.

4.

Quorum. A majority of the qualified members of the committee shall constitute a quorum to conduct business. Any
action must be by a majority affirmative vote of those members in attendance at a regular, special, or adjourned
meeting.

5.

Meetings. Meetings of the committee shall be open to the public, and notice of the time and place of the meeting at
which his application will be reviewed shall be given to any applicant whose application may be subject to review of the
committee. Such notice shall be in writing and may be delivered personally or by mail, but in any event, must be given at
least twenty-four hours before such meeting. Regular meetings need not be held; however, when special meetings are
called, they shall be called as prescribed by the California Government Code, Section 54950, et seq., by giving at least
twenty-four hours prior written notice by mail to each member of the committee and to all news media requesting such
notice, setting forth the items of the agenda which will be considered and the time and place of such meeting.

6.

Duties. The committee shall review all tentative subdivision maps, applications for variances, conditional use permits,
building permits, zone changes, and other matters in connection with land development within any land designated as
part of the "H" (hillside) overlay zone. The purpose of such review shall be to determine if the provisions of this section
are met. After reviewing the application and all other relevant evidence available to it, the committee shall make findings
and recommendations to the planning commission that such application be approved, approved with conditions or
changes, or denied, together with the reasons for such findings and recommendations. In any event, however, the
decision of the committee shall not be binding or conclusive on any matter until acted upon by the planning commission.
In reviewing any application, the committee shall pay particular attention to the following matters contained within the
following subsections of this section: subsection D-5 (minimizing loss of view); subsection E (landscaping, and screening
of parking areas); and subsection G (street design and traffic circulation).

7.

Appeals. Appeals may be made by any applicant to the city council from the decision of the planning commission based
in whole or in part upon any recommendation made by the committee. Such appeal, however, must be made in the
same manner upon the payment of the same fees as prescribed by this ordinance for an appeal from the decision
concerning a variance.

(Ord. No. 2202, § 1; Ord. No. 2395, § 1-5: Ord. No. 2547, § 1.)

Sec. .58011. - Conditional use permit required for multiple family residential developments.
A.

A conditional use permit shall be required at any time ten or more dwelling units are proposed to be constructed on a lot.

(Ord. No. 3385, § 39.)

B.

Before a conditional use permit may be granted to construct ten or more dwelling units on a lot, the planning commission
shall make the following findings:
1.

The building height, size, scale, location and relationship of the proposed development shall be compatible with and not
290/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

detrimental to both the existing or proposed surrounding development;
2.

The grading of the site and the vehicular access is compatible with and not detrimental to existing and proposed
surrounding development.

(Ord. No. 3385, §§ 40, 41: Ord. No. 2575, § 1: Ord. No. 2589, § 1.)

Sec. .58012. - Conditional use permit required for conversion of existing multiple dwellings into co-operative multiple dwellings or condominiums.
A.

In addition to the requirements of Section .58011, the following information shall be presented in support of any application:
1.

The effect upon the orderly development of property:

2.

The effect upon the preservation of property values and the protection of the tax base:

3.

The effect on the neighborhood:

4.

The likelihood of a nuisance being created:

5.

The effect on the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the city and purchasers of rights or
interests in the co-operative multiple dwelling:

B.

6.

Special conditions or exceptional characteristics of the property and its location or surroundings:

7.

The impact on available city-wide rental units in multiple dwellings: and

8.

Any other matters relevant to the application.

Necessary Findings. In addition to the prerequisite conditions set forth in Section .58011, a conditional use permit may not be
granted unless the following general conditions are found to exist:
1.

The establishment and maintenance of the co-operative multiple dwelling applied for conforms with the comprehensive
planning and land use regulations and the General Plan;

2.

Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary facilities have been or will be provided;

3.

The proposed co-operative multiple dwelling will not under the circumstances of the particular case, be a nuisance or be
detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing in the neighborhood;

4.

The proposed co-operative multiple dwelling is not detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the
neighborhood and is appropriate to the location, the lot and the neighborhood; and

5.

The co-operative multiple dwelling project meets or exceeds all building and zoning standards currently applicable to
new construction of such project.

C.

In addition to other conditions that may. be imposed by law, the planning commission and city council may impose any
condition which it considers necessary to create an acceptable living environment compatible with the surrounding land uses
and consistent with the goals of the community.

D.

Any conversion or proposed conversion specifically involving or relating to a manufactured housing development shall follow
the requirements for manufactured housing development conversion contained in sections .484 through .487 of the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.

(Ord. No. 3036, § 2; Ord. No. 3137, § 5.)

Sec. .581. - Public use permits.
The following uses may be permitted without the required advertising and posting required for hearings when such uses are deemed to
be essential and/or desirable to public convenience and welfare and not contrary to the master plan or its objectives:
1.

Educational uses, private.

2.

Governmental facilities.

3.

Large scale housing developments.

4.

Public utility installations.

5.

And other such uses as the planning commission may determine to be similar to, not more obnoxious than, and equally
essential to serve the public welfare as the uses listed above. The decision of the planning commission shall be final
unless a notice of appeal is filed pursuant to Section .560GI.

291/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part).)

A.

PROCEDURE

Same as for variances, see Section .560-B.
B.

FILING FEE

A filing fee in the sum of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) shall be paid to the city of Pomona with the filing of each application for a
public use permit.
(Ord. No. 1821, § 4.)

C.

PUBLIC HEARING

Upon receipt of an application for a public use permit, the commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon
not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than forty (40) days thereafter. The commission shall hold one public hearing upon the
matters referred to in the application, and thereupon within forty (40) days of the hearing shall make a determination and report
thereon to the council. The council, after receipt of the report and recommendations, shall either approve, modify or reject the
same.
(Ord. No. 1821, § 4.)

D.

PUBLICATION AND MAKING OF NOTICES

None required.
E.

CONDITIONS TO USE

Conditions shall be set forth as are deemed necessary and reasonable to protect the best interests of the surrounding
property or neighborhood and the master plan for the intent thereof.
Sec. .582. - Finality and limitation.
The decision of the planning commission or the city council when an appeal has been heard on any application, shall be final and
conclusive on the applicants and their successors in interest for a period of six (6) months from such order, and no new application for the
same variance, amendment and/or change of zone, conditional use permit, or public use permit relating to the same matter, or for
reclassification of such premises shall be again filed during such period.
(Ord. No. 1821, § 5.)

Sec. .583. - Temporary Uses.
A.

PURPOSE AND INTENT

The purpose of this section is to control and regulate land use activities of a temporary nature which may adversely affect the public
health, safety, and welfare. The intent is to ensure that temporary uses will be compatible with surrounding land uses, to protect the
rights of adjacent residents and land owners, and to minimize any adverse effects on surrounding properties and the environment.
B.

AUTHORITY

The community development director is authorized to approve, conditionally approve or to deny such request. The community
development director may establish conditions and limitations to minimize detrimental effects on surrounding properties, including but
not limited to hours of operation, provision of parking areas, signing, lighting, and traffic circulation access only.
The community development director also may require a cash deposit or cash bond to defray the costs of cleanup of a site by the
city in the event the applicant fails to leave the property in a presentable and satisfactory condition, or to guarantee removal and/or reconversion of any temporary use to a permanent use allowed in the subject zoning district. A business license shall also be obtained.
C.

APPLICATION

292/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The property owner or the owner's authorized representative shall file an application for a temporary use permit with the planning
division at least ten days prior to the date the proposed use takes place. Circus carnivals, fairs or similar amusement enterprises must
submit application thirty days prior to date the proposed use takes place in a residential zone.
The application form shall be filed along with any data and information deemed necessary to evaluate and process the application as
may be required by the community development director.
D.

REQUIRED FINDINGS

The application shall not be approved as submitted or in modified form unless the community development director may make the
following findings:
1.

The proposed temporary use will be located, operated, and maintained in a manner consistent with the policies of the
General Plan and the provisions of the zoning ordinance.

2.

Approval of the application will not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public
health, safety or general welfare.

E.

3.

The proposed temporary use complies with the various provisions of this ordinance.

4.

All building, electric, plumbing, fire, encroachment or other permits required by city ordinances shall be obtained.

PERMITTED USES

The following uses may be allowed in the various zones, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit.
1.

Christmas tree lots or pumpkin sale lots. A maximum of thirty days is allowed per calendar year per event.

2.

Circuses, carnivals, fairs, or similar amusement enterprises. A maximum ten day period is allowed and safety certification
of rides and equipment is required. In residential zones notice shall be mailed to all property owners within four hundred
feet twenty-one days prior to date of event.

3.

Outdoor meetings, outdoor art and craft shows, group activities, or sales within parking areas. Time limit of seven
consecutive days in each ninety day period.

4.

Sales, bazaars, dinners, parties or other outdoor events (other than uses as listed in 1 and 2 above) held by and on the
property of a religious facility shall not be restricted as to number of occasions or duration. (Ord. No. 4114, § 3.)

5.

Outdoor display and sale of merchandise such as sidewalk sales shall be allowed only for merchandise regularly sold on
premises and located immediately adjacent to the building for a period not to exceed three consecutive days in a ninety
day period.

6.

Single uses in buildings with a minimum of sixty-five thousand square feet of gross floor area may apply for a temporary
use permit to allow the outdoor sales and display of new merchandise in the C-3, C-4 zoning districts and commercial
designated areas of the SP (specific plan) area. The temporary use permit shall be subject to the following conditions:
a.

The sales and display area shall be located immediately adjacent to the building at the main entrance along
walkways adjacent to the street elevation.

b.

The sales and display area shall not encroach into the city right-of-way or required parking and subject to the
following criteria:
i.

Merchandise shall be displayed in a manner that allows free access from all doorways to a separate
pedestrian walkway.

ii.

Merchandise shall be displayed in a manner that allows a minimum designated four-foot walkway for
pedestrians.

iii.

Except at specified access points, designated pedestrian walkways shall be physically separated from vehicular
traffic by a change in elevation, bollards, a fence, hedge, temporary merchandise displays or other physical
barrier.

iv.

Merchandise displays shall not block designated fire lanes.

v.

Merchandise displays shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning manager.

c.

The temporary use permit for outdoor sales and display of merchandise shall be valid for no more than one year.

d.

Outdoor sales and display of merchandise shall not exceed one hundred eighty days in a year.
293/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

e.

Outdoor sales and display of merchandise shall be limited to the following days: Friday, Saturday, and Sunday on
non-holiday weekends and to Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Monday on holiday weekends. Holidays will be defined
as Federal Holidays and include New Year's Day, Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., Washington's Birthday,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas.

7.

f.

Sale of alcohol is prohibited under this subsection of the ordinance.

g.

Sale of food products for preparation or consumption off-premises is prohibited.

h.

Sale of prepared food may be permitted.

Storage of merchandise outside is prohibited. All merchandise must be relocated inside the building or within an
approved storage area when the store is closed for business.

8.

Temporary uses on commercial or industrial property shall be limited to car washes, candy sales and other activities by
tax exempt organizations pursuant to 501(c) of Federal Revenue and Taxation Code only, with no limitation on number of
occasions and duration.

9.

Portable structures may be used as interim offices for a one year period in commercial and industrial zones. A one year
time extension may be requested at least thirty days before the one year period expires. A new temporary use permit
may be granted for such one year time extension following public hearing pursuant to Section .580.D.

10.

Similar temporary uses and extension on dates and occasions which, in the opinion of the community development
director, are compatible with the district and surrounding uses and necessary because of unusual or unique
circumstances.

(Ord. No. 3896, § 2.)

F.

APPEALS

The applicant or any adjacent property owner may appeal the decision of the community development director to the planning
commission in writing within ten days of such decision. The decision of the planning commission shall be final.
(Ord. No. 3654, § 4.)

Sec. .584. - Speci c plans.
A.

PURPOSE AND INTENT

The intent of this section is to establish uniform procedures for the preparation, processing, adoption and amendment of specific
plans. Specific plans are to provide for the classification and regulation of land use and development with specific project boundaries and
shall implement the goals and objectives of the general plan. Unless otherwise specified within the specific plan itself, it is intended that
the specific plan will replace the base zoning district, and that the development standards contained in the specific plan will take
precedence over this code, where applicable. Where the specific plan is silent regarding a development or improvement standard
contained within this code, this code's standard of the zoning district which most closely resembles the use and intensity of the proposed
development shall apply.
Specific plans shall achieve the following purposes:
1.

To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare;

2.

To minimize the intrusion of new development into environmentally sensitive areas;

3.

To ensure the timely provision of essential public services and facilities consistent with the demand for such services;

4.

To promote a harmonious variety of housing choices and commercial and industrial activities; to attain a desirable
balance of residential and employment opportunities, a high level of urban amenities, and preservation of natural and
scenic qualities of open space; and

5.

To facilitate quality development within the city by permitting greater flexibility and encouraging more creative and
aesthetically pleasing designs for major urban development projects subject to large scale community planning.

B.

APPLICABILITY

294/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The provisions of this section shall apply to all parcels of land designated as specific plan areas in the city's general plan and on the
official zoning map. Once a specific plan is noticed for public hearing, no building or grading permit, planned development permit,
conditional use permit, variance, tentative map, or any other entitlement shall be granted for any parcel within any area so designated.
A minimum project area of fifteen acres, as a separate parcel or in combination with adjoining parcels, is required for the filing of a
specific plan application. Such minimum requirement shall not be waived via variance or modification. A specific plan area shall be under
single ownership or otherwise subject to unified planning and development, with the concurrence of all property owners. In cases where
the city is the applicant, said unified ownership or concurrence of owners shall not be required. A specific plan shall be subject to
development review.
C.

ADOPTED SPECIFIC PLANS/MAP DESIGNATION

Areas with an adopted specific plan shall be designated "specific plan" on the general plan map and on the official zoning map as
follows:
In all cases, the "SP" symbol shall be followed by an abbreviation to designate the specific plan (e.g., SP-DT for specific plan
downtown). All development shall be subject to provisions of the designated specific plan, associated documents and the regulations
of this chapter.
The following areas are adopted and designated on the zoning map as specific plan (SP) areas. A copy of the text of these specific
plans shall be kept in the office of the community development department.
1.

Downtown Pomona specific plan (SP-DT).

(Ord. No. 3723, § 5.)

D.

SPECIFIC PLAN CONTENTS

A specific plan may include, but not be limited to, a text and diagram(s) which specify all of the following in detail:
1.

The distribution, location and extent of the land, including open space, within the area covered by the plan;

2.

The proposed distribution, location, extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation,
sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, parks and other essential facilities proposed to be located within
the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan;

3.

Standards and criteria by which development will proceed and standards for the conservation, development and
utilization of natural resources, where applicable;

4.

A program of implementation measures including regulations, programs, public works projects, financing measures and
a statement of consistency with any existing master/capital improvements plan necessary to carry out subdivisions 1, 2
and 3 listed above; and

5.

The specific plan shall include a statement of its relationship to the general plan including a statement of how the specific
plan implements the goals and policies of the general plan.

E.

DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS

The text of the specific plan shall describe the basic land use regulations, site development regulations and performance standards
designed to govern each use identified by the land use plan. The text shall be as comprehensive as necessary to establish basic
provisions and regulations which shall govern subsequent approval of specific tracts or developments within the specific plan. The text
may include, but not be limited to, the following provisions:
1.

A listing of allowable uses within each use area, including such qualifying descriptions or definitions and requirements
for conditional use permits, as may be applicable;

2.

Regulations governing residential density, site coverage, lot size and dimensions, yard requirements, usable open space,
landscaping and performance standards;

3.

Required yards, landscaping or other site development regulations applicable to adjacent other zoning districts at the
perimeter of the specific plan and boundaries;

4.

Supplemental illustrations establishing the basic community architectural character, environmental character and
environmental design qualities to be attained throughout the specific plan and within particular portions of the district;
295/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

5.

A discussion of the architectural, landscaping, streetscape and other urban design features for development within the spec
discussion of standards and concepts shall be specific in nature. Streetscape design concepts shall include, but not be limite
palette, landscaped lots and medians, fence and wall material and placement, lighting, street furniture and equipment scree

6.

For properties having natural slope areas prior to grading of fifteen percent or more, and which propose development in
these areas, hillside development standards shall be prepared and included in the document. The standards shall
include, but not be limited to, measures to minimize grading impacts, erosion control landscaping, modified street
standards, drainage structures compatible with the land form, fencing details, and maximum height or percent of slope
in yard areas.

F.

NOTICING FOR PUBLIC HEARING
1.

Legal notice of hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days
before the date of the hearing. The notice shall contain data pertinent to the case, including date, time, place of hearing
and location of documents for review.

2.

In addition to the item No. 1 of this subsection, written notice shall be mailed in the United States mail not less than ten
days prior to the date of the hearing, to the affected property owners and owners of property within a radius of four
hundred feet from the external boundaries of the property described in the application, using for this purpose of the last
known name and address of such owners as are shown on the tax roll of the county of Los Angeles. Such written notice
shall contain pertinent data related to the case.

3.

If the properties in a project area exceeds one thousand in number, written notice shall be mailed in the United States
mail not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to only those property owners in the area affected by the
proposed specific plan amendment. Such written notice shall contain pertinent data related to the case. In addition,
notice of hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city, as described in item No. 1 of
this subsection.

(Ord. 3766, § 3.)

G.

COMMISSION ACTION ON SPECIFIC PLANS

The commission shall make a written recommendation via resolution on the proposed specific plan whether to approve, approve in
modified form or disapprove, based upon the findings contained in subsection I of this section. Commission action recommending that
the proposed specific plan be approved, approved in modified form or disapproved shall be considered by the council following
commission action.
H.

COUNCIL ACTION ON SPECIFIC PLANS

Upon receipt of the commission's recommendations, the council shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the
proposed specific plan based upon the findings contained in subsection I of this section.
I.

FINDINGS

A specific plan may be adopted only if all of the following findings are made:
1.

The proposed plan systematically implements and is consistent with the general plan;

2.

The proposed plan will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city;

3.

The subject property is physically suitable for the requested land use designation(s) and the anticipated land use
development(s);

4.

The plan provides for the development of a comprehensively planned project that is superior to development otherwise
allowed under conventional zoning classifications; and

5.

The proposed plan will contribute to a balance of land uses so that local residents may work and shop in the community
in which they live.

J.

AMENDMENT PROCEDURE

A specific plan text and map may be amended in the same manner as when adopted except that the specific plan may be amended
as often as deemed necessary by the city council. Amendment of a specific plan text shall be subject to the same findings as prescribed
for initial enactment of a specific plan, pursuant to subsection I of this section. An amendment to a specific plan text and map may be
initiated in the same manner as in subsection B of this section.
296/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

K.

MODIFICATION PROCEDURE
The development and design standards set forth in the text of a specific plan may under certain unique situations be

difficult to integrate into a project which otherwise complies with all other specific plan standards and regulations. In such situations, an
application for a modification of specific plan may be made by the developer of such project. Such application shall be made and
processed in the same manner as are applications for variances, pursuant to Section .560 of this code. Such application may be granted
upon the planning commission finding that:
1.

The modification is necessary to accomplish a physically and economically viable project; and

2.

The modification will effectuate the general purpose and intent of the specific plan.

Specific plan standards and regulations other than those subject to modification, as set forth above, may be changed only by an
amendment to the specific plan. Any modification pursuant to this section shall be specific to the site in question and shall not be
deemed to be an amendment to a specific plan or of any zoning ordinance, subordinate or related to the specific plan.
L.

SPECIFIC PLAN CONSISTENCY

No public works project, tract map, parcel map, conditional use permit, variance, or other land use entitlement may be approved,
adopted or amended within an area covered by a specific plan, unless found consistent with the adopted specific plan.
(Ord. No. 3688, § 4.)

Sec. .590. - Moving of buildings procedure.
No permit shall be issued for the moving of any residential, commercial, or industrial building or structures from one lot to another lot in
the city or from a lot outside of the city to one within the city without the filing of an application for a conditional use permit for a moving of
building permit under the conditional use permit procedures (Sec. .580), except for a single manufactured house where the intended use is
for a single-family dwelling on a single residentially zoned lot.
A.

The following information shall be filed with the planning division at the time the application is made:
1.

Location and address of the old and new site.

2.

Plot plan of the new location, including the showing of adjacent lots on all sides of the property, and an indication of
all structures and improvements on said lots.

3.

Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new location, including landscape treatment of
front, side and rear yards.

B.

4.

Definition of the route of travel for the house to be moved.

5.

Photographs to be furnished by the applicant:
(a)

All elevations of the structure proposed to be moved.

(b)

The site onto which the building is proposed to be moved.

(c)

The buildings adjacent to the proposed site.

Before the planning commission may approve the application for a conditional use permit for moving of building or
structure, there shall be a finding that said moving shall have no detrimental effect on the living environment and
property values in the area into which the structure is to be moved. Conditions shall be set forth as are deemed
necessary and reasonable to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and the master
plan for the intent thereof.

C.

A licensed contractor shall apply for and be responsible for any and all applications for moving of buildings and all
phases of each project.

D.

Plot plans, landscaping plans and irrigation plans shall be submitted for signatures per Public Works Department
requirements prior to issuance of building permits.

E.

CASH BONDS
(1)

Before a building permit may be granted there shall be the posting of a cash bond as determined by the supervising
building official and city engineer to cover costs of the activities involving the city and the expenditures involved in
complying with conditions related to improvements of the property which may have been established in the
297/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

granting of the permit.
(2)

The bond shall also cover the costs involved in cleaning up the vacated site and restoring it to a safe and sightly
condition if said site is within the city.

(3)

The bond shall also insure the completion of the project within a reasonable, specified time limit, which is to be
established by the planning commission at the public hearing.

F.

BASIS FOR FINDINGS

In approving an application for a conditional use permit to move a building into an area, the planning commission shall find:
(1)

That the building is in conformity with the type and quality of buildings existing in the area into which it is proposed
to be moved.

(2)

That said building is not more than two stories in height.

(3)

That its location on the lot does not in any way adversely affect buildings or uses on abutting properties.

(4)

That the percentage of lot coverage by all buildings and structures be not greater than that permitted by the district
into which the house is proposed to be moved.

(5)

That all yard and setback provisions be observed.

(6)

Prior to occupancy the building shall be brought up to standards of a new building, and shall be painted and
refurbished.

(7)

That all dedications and improvements required for streets and alleys necessary for access to the property upon
which the house is to be located be provided in conformity with the standards of the city.

G.

APPEAL

The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council as set forth in Section .580-C.
H.

FILING FEE AND PROPERTY OWNERS LIST

The filing fee and list of owners required to be notified for a conditional use permit for moving a building shall be as required in
Section .580-B.
(Ord. No. 1821, § 6; Ord. No. 2641, § 1; Ord. No. 3070, § 33.)

Sec. .600 - Exterior property maintenance.
All buildings and the land upon which said buildings are located and all vacant land in the city which is maintained in a condition which is
detrimental to the property of others, or which is maintained so as to result in an unsightly, hazardous or inappropriate condition, or which
reduces the value of neighboring properties, are public nuisances and a violation of the comprehensive zoning ordinance. No person who
owns, maintains or possesses a building or land shall permit or allow such nuisance condition to exist on his building or land. A violation of
any provisions of Section .600 shall be an infraction or misdemeanor pursuant to Section .670.
Such conditions include but are not limited to keeping or depositing on, scattering over, or allowing to exist on the premises, any of the
following: (Ord. No. 4118, § 20.)
A.

Residential Buildings and Premises.
1.

Lumber, junk, trash, debris or salvaged materials visible at ground level from a public street, alley or adjoining
property;

2.

Weeds or dead, diseased, damaged or overgrown vegetation of any type including trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and
ground covers;

3.

Trash, garbage or refuse cans, bins, boxes or other such containers stored for more than twenty-four (24) hours on
the public right-of-way or within the required front yard or side yard abutting the street;

(Ord. No. 3959, § 5.)

4.

Abandoned, discarded or unused furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other
household fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible at ground level from a public street or alley, or from
adjoining property;
298/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

5.

Construction equipment or machinery of any type or description, parked or stored on residential premises when it
is readily visible to the general public, except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an
active building permit are in progress on the subject premises or on adjoining property;

6.

Other conditions related to buildings, structures, or landscaping which are in need of correction, repair or adequate
and proper maintenance, including but not limited to the existence of broken windows, surfaces in need of
repainting, physical damage or general dilapidation, and graffiti; (Ord. No. 4118, § 20.)

7.

Damaged, dilapidated, inadequately or improperly maintained signs or other identification or advertising devices or
signs related to uses no longer conducted at the site;

8.

Clothing, linens, towels, laundry, rugs, and other similar materials may not be hung on lines, ropes, trees, bushes,
fences, building, railings or walls in the front or side yards or be visible from the front or side property lines;

(Ord. No. 3651, § 11.)

9.

Residential premises which are abandoned and unoccupied for thirty days or more must be secured from
vandalism and dumping by fencing the perimeter of the lot, where it is not already fenced, with a six-foot-high fence
of chain link or similar wire mesh fencing material, or wrought iron or tubular steel fencing . For regulations
pertaining to the design and construction of chain link and wire mesh fences around abandoned and unoccupied
residential premises, see Sec. .503-I 4(e). (Ord. No. 3651, § 12; Ord. No. 4118, § 20.)

10.

Fences and walls partially or wholly constructed of, or assembled from, junk material, debris, tarps or other types of
fabric (except for mesh fabric specifically designed as windscreens to be used for tennis courts), rolled plaster,
sheet metal, plywood, or other waste materials (unless such waste materials have been reprocessed into building
materials marketed to the general public as fencing and/or wall materials and resembling new building materials).
For additional regulations pertaining to walls and fences, see Sec. .503-I of the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. No. 4118, §
20.)

B.

Occupied Nonresidential Buildings or Premises.
1.

Discarded lumber, junk, trash, construction debris, salvaged materials or waste materials of any description located
anywhere on the premises, except in approved trash-storage or pick-up areas, or in junkyards as allowed under this
section or Section .6001;

2.

Damaged, dilapidated, inadequately or improperly maintained buildings or structures, or buildings or structures left
in a state of partial completion and not covered by an active building permit;

3.

Damaged, dilapidated, or inadequately or improperly maintained signs or other identification or advertising devices
or signs related to uses no longer conducted at the site;

4.

Neglected or improperly maintained landscaping: This shall include weed infested, dead or overgrown vegetation,
or vegetation dying as a result of physical damage, disease, insect infestation or lack of water, and any required
landscaping removed without city approval;

5.

Trash, garbage or refuse cans, bins, boxes or other such containers stored for more than twenty-four hours on the
public right-of-way or within the required front yard or required side yard abutting a street;

6.

Business activities, including sales, storage of merchandise or materials, and manufacturing not conducted entirely
within a totally enclosed building, except as specifically permitted by other provisions of this section or Section
.6001.

7.

Other conditions related to buildings, structures, walls, fences or landscaping which are in need of correction, repair
or adequate and proper maintenance, including but not limited to the existence of broken windows, surfaces in
need of repainting, physical damage or general dilapidation, and graffiti.

C.

Vacant Nonresidential Buildings or Premises.
1.

Property maintenance requirements for vacant commercial, industrial or professional buildings or premises shall
be the same as for occupied buildings, where applicable, along with additional requirements applicable to vacant
buildings or premises only;

2.

Damaged, dilapidated, or inadequately or improperly maintained signs or other identification or advertising devices
or signs related to uses no longer conducted at the site.
299/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

a.

That rental, sale or lease signs not exceeding one-half square foot for each linear foot of building fronting the stre
the building.

b.

That the business which most recently occupied the premises may advertise the fact that the business has
moved and the new business address, on one sign, not to exceed one-half square foot in area for each linear
foot of building fronting the street, to be displayed on the wall or in a window. Such sign may remain in place
until such time that the building or premises are occupied by a new business, or for a maximum of one
hundred twenty days from the date on which the building or premises first become vacant.

3.

Nonresidential premises which are abandoned and unoccupied for thirty days or more must be secured from
vandalism and dumping by fencing the perimeter of the lot, where it is not already fenced, with a six-foot-high fence
of chain link or similar wire mesh fencing material, or wrought iron or tubular steel. For regulations pertaining to
the design and construction of chain link and wire mesh fences around abandoned and unoccupied nonresidential
premises, see Sec. .503-I 4(e). (Ord. No. 4118, § 20.)

D.

Vacant Land.
1.

Discarded lumber, junk, trash, construction debris, salvaged materials or waste materials of any description located
anywhere on the vacant property;

2.

Weeds or dead, diseased, damaged or overgrown vegetation of any type, including trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and
ground covers;

3.

Vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, trailers of any type, boats, camper shells, motor homes, mobile homes and
construction equipment, regardless of condition or capability of self-powered movement, parked or stored on
vacant private property, except as specifically permitted by other provisions of this section or Section .6001, or of
the Uniform Building Code as adopted and amended by the city:

4.

Abandoned, discarded, unused or stored industrial, business or household equipment, fixtures, furniture or
materials, located anywhere on the vacant property:

5.

Damaged, dilapidated, or inadequately or improperly maintained signs or other identification or advertising devices
or signs relating to uses no longer conducted at the site including the signs permitted by Sections 3-45. 3-46 and 347 of Chapter 3 (Advertising) of this code.

(Ord. No. 2773, § 1 (part): Ord. No. 3386, § 2.)

Sec. .6001. - Abatement of nuisance by administrative action, alternative to criminal action.
An owner of real property, or a bona fide agent thereof, who has received an order from the city to correct any condition existing on the
subject property pursuant to a violation of Section .600 may request within fifteen days after such order has been sent by first-class mail. or
delivered by personal service, a hearing before a hearing officer appointed by the city administrator. The order of the city to correct a
violation of Section .600, shall inform the property owner of his hearing rights as set forth hereinabove and shall state that the failure for a
property owner to exercise his hearing rights shall be deemed a waiver thereof.
A.

Request for Hearing and Hearing Officer Action.
1.

Upon receipt of a written request to appeal an order to correct any condition existing on real property pursuant to
the provisions of Section .600, which request shall include a statement of the alleged misinterpretation or incorrect
application of the ordinance, the hearing officer shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon, not less than
fifteen days nor more than forty days thereafter.

2.

The hearing officer shall hold one hearing upon the matters referred to in the application for appeal, and thereupon
within fifteen days of such hearing shall render his decision. The decision shall determine the validity of the order to
correct the conditions in question and shall determine whether the city staff has interpreted the ordinance correctly
and applied the law fairly and equitably in the handling of this case. In the event that the order to correct is upheld,
upon the finding that the conditions of property set forth in Section .600 exist, the hearing officer shall conclude
that the condition on the property is a nuisance.

3.

The decision shall be filed with the city administrator within twenty days, and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the
applicant by the hearing officer at the address shown on the application for appeal. The decision of the hearing
officer shall be final forthwith.
300/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

4.

In the event the hearing officer does not sustain the objection of the property owner or the property owner does
not object to the order to correct within the time prescribed above, the city shall abate the nuisance. The city shall
keep an itemized account of the expense involved in such abatement. This itemized statement shall be submitted to
the city clerk who shall send, by first-class mail, a copy of the statement to the person owning the land along with
the notice of the time and place when and where the statement shall be submitted to the city council for approval
and confirmation. At said time, the city council shall consider any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised
by the property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such work, after which, by resolution, the report as
submitted, or as ordered revised, corrected or modified by the city council shall be confirmed. If the statement is
not paid within fifteen days after the passing of the resolution, it shall constitute a lien on the real property upon
which the nuisance exists, and shall be collected as a special assessment against the real property. The resolution
shall further direct that the city clerk shall file with the auditor of Los Angeles County, and the county assessor and
tax collector, certified copies of the resolution and the statement adopted therein. The clerk shall direct the auditor
to enter the amount of the charges against the real property described in the statement and resolution as it
appears on the current assessment roll. The tax collector shall include the amount of the charges on the bills for
taxes levied against the real property. Thereafter, the amount of the charge shall be collected at the same time and
in the same manner and by the same person as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the
city and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest upon delinquent payment.

(Ord. No. 2773, § 1 (part): Ord. No. 3386, § 4.)

Sec. .610. - Compliance.
All departments, officials, or public employees, vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, licenses or certificates of occupancy,
where required by law, shall conform to provisions of this ordinance. No such permit, license or certificate for buildings, uses, or purposes
where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance shall be issued. Any such permit, license or certificate, if issued in
conflict with the provisions hereof, shall be null and void.
Sec. .640. - Enforcement.
A.

PLANNING COMMISSION

The planning commission shall administer the regulations as provided for in this ordinance and amendments thereto: the planning
commission shall hear and recommend to the council matters involving changes of zones, suspensions and modification of setback
ordinances, and decide matters involving variances, conditional use permits, public use permits, determinations of similarity, and
perform such other duties as are requested by the council by resolution.
(Ord. No. 1821, § 7: Ord. No. 3223, § 1 (part).)

B.

SUPERVISING BUILDING OFFICIAL

It shall be the duty of the supervising building official to enforce the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to the erecting,
construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration of, or addition to, any building: and to enforce the requirements of
occupancy in any dwelling, apartment house, or other building not otherwise regulated by the license officer as herein stated.
Sec. .650. - Form of applications, petitions and appeals.
The commission shall, in its rules of procedure, prescribe the form and scope of all petitions and applications provided for in this
ordinance, and of the accompanying data to be furnished, so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for proper
consideration of the matter involved in each case and for a permanent record thereof. Any petition as provided for in this ordinance shall
include a verification by at least one (1) of the petitioners, attested to before a notary public or before the city clerk.
Sec. .660. - Legal procedure.

301/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this ordinance, and any use of land, building or premises established, conducted or operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
ordinance, shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance; and the city attorney of the city upon order of the
council, shall immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and the enjoining thereof in the manner
prescribed by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate
and remove the structure or building, and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining or use of
any such building or structure or using property contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. The remedies provided herein shall be
cumulative and not exclusive.
Sec. .670. - Penalties for violation.
Any person violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the city attorney or the district attorney of Los Angeles County. Any such violation, if a
misdemeanor, shall upon conviction be punishable by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a term of not
exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment: and if an infraction, shall upon conviction be punishable by a fine of not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of
which the violation of this code is committed by such person and shall he punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. No. 3188, § 1: Ord. No. 3386, § 3.)

Sec. .680. - Validity.
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The council of the city hereby declares that it would have
passed and does hereby pass this ordinance and each section, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid, or unconstitutional.
Sec. .690. - Amendment and repeal.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Sec. .700. - E ective date.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage as provided by law.
Sec. .710. - Certi cation of passage, etc.
Approved, Adopted and Signed this 14th day of May, 1957.
s/ Arthur H. Cox, Mayor.
ATTEST:
s/ L. B. Thomas City Clerk
City Clerk
Approved as to form this 14th day of May, 1957
s/ Arlo E. Rickett, Jr.
City Attorney

STATE OF

}

ss

CALIFORNIA

302/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

COUNTY OF LOS

}

ANGELES

I, L. B. Thomas, City Clerk of the City of Pomona, California DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE foregoing Ordinance was introduced
at a regular meeting of the Council of said City, duly held on the 7th day of May, 1957, and thereafter at a regular meeting of said
Council duly held on the 14th day of May, 1957, was reread, duly passed and adopted by the said Council and signed and
approved by the Mayor of said City, and that said Ordinance was so passed and adopted by the following vote, to wit:
AYES: Councilmen Baker, Brownell, (Mayor) Cox
NOES: Councilmen Long, Turney
ABSENT: Councilmen none
s/ L. B. Thomas, City Clerk.
PART IV. - APARTMENT OWNERSHIP.
Sec. .800. - Apartment ownership part.
This part shall be known as the "Apartment Ownership Part."
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .801. - De nitions.
As used in this part, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a)

"Apartment" means a part of the property intended for any type of independent use, including one or more rooms or
enclosed spaces or open balconies or patios located on one or more floors (or part or parts thereof) in a building, and
with a direct exit to a public street or highway or to a common area leading to such street or highway.

(b)

"Apartment owner" means the person or persons owning an apartment in fee simple absolute and an undivided interest
in the fee simple estate of the common areas and facilities in the percentage specified and established in the declaration.

(c)

"Apartment number" means the number, letter, or combination thereof, designating the apartment in the Declaration.

(d)

"Association of apartment owners" means all of the apartment owners acting as a group in accordance with the by-laws
and declaration.

(e)

"Building" means a building, containing four or more apartments, or two or more buildings, each containing two or more
apartments, with a total of four or more apartments for all such buildings, and comprising a part of the property.

(f)

"Common areas and facilities," unless otherwise provided in the declaration or lawful amendments thereto, means and
includes:
(1)

The land on which the building is located.

(2)

The foundations, columns, girders, beams, supports, main walls, roofs, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairs, stairways, fire
escapes, and entrances and exits of the building;

(3)

The basements, yards, gardens, parking areas and storage spaces;

(4)

The premises for the lodging of janitors or persons in charge of the property;

(5)

Installations of central services such as power, light, gas, hot and cold water, heating, refrigeration, air conditioning
and incinerating;

(6)

The elevators, tanks, pumps, motors, fans, compressors, ducts and in general all apparatus and installations
existing for common use;

(7)

Such community and commercial facilities as may be provided for in the declaration; and

303/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(8)
(g)

(h)

All other parts of the property necessary or convenient to its existence, maintenance and safety, or normally in commo

"Common expenses" means and include:
(1)

All sums lawfully assessed against the apartment owners by the association of apartment owners;

(2)

Expenses of administration, maintenance, repair or replacement of the common areas and facilities;

(3)

Expenses agreed upon as common expenses by the association of apartment owners;

(4)

Expenses declared common expenses by provisions of part, or by the declaration or the by-laws.

"Common profits" means the balance of all income, rents, profits and revenues from the common areas and facilities
remaining after the deduction of the common expenses.

(i)

"Declaration" means the instrument by which the property is submitted to the provisions of this part, as hereinafter
provided, and such declaration as from time to time may be lawfully amended.

(j)

"Limited common areas and facilities" means and include those common areas and facilities designated in the
declaration as reserved for use of certain apartment or apartments to the exclusion of the other apartments.

(k)

"Majority" or "majority of apartment owners" means the apartment owners with 51% or more of the votes in accordance
with the percentage assigned in the declaration to the apartments for voting purposes.
(1)

(m)

"Person" means individual, corporation, partnership, association, trustee or other legal entity.

"Property" means and includes the land, the building, all improvements and structures thereon, all owned in fee simple
absolute and all easements, rights and appurtenances belonging thereto, and all articles of personal property intended
for use in connection therewith, which have been or are intended to be submitted to the provisions of this part.

(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .802. - Application of this part.
This part shall be applicable only to property, the sole owner or all of the owners of which submit the same to the provisions hereof by
duly executing and recording a declaration as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .803. - Status of the apartments.
Each apartment, together with its undivided interest in the coinmon areas and facilities, shall for all purposes in applying this part be
considered as real property.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .804. - Ownership of apartments.
Each apartment owner shall be entitled to the exclusive ownership and possession of his apartment for this part to apply.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .805. - Common areas and facilities.
The declaration shall provide for the following among other matters:
(a)

Each apartment owner shall be entitled to an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities in the percentage
expressed in the declaration.

(b)

The percentage of the undivided interest of each apartment owner in the common areas and facilities as expressed in
the declaration shall have a permanent character and shall not be altered without the consent of all of the apartment
owners and approved by the City of Pomona expressed in an amended declaration duly recorded. The percentage of the
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities shall not be separated from the apartment to which it appertains
and shall be deemed to be conveyed or encumbered with the apartment even though such interest is not expressly
mentioned or described in the conveyance or other instrument.
304/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

(c)

The common areas and facilities shall remain undivided and no apartment owner or any other person shall bring any action
division of any part thereof. Any covenant to the contrary shall not be approved.

(d)

Each apartment owner may use the common areas and facilities in accordance with the purpose for which they were
intended without hindering or encroaching upon the lawful rights of the other apartment owners.

(e)

The necessary work of maintenance, repair and replacement of the common areas and facilities and the making of any
additions or improvements thereto shall be carried out only as provided herein and in the by-laws or declaration.

(f)

The association of apartment owners shall have the irrevocable right, to be exercised by the manager or board of
directors, to have access to each apartment from time to time during reasonable hours as may be necessary for the
maintenance, repair or replacement of any of the common areas and facilities therein or accessible therefrom, or for
making emergency repairs therein necessary to prevent damage to the common areas and facilities or to another
apartment or apartments.

(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .806. - Compliance with covenants, by-laws and administrative provisions.
The declaration shall provide that each apartment owner shall comply strictly with the by-laws and with the administrative rule and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as either of the same may be lawfully amended from time to time, and with the covenants, conditions
and restrictions set forth in the declaration or in the deed to his apartment. Failure to comply with any of the same shall be ground for an
action to recover sums due, for damages or injunctive relief or both maintainable by the manager or board of directors on behalf of the
association of apartment owners, or, in a proper case, by an aggrieved apartment owner.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .807. - Certain work prohibited.
The declaration shall provide that no apartment owner shall do any work which would jeopardize the soundness or safety of the
property, reduce the value thereof, or impair any easement or hereditament without in every such case the consent of the association of
apartment owners being first obtained.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .808. - Common pro ts and expenses.
The declaration shall provide that the common profits of the property shall be distributed among, and the common expenses shall be
charged to, the apartment owners according to the percentage of the undivided interest in the common areas and facilities.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .809. - Contents of declaration.
The declaration shall contain the following particulars:
1.

Description of the land on which the building and improvements are or are to be located.

2 Description of the building, stating the number of stories and basements, the number of apartments and the principal materials of
which it is or is to be constructed.
3.

The apartment number of each apartment, and a statement of its location, and immediate common area to which it has
access, and any other data necessary for its proper identification.

4.

Description of the common areas.

5.

Description of the limited common areas and facilities, if any, stating to which apartments their use is reserved.

6.

The percentage of undivided interest held by each apartment in the common areas and facilities appertaining to each
apartment and its owner for all purposes, including voting.

7.

Statement of the purposes for which the building amid each of the apartments are intended and restricted as to use.
305/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

8.

The name of a person to receive service of process together with the residence or place of business of such person which sh
City of Pomona until the association of apartment owners designates a person to receive service of process which name and
the City of Pomona shall be filed from time to time with the city clerk of the City of Pomona within 30 days of the designatio

9.

Provision as to the percentage of votes by the apartment owners which shall be determinative of whether to rebuild,
repair, restore, or sell the property in the event of damage or destruction of all or part of the property.

10.

Any further details in connection with the property which the person executing the declaration may deem desirable to
set forth consistent with the part.

11.

The method by which the declaration may be amended, consistent with the provisions of this part.

(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .810. - Contents of deeds of apartments.
Deeds of apartments shall include the following particulars:
1.

Description of the subdivision and the portion thereof being conveyed, including the liber, page and date of recording of
the declaration.

2.

The apartment number of the apartment in the declaration and any other data necessary for its proper identification.

3.

The percentage of undivided interest appertaining to the apartment in the common areas and facilities.

4.

Any further details which the grantor and grantee may deem desirable to set forth consistent with the declaration and
this part.

(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .811. - Copy of the oor plans to be led.
Simultaneously with the recording of the subdivision map, the declaration shall be recorded and there shall be filed in the office of the
building department of the City of Pomona a set of the floor plans of the building showing the layout, location, apartment numbers and
dimensions of the apartments as they affect the common area stating the name of the building or that it has no name, and bearing the
verified statement of a registered architect or licensed professional engineer certifying that it is an accurate copy of portions of the plans of
the building as filed with and approved by the council of the City of Pomona. If such plans do not include a verified statement by such
architect or engineer that such plans fully and accurately depict the layout, location, apartment numbers and dimensions of the apartments
as built, there shall be recorded prior to the first conveyance of any apartment an amendment to the declaration to which shall be attached a
verified statement of a registered architect or licensed professional engineer certifying that the plans theretofore filed, or being filed
simultaneously with such amendment, fully and accurately depict the layout, location, apartment numbers and dimensions of the
apartments as built. Such plans shall be kept by the building department in a separate file for each building, indexed in the same manner as
a conveyance entitled to record, numbered serially in the order of receipt, each designated "apartment ownership," with the name of the
building, if any, and each containing a reference to the liber page and date of recording of the subdivision map and the declaration.
Correspondingly, the record of the declaration shall contain a reference to the file number of the floor plans of the building affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .812. - Recording.
(a)

The declaration, any amendment or amendments thereof, any instrument by which the provisions of this part may be waived,
and every instrument affecting the property or any apartmnent shall be executed properly to be recorded. The declaration
and any amendment thereof shall be duly recorded.

(Ord, No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .813. - By-laws.
The administration of every property shall be governed by by-laws, a true copy of which shall be filed with the City of Pomona before
recording.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

306/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. .814. - Contents of by-laws.
The by-laws may provide for the following:
(a)

The election from among the apartment owners of a board of directors, the number of persons constituting the same,
and that the terms of at least one-third of the directors shall expire annually; the powers and duties of the board; the
compensation, if any, of the directors; the method of removal from office of directors; and whether or not the board may
engage the services of a manager or managing agent.

(b)

Method of calling meetings of the apartment owners; what percentage, if other than a majority of apartment owners
shall constitute a quorum.

(c)

Election of a president from among the board of directors who shall preside over the meetings of the board of directors
and of the association of apartment owners.

(d)

Election of a secretary who shall keep the minute book wherein resolution shall be recorded.

(e)

Election of a treasurer who shall keep the financial records and books of account.

(f)

Maintenance, repair and replacement of the common areas and facilities and payments thereof, including the method of
approving payment vouchers.

(g)

Manner of collecting from the apartment owners their share of the common expenses.

(h)

Designation and removal of personnel necessary for the maintenance, repair and replacement of the common areas and
facilities.

(i)

Method of adopting and of amending administrative rules and regulations governing the details of the operation and use
of the common areas and facilities.

(j)

Such restrictions on and requirements respecting the use and maintenance of the apartments and the use of the
common areas and facilities, not set forth in the declaration, as are designed to prevent unreasonable interference with
the use of their respective apartments and of the common areas and facilities by the several apartment owners.

(k)

The percentage of votes required to amend the by-laws.

(l)

Other provisions as may be deemed necessary for the administration of the property consistent with this part.

(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .815. - Books of receipts and expenditures; availability for examination.
The declaration shall provide that the manager or board of directors, as the case may be, shall keep detailed, accurate records in
chronological order, of the receipts and expenditures affecting the common areas and facilities, specifying and itemizing the maintenance
and repair expenses of the common areas and facilities and any other expenses incurred. Such records and the vouchers authorizing the
payments shall be available for examination by the apartment owners at convenient hours of week days.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .816. - Separate taxation.
Insofar as the State of California law shall provide each apartment and its percentage of undivided interest in the common areas and
facilities shall be deemed to be a parcel and shall be subject to separate assessment and taxation by each assessment unit and special
district for all types of taxes authorized by law including but not limited to special ad valorem levies and special assessments.
(Ord. No. 1886, § 3.)

Sec. .817. - Priority of lien.
The declaration shall provide all sums assessed by the association of apartment owners but unpaid for the share of the common
expenses chargeable to any apartment shall constitute a lien on such apartment. Such lien may be foreclosed by suit by the manager or
board of directors, acting on behalf of the apartment owners, in like manner as a mortgage of real property. In any such foreclosure the
apartment owner shall be required to pay a reasonable rental for the apartment, if so provided in the by-laws, and the plaintiff in such
307/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

foreclosure shall be entitled to the appointment of a receiver to collect the same. The manager or board of directors, acting on behalf of the
apartment owners, shall have power, unless prohibited by the declaration to bid in the apartment at foreclosure sale, and to acquire and
hold, lease, mortgage and convey the same. Suit to recover a money judgment for unpaid common expenses shall be maintainable without
foreclosing or waiving the lien securing the same.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .818. - Joint and several liability of grantor and grantee for unpaid common expenses.
The declaration shall provide that in a voluntary conveyance the grantee of an apartment shall be jointly and severally liable with the
grantor for all unpaid assessments against the latter for his share of the common expenses up to the time of the grant or conveyance,
without prejudice to the grantee's right to recover from the grantor the amounts paid by the grantee therefor. However, any such grantee
shall be entitled to a statement from the manager or board of directors, as the case may be, setting forth the amount of the unpaid
assessments against the grantor and such grantee shall not be liable for, nor shall the apartment conveyed by subject to a lien for, any
unpaid assessments against the grantor in excess of the amount therein set forth.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .819. - Disposition of property; destruction or damage.
The declaration shall provide that if, within 360 days or less as determined by the association of apartment owners of the date of the
damage or destruction to all or part of the property, it is not determined by the association of apartment owners to repair, re-construct or
rebuild, them and in that event:
(a)

The property shall be deemed to be owned in common by the apartment owners;

(b)

The undivided interest in the property owned in common which shall appertain to each apartment owner shall be the
percentage of undivided interest previously owned by such owner in the common areas and facilities;

(c)

Any liens affecting any of the apartments shall be deemed to be transferred in accordance with the existing priorities to
the percentage of the undivided interest of the apartment owner in the property as provided herein; and

(d)

The property shall he subject to an action for partition at the suit of any apartment owner, in which event the net
proceeds of sale, together with the net proceeds of the insurance on the property if any, shall be considered as one fund
and shall be divided among all the apartment owners in a percentage equal to the percentage of undivided interest
owned by each owner in the property, after first paying out of the respective shares of the apartment owners, to the
extent sufficient for the purpose, all liens on the undivided interest in the property owned by each apartment owner.

(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .820. - Personal application.
The declaration shall provide:
(a)

All apartment owners, tenants of such owners, employees of owners and tenants, or any other persons that may in any
manner use property or any part thereof submitted to the provisions of this part shall be subject to this part and to the
declaration and by-laws of the association of apartment owners adopted pursuant to the provisions of this part.

(b)

All agreements, decisions and determinations lawfully made by the association of apartment owners in accordance with
the voting percentages established in the declaration or by-laws, shall be deemed to be binding on all apartment owners.

(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

Sec. .821. - Severability.
If any provision of this part or any section, sentence, clause, phrase or word, or the application thereof in any circumstance is held
invalid, the validity of the remainder of the part and of the application of any such provision, section, sentence, clause, phrase or word in any
other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 1866, § 3.)

308/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

APPENDIX II - MASTER PLAN OF PRINCIPAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS, ORDINANCE NO. 1199, CITY OF POMONA
Sec. 1. - Purposes.
The aforesaid Principal Street and Highway Plan is adopted to protect and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare and for the accomplishment thereof is adopted for the purposes more particularly set forth as follows:
(1)

To assist in providing a definite plan of development for the City of Pomona, and to guide, control and regulate the future
growth of said city in accordance with the Master Plan.

(2)

To provide a guide for the intelligent use of the capital expenditures of said city for street and highway improvements.

(3)

To provide an authentic source of information as to the development of the city for present and prospective residents
and investors therein.

(4)

To provide a pattern for such future subdivision of land as may take place in said city.

(5)

To obviate the menace to the public safety resulting from inadequate provisions of traffic thoroughfares in connection
with and as a result of the development of the city.

(6)

To prevent deterioration of property values and the impairment of conditions making for desirable residential,
commercial or industrial development, as the case may be, which would result from a lack of plans designed to assure
the orderly, harmonious and beneficial development of the city.

(7)

To provide for precise lines for boundaries of streets which are either existing or planned along which building set-backs
for structures are to be determined, and which shall be used for determining dedications for public rights of way. (Ord.
No. 2089, § 1.)

Sec. 2. - De nitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance certain words and terms are defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future ;
words in the singular number include the plural; and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory.

Buildings. Any structure built for the purpose, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
City. The City of Pomona, County of Los Angeles, State of California.
Council. The City Council of the City of Pomona.
Official plan of principal streets and highways. An official map of the City of Pomona indicating the present and future alignment of
principal streets and highways within the limits of said city and their proposed relocation, widening and extension.

Book of official plan lines. A book of maps of planned streets in die City of Pomona showing precise plan measurements of said streets
kept in the office of the city engineer and which have been adopted pursuant to this ordinance as additions to section 8 hereof.

Planning commission. The city planning commission of the City of Pomona.
Precise plan measurements. The exact plans and measurements as set forth in the engineering department showing the official precise
center-lines and other measurements of existing and proposed streets as shown on the official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways.

Street. A dedicated public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
Precise alignment. Precise engineered lines showing the boundaries of an existing or proposed street as shown on the Official Plan of
Principal Streets and Highways, and reduced to precise plan measurements or official plan lines in the Book of Official Plan Lines.

Non-precise alignment. Proposed location of streets which have not had their boundaries specifically engineered to precise alignments
but which are shown as a part of the circulation element of the Master Plan of the City of Pomona for information only.

Freeways. A divided highway for through traffic with full control of accesses leaving no intersecting streets at grade level as indicated on
the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways having varying widths.

309/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Arterial. A street indicated by legend as an arterial on the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways having a designated right of way
width of 100 feet.

Collector. A street indicated by legend as a collector on the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways having a designated width of
SO feet.

Minor collector. A street indicated by legend as a minor collector on the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways having a
designated right of way of 60 feet used primarily for direct access to residences, commercial, industrial or other abutting property carrying
through traffic to arterial and collector streets.

Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on ground,
but not including fences or walls used as fence less than 6 feet in height.

Structure, non-permanent. Any structure so designed and built as to be of a temporary status or construction.
(Ord. no. 2089, § 2.)

Sec. 3. - O cial plan of principal streets and highways.
There is hereby adopted an Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways as part of the Precise Plan of Traffic Circulation of the City of
Pomona. Said Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways was originally enacted by a map designated as an exhibit to the enacting
ordinance. However, because of numerous amendments of this ordinance, it has become necessary to redraw this map to include in one
map all the amendments and changes and to further add to said map further new precise alignments and non-precise alignments, and
establish minimum widths for rights of way. Said new map, therefore, is hereby enacted and adopted and made a part of this ordinance
marked Exhibit "A-l" 1 and is officially designated as "Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways", and is attached hereto and by reference
made a part hereof. Such map is also on file in the offices of the city clerk, city engineer and planning director of the City of Pomona. The
former map insofar as it is consistent with the new map is reenacted, hut any portions of the former map inconsistent with the new map is
hereby repealed. This new map designated as the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways shall serve as a basic guide map for future
development of streets and highways in the City of Pomona. For the accomplishment of the purposes of this ordinance, precise plan
measurements of planned streets as shown on the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways are on file in the office of the city engineer
of the City of Pomona. Such precise? plan measurements shall govern the specific precise alignments as indicated existing by the Official Plan
of Principal Streets and Highways.
Editor's note—
1. Editor's Note.—The map here referred to is not carried in this Appendix, but a copy thereof if filed in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 20S9, ;S; 3.)

Sec. 4. - Book of o cial plan lines generally,
For the further accomplishment of the purposes of this ordinance, precise alignment of planned streets are also set forth in the office of
the city engineer, known as the Book of Official Plan Lines, These Official Plan Lines are precise alignments of streets within the City of
Pomona which may or may not he in existence or which may or may not be actually shown as part of the Official Plan of Principal Streets and
Highways Map. However, for the purposes of this ordinance all regulations having to do with building setbacks from precise alignments and
for dedication of street rights of way-shall apply equally to streets shown in the Book of Official Plan Lines and the Official Plan of Principal
Streets and Highways.
The council hereby declares it has from time to time amended this ordinance, and intends in the future from time to time to amend this
ordinance, and such amendments to the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways, and to the Book of Official Plan Lines and shall
become continuations of section 8 of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 2089, § 4.)

Sec. 5. - Subdivision of land.

310/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

The streets and highways layout of any subdivision of land falling under the provisions of chapter 29 of Ordinance No, 1673 of the City of
Pomona as amended shall be in accordance with the aforesaid Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways and Official Plan Lines as
adopted by this ordinance and amendments thereto. Subdivisions shall be deemed to include any division of land into two or more lots. The
approval of such divisions shall not be given until, and unless, the necessary dedication for street rights of way have been given to the City of
Pomona as shown by precise alignments, precise plan measurements, Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways, and/or Book of Official
Plan Lines.
(Ord. No. 2089, § 5.)

Sec. 6. - Land within street alignment.
The making or adoption of said Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways, or any other provision of this ordinance, shall not in and
of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street
purposes. Nor shall anything in this ordinance be deemed a condition precedent to the acquisition of rights of way by purchase or by
proceedings in eminent domain.
(Ord. No. 2089, § 6.)

Sec. 7. - Building within street alignment.
No building, structure or expansion or enlargement thereof, or addition thereto, shall be erected or placed in the boundaries of any
planned street as shown on the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways, or any precise alignment thereof, or precise measurements
thereof, or of any precise alignments established by enactment of additions to the Book of Official Plan Lines as provided for in this
ordinance. This provision shall not apply to garden and agricultural crop, planting, and non-permanent structures as in the opinion of the
planning commission will not defeat the purpose of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 2089, § 7.)

Sec. 7.1. - O cial plan lines reducing size of lot to less than minimum area to build a structure—Removal of restrictions thirty days after building
permit is sought if land not purchased by the city.
The restrictions imposed by Section 7 of this ordinance shall not apply to any land which has been reduced in size for building purposes
by the adoption of an official plan line as described in Section 8 of this ordinance to less than the minimum size lot permitted in the zoning
district permitted by the uniform zoning ordinance in which such land is located after thirty days after a building permit for such land has
been applied for unless the city has purchased such land.
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1.)

Sec. 7.5. - Precise plans and regulations—Preparation by commission.
From time to time, the planning commission may, or if so directed by the city council, shall prepare or cause to be prepared plans based
on the master plan and drafts of such regulations, programs and legislation as may in its judgment be required to insure the systematic
execution of the master plan and the planning commission may recommend such plans and measures to the city council for adoption.
The precise plans and regulations may include:
(a)

Proposed regulations limiting the use of land and buildings, the height and bulk of buildings, and the open spaces about
buildings.

(b)

Proposed regulations limiting the locations of buildings and other improvements with respect to existing or planned
rights-of-way.

(c)

Such other matters that will accomplish the purpose of this chapter including procedure for the administration of such
regulations. A precise plan may include street and highway naming and numbering plans, in order to establish the official
names of streets and highways, and to remove conflicts, duplications and uncertainty among such names and to provide
an orderly system for the numbering of buildings and properties.

(Ord. No. 1579, § 15; Ord. No. 3449, § 2 (part).)

311/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. 7.6. - Same—Procedure for adoption.
(a)

Hearing by planning commission. Before recommending a precise plan or regulation to the city council or any amendment to
it, for adoption, the planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing, after giving notice of the time and place of the
hearing at least ten days before the hearing by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by
such other means as the planning commission may deem necessary.

(b)

Recommendation by the planning commission. The recommendation of any precise plan or regulation or any amendment to it
shall be made to the city council by resolution of the planning commission carried by the majority vote of the planning
commission members present at that planning commission meeting.

A copy of any precise plan, regulation or amendment recommended pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the city council
and shall be accompanied by a report of findings, summaries of hearings and recommendations of the planning commission.
(c)

Hearing by city council. Before adopting the proposed precise plan or regulation the city council shall hold at least one public
hearing, after giving notice of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days before the hearing by at least one publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(d)

Adoption by the city council. The plan or regulation, as adopted shall be designated as a precise plan or regulation.

(e)

Proposed change prior to adoption of precise plan. In adopting a precise plan or regulation, the city council shall make no
change in any proposed precise plan, regulation, or amendment thereto recommended by the planning commission, until the
proposed change has been referred back to the planning commission for a report and a copy of the report has been filed with
the city council.

(Ord. No. 1579, § 16; Ord. No. 2066, § 1; Ord. No. 3449, § 2 (part).)

Sec. 7.7. - Same—Procedure for council to initiate, adopt or change.
When the city council deems it to be in the public interest, the city council may initiate, adopt or change an ordinance or resolution
establishing any precise plans or regulations specified in section 20-18 of this Code, in the following manner:
(a)

Refer to the planning commission for report. The city council shall first refer such proposal to establish or change such
precise plan or regulation to the planning commission for a report. Before making a report the planning commission
shall hold at least one public hearing in the same manner as heretofore prescribed in the preceding section.

(b)

Failure to report deemed approval. The failure of the planning commission to report within forty days after the reference
or such period as may be designated by the city council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed adoption of the
change, ordinance or resolution.

Nothing in this chapter applies to the adoption or amending of any ordinance by the city council, whether or not it may relate to the
subjects mentioned in section 20-18 of this Code, except ordinances expressly adopting or amending a precise plan initiated pursuant to this
section. (Ord. No. 1579, § 17; Ord. No. 3449, § 2 (part).)
Sec. 7.8. - Same—Administration.
(A)

Administrative rules and procedures to enforce. The city council may determine and establish such administrative rules and
procedures as may be required for the application and enforcement of precise plans and regulations, and may assign or
delegate such administrative functions, powers and duties to the planning department provided for in section 20-14 of this
Code.

(B)

Subdivision map approval by planning commission. The city council may designate the planning commission as the advisory
agency with respect to the approval of subdivision maps.

(C)

Conditions prerequisite to street improvements:
1.

Improvements Prohibited without Report. The city shall not improve any street or authorize sewers or connections or
other improvements to be laid in any street within any territory for which the city council has adopted a precise street or
highway plan until the matter has been referred to the planning commission for a report and a copy of the report has
been filed with the city council unless one of the following conditions applies.
312/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

2.

Exceptions:
(a)

The street has been accepted, opened, or has otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to the
adoption of the plan.

(b)

It corresponds with streets shown on the plan.

(c)

It corresponds with streets, highways and freeways shown on a subdivision map or record of survey approved by
the city council.

(d)

It corresponds with streets, highways and freeways shown on a subdivision map previously approved by the
planning commission.

3.

Failure to Report Deemed Approval Failure of the planning commission to report on the matter within forty days after
the reference or such longer period as may be designated by the city council shall be deemed to be approval of such
matter.

(D)

Streets with same or conflicting names. Whether a master plan or any portion of it have been adopted or not, whenever the
planning commission finds that there are two or more streets within the city having the same name or names so similar as to
confuse the public, the planning commission may make any recommendation it deems appropriate to the city council which
shall thereupon take any action it considers proper. When any street is known by two or more names or when portions of the
same street have names that conflict, the planning commission may recommend to the city council a name for it.

(Ord. No. 1579, § 18; Ord. No. 3449, § 2 (part).)

Sec. 8. - Setback requirements.
Buildings, structures or expansions thereof, shall conform with the established setback regulations of the city as they apply to this
Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways as set forth in this ordinance, and in accordance with precise alignments established by precise
plan measurements and official plan lines contained in the Book of Official Plan Lines. Additions have been made to this ordinance
heretofore by designation of such additions as "official plan lines" of certain named streets. These have begun with Section "8.1." and have
continued thereafter. These additions are hereby reenacted; however, any reference hereafter made in this ordinance to Master Plan of
Principal Streets and Highways of the city means the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways as defined and set forth in Section 3 of
this ordinance, and any reference to "official plan lines" of certain streets shall mean those official plan lines and precise alignments as kept
in a Book of Official Plan Lines in the office of the city engineer as set forth in Section 4 of this ordinance and defined in Section 2 of this
ordinance. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to repeal any official plan lines which have heretofore been enacted prior to
the amendment of this section.
(Ord. No. 2089, § 8.)

Sec. 8.1. - O cial plan lines established—Towne Avenue.
Official plan lines of Towne Avenue north and northeasterly from its intersection with San Bernardino Avenue to its intersection with San
Antonio Avenue, being a part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city.
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of the Charter of the city and to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1199; Master Plan of Principal
Streets and Highways of the city, the council hereby declares that the portion of Towne Avenue as indicated on the attached map is hereby a
portion of said Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city to be entitled and subject to all the provisions of said ordinance and
shall be entitled and known as "Official Plan Lines of Towne Avenue north and northeasterly from its intersection with San Bernardino
Avenue to its intersection with San Antonio Avenue, being a part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city."
(Ord. No. 1221, § 1.)

Sec. 8.2. - Same—White avenue.
Official plan lines of White Avenue northwesterly on the old railroad right-of-way through the Los Angeles County Fair Grounds to the
westerly city limits to coordinate with the Los Angeles County, Los Angeles County Fair Association, Los Angeles County Flood Control and the
city of La Verne; to join with Lincoln Avenue in La Verne with its intersection with La Verne Avenue, being a part of the Master Plan of
Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona, County of Los Angeles, State of California.

313/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Subject to the provisions and restrictions of the Charter of the City of Pomona and to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1199, Master Plan
of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona, the council hereby declares that the portion of White Avenue, as indicated on the
attached map is hereby a portion of said Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona to be entitled and subject to all
the provisions of said ordinance and shall lie entitled and known as "Official Plan Lines of White Avenue northwesterly on the old railroad
right of way through the Los Angeles County Fair Grounds to the westerly city limits of the City of Pomona to coordinate with the Los Angeles
County, Los Angeles County Fair Association, Los Angeles County Flood Control and the City of La Verne; to join with Lincoln Avenue in La
Verne with its intersection with La Verne Avenue, being a part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona,
County of Los Angeles, State of California."
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1.)

Sec. 8.3. - Same—Gardner Avenue.
The official plan lines of Gardner Avenue is part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona, County of
Los Angeles, State of California.
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of the Charter of the City of Pomona and to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1199, Master Plan
of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona, the council hereby declares that Gardner Avenue as indicated on the map attached
hereto and by reference made a part thereof which is marked "Official Plan Lines of Gardner Avenue'" is hereby a portion of the Master Plan
of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1702, § 1.)

Sec. 8.4. - Same—Friar Lane, Felicia Way and Fernleaf Avenue.
The official plan lines of Friar Lane, Felicia Way and Fernleaf Avenue are part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the
City of Pomona, County of Los Angeles, State of California.
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of the Charter of the City of Pomona and to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1199, Master Plan
of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona, the council hereby declares that Friar Lane, Felicia Way and Fern-leaf Avenue as
indicated on the map attached hereto and by reference made a part hereof which is marked "Official Plan Lines of Friar Lane, Felicia Way and
Fernleaf Avenue" is hereby a portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1.)

Sec. 8.5. - Same—Fifth Avenue and Butter eld Road; Pen-Mar Lane and Eleanor Street.
(1)

Official plan lines of the intersection of Fifth Avenue and Butterfield Road, being a part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets
and Highways of the City of Pomona, County of Los Angeles, State of California.

Subject to the provisions and restrictions of the Charter of the City of Pomona and to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1199, Master
Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona, the council hereby declares that the intersection of Fifth Avenue and
Butterfield Road, as indicated on the attached map, is hereby a portion of said Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City
of Pomona to be entitled and subject to all the provisions of said ordinance and shall be entitled and known as "Official Plan Lines of the
intersection of Fifth Avenue and Butterfield Road." being a part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of
Pomona, County of Los Angeles, State of California.
(Ord. No. 1297, § 1.)

Editor's note—
Editor's note.—The above paragraph (1) was designated section 15.1, but in order to classify similar subject matter, the editor has
renumbered the section to 8.5.
(2)

The official plan lines of Penmar Lane and Eleanor Street are part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the
City of Pomona, County of Los Angeles, State of California.

314/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Subject to the provisions and restrictions of the Charter of the City of Pomona and to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1199, Master
Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona, the council hereby declares that Penmar Lane and Eleanor Street as
indicated on the map attached hereto and by reference made a part hereof which is marked "Official Plan Line of Penmar Lane & Eleanor
Street" is hereby a portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1717, § 1.)

Sec. 8.6. - Same—Temple Avenue.
The official plan lines of Temple Avenue in the westerly portion of the City of Pomona is part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and
Highways of the City of Pomona, County of Los Angeles, State of California.
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of the Charter of the City of Pomona and to the provisions of Ordinance Mo. 1199, Master Plan
of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona, the council hereby declares that Temple Avenue in the westerly portion of the City of
Pomona as indicated on the map attached hereto, and by reference made a part hereof which is marked "Official plan lines of Temple
Avenue between the westerly boundary of Pomona and the intersection of Temple Avenue and a Collins Street" is hereby a portion of the
Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1690, § 1.)

Sec. 8.7. - Alleys established—Between Pearl and Alvarado Streets.
A fourteen foot alley is hereby established east of Park Avenue and west of Gordon Street between Pearl and Alvarado Streets.
(Ord. No 1580, § 1.)

Sec. 8.8. - Same—Between Pearl and Gordon Streets.
A twenty foot alley west of Main Street is hereby established extending between Pearl and Gordon Streets to be ten feet on each side of
the center line of the now existing alley.
(Ord. No. 1626, § 1.)

Sec. 8.9. - Same—Between Mountain View Avenue, Reservoir Street, Monterey Street and Hawthorne Place.
A twenty foot alley is hereby established between Mountain View Avenue, Reservoir Street, Monterey Street and Hawthorne Place by
adding two and one-half feet to each side of the alley heretofore established.
(Ord. No. 1655, § 1.)

Sec. 8.10. - Monterey Avenue established as secondary highway.
Monterey Avenue between White and Towne Avenue is hereby established as a secondary highway.
(Ord. No. 1574, § 1.)

Sec. 8.11. - Portion of East End Avenue established as a major highway.
East End Avenue between Holt Avenue and Fifth Avenue is hereby established as a major highway.
(Ord. No. 1382, § 1.)

Sec. 8.12. - Portion of Park Avenue removed from secondary highway designation.
Portion of Park Avenue between Phillips Boulevard and Philadelphia Street is hereby removed from its designation as a secondary
highway on the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1453, § 1.)

Sec. 8.13. - Portion of Park Avenue removed from secondary highway designation.
315/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Portion of Park Avenue southerly of Philadelphia Street is hereby removed from its designation as a secondary highway on the Master
Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1444, § 1.)

Sec. 8.14. - Deletion of San Bernardino Avenue from Master Plan.
San Bernardino Avenue from Towne Avenue to Orange Grove Avenue is hereby deleted from the Master Plan of Streets and Highways.
(Ord. No. 1378, § 1.)

Sec. 8.15. - Portion of Palomares Street removed from secondary highway designation.
Portion of Palomares Street extending between Phillips Boulevard and Franklin Avenue is hereby removed from its designation as a
secondary highway on the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the City of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1315, § 1.)

Sec. 8.16. - Portion of Alvarado Avenue removed from secondary highway designation.
The extension of Alvarado Avenue between San Antonio Avenue and Mills Avenue in the City of Pomona, County of Los Angeles, State of
California, is hereby removed as a secondary highway from the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways.
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1.)

Sec. 8.17. - O cial plan lines of Furlong Avenue and Fern-Leaf Avenue.
The official plan lines of Furlong Avenue and Fernleaf Avenue east of White Avenue, south of Grand Avenue, west of Park Avenue and
north of Phillips Boulevard are hereby established as part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of Pomona, as shown on map
which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. No. 1750, § 1.)

Sec. 8.18. - O cial plan lines of Salem Lane and Spazier Street.
The official plan lines of Salem Lane and Spazier Street west of Mountain View Avenue, north of Phillips Boulevard, east of San Antonio
Avenue and south of Grand Avenue are hereby established as part of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of Pomona, as shown
on map which is incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. No. 1760, § 1.)

Sec. 8.19. - O cial plan lines of Huntington Street and Eighth Street.
Huntington Street and Eighth Street as indicated on the map which is by reference made a part hereof and which is marked "Official Plan
Line of Huntington Street and Eighth Street" is hereby a portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1762, § 1.)

Sec. 8.20. - O cial plan lines of Hillman Avenue.
Hillman Avenue between Grand Avenue and Fernleaf Avenue and between Buena Vista Avenue and Hamilton Boulevard as indicated on
the map which is by reference made a part hereof and which is marked "Official Plan Line of Hillman Avenue" is hereby a portion of the
Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1765, § 1.)

Sec. 8.21. - O cial plan lines of Penland Drive, Leona Way, Puritan Place, Portola Place and Pawnee Place.*
Editor's note—
* This section is repealed by Ord. No. 2452 when and if tentative Tract No. 31113 is recorded.
316/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. 8.22. - O cial plan lines of Burna Court, Dover Place, Tana Lane, Neva Lane, Neva Street and Tana Way.
Burna Court, Dover Place, Tana Lane, Neva Lane, Neva Street, and Tana Way as indicated on the map which is by reference made a part
hereof and which is marked "Official Plan Line of Burna Court, Dover Place, Tana Lane, Neva Lane, Neva Street and Tana Way" is hereby a
portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1828, § 1.)

Sec. 8.24. - O cial plan lines of Packard Drive, Painter Court and Preston Court.
Packard Drive, Painter Court, and Preston Court as indicated on the map which is made a part hereof and which is marked "Official Plan
Line of Packard Drive, Painter Court and Preston Court," is hereby a portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city of
Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1833, § 1.)

Sec. 8.25. - O cial plan lines of Dogwood Way and Dunbar Court.
Dogwood Way and Dunbar Court, as indicated on the map which is by reference made a part hereof and which is marked "Official Plan
Line of: Dogwood Way, Dunbar Court," is hereby a portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city of Pomona.
(Ord, No. 1838-A, § 1.)

Sec. 8.26. - O cial plan lines of Alvarado Street.
Official plan lines of Alvarado Street as indicated on the map which is by reference made a part hereof and which is marked "Official Plan
Line of: Alvarado Street," is hereby a portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city of Pomona.
(Ord. No. 1846, § 1.)

Sec. 8.26½. - O cial plan lines of Mountain View Avenue, Jasmine Lane and Cherrystone Way.
Mountain View Avenue, Jasmine Lane, and Cherrystone Way as indicated on the map which is by reference made a part hereof and which
is marked Official Plan Line of Mountain View Avenue, Jasmine Lane, and Cherrystone Way, is hereby made a portion of the Master Plan of
Principal Streets and Highways of the city of Pomona. The proper development of this area requires the dedication and improvement of the
indicated streets before the property will be provided with adequate utility service, fire and police protection. It is understood that it will be
necessary to purchase and improve property to provide the indicated streets. When individual property owners desire to develop their
property it will be their responsibility to guarantee their proportionate share of the land and improvements costs as determined by the city
engineer in accordance with the area benefited as indicated on the map made a part hereof and which is on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1.)

Sec. 8.27. - O cial plan lines of Monterey Street from Palm Place to San Antonio Avenue.
Official plan line of Monterey Street from Palm Place to San Antonio Avenue, as indicated on the map which is on file in the office of the
city clerk, and by reference made a part hereof which is marked "Official Plan Line of: Monterey Street from Palm Place to San Antonio
Avenue," is hereby a portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city.
(Ord. No. 1861, § 1.)

Sec. 8.28. - O cial plan lines of Lexington Avenue, Palomares Street, Garey Avenue and Philadelphia Street.
Official plan lines of Lexington Avenue, Palomares Street, Garey Avenue and Philadelphia Street, as indicated on the map which is on file
in the office of the city clerk, and by reference made a part hereof which is marked "Official Plan Lines of Lexington Avenue, Palomares Street,
Garey Avenue, and Philadelphia Street," is hereby a portion of the Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city.
(Ord. No. 2005, § 1.)

317/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. 8.29. - O cial plan lines of First Street between Gibbs Street and Towne Avenue and adjacent and to the south of the Union Paci c Railroad.
Official plan line of First Street between Gibbs Street and Towne Avenue, and adjacent and to the south of the Union Pacific Railroad, as
indicated on the map which is on file in the office of the city clerk, and by reference made a part hereof which is marked "Official Plan Line of:
First Street between Gibbs Street and Towne Avenue, and adjacent and to the south of the Union Pacific Railroad," is hereby a portion of the
Master Plan of Principal Streets and Highways of the city.
(Ord. No. 2068, § 1.)

Sec. 8.31. - O cial plan lines of Ericksen Drive and Tuxford Place extension.
Official plan lines for the extension of Ericksen Drive and Tuxford Place, within the block bounded by Arroyo Avenue on the north, Glen
Avenue on the west, Orange Grove Avenue on the south, and Dudley Street on the east are hereby adopted and are marked Exhibit "A" and
by such reference are made a part hereof. The city clerk is hereby directed to file the original of said official plan lines in the Book of Official
Plan Lines as provided for by such ordinance.
(Ord. No. 2218, § 1.)

Sec. 8.32. - Precise street alignment for Temple Avenue.
The precise street alignment for Temple Avenue, generally extending east of Pomona Boulevard and west of Brea Canyon Road and
connecting Pomona Boulevard with Brea Canyon Road is hereby adopted, and the legal description of the center line of such precise
alignment is marked Exhibit "A," and by such reference is made a part hereof. A map showing such precise alignment is in the office of the
city engineer, entitled "PA 21" and by reference is made a part hereof.
(Ord. No. 2221, § 1.)

Sec. 8.33. - O cial plan lines for Murchison Avenue.
The official plan lines for Murchison Avenue north and westerly from its intersection with Elwood Avenue to Glen Avenue, thence
westerly and southwesterly to Greenacre Road and to Ganesha Boulevard are adopted and marked Exhibit "A" and by such reference are
made a part of this appendix. The city clerk is directed to file the original of the official plan lines in the Book of Official Plan Lines as provided
for by such ordinance.
(Ord. No. 2262, § 1.)

Sec. 8.34. - Precise street alignments for master plan streets bounded by Lexington Avenue, Garey Avenue, Philadelphia Street and Palomares
Street.
The precise street alignments for master planned streets bounded by Lexington Avenue on the north, Garey Avenue on the west,
Philadelphia Street on the south and Palomares Street on the east are adopted, and the legal description of such alignment is marked Exhibit
"A," by reference made a part of this appendix, and is on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 2308, § 1.)

Sec. 8.35. - Precise street alignments for master plan streets bounded by Foothill Boulevard, Falcon Street, Fuego Avenue and Thompson Creek.
The precise street alignments for master planned streets bounded by Foothill Boulevard on the north, Falcon Street on the west, Fuego
Avenue on the south, and Thompson Creek on the east are adopted, and the legal description of such alignment is marked Exhibit "A," by
reference made a part of this appendix, and is on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 2309, § 1.)

Sec. 8.36. - Area bounded by Ninth Street, Grand Avenue, Reservoir Street and San Antonio Avenue deleted from master plan.
Precise Street Alignment Number 16 for the area bounded by Ninth Street on the north, Grand Avenue on the south, Reservoir Street on
the east, and San Antonio Avenue on the west is deleted from the Master Plan of Streets and Highways.
(Ord. No. 2318, § 1.)

318/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

Sec. 8.37. - Modi cation of area bounded by Franklin Avenue, Reservoir Street, Lexington Avenue and San Antonio Avenue.
Precise Street Alignment Number 13 for the area bounded by Franklin Avenue on the north, Reservoir Street on the east, Lexington
Avenue on the south, and San Antonio Avenue on the west, and involving the following planned streets: Shelton Place, Neva Street, Dorset
Avenue and Tana Lane, is modified in accordance with the centerline description marked Exhibit "A," and the map marked Exhibit "B," and by
reference made parts of this appendix, and which are on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 2332, § 1.)

Sec. 8.38. - Precise street alignments for master plan streets bounded by Ninth Street, Eleventh Street, Buena Vista Street and Hansen Avenue.
Precise street alignments for master planned streets bounded on the north by Ninth Street, on the south by Eleventh Street, on the east
by Buena Vista Street, and on the west by Hansen Avenue, are adopted, and shall be known as Precise Street Alignment No. 26.
(Ord. 2750 § 1 (part).)

Sec. 8.39. - Map and legal description for Precise Street Alignment No. 26.
The map and legal description for Precise Street Alignment No. 26 are contained in Exhibit "A," which is made a part of this appendix by
reference and which is on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. 2750 § 2 (part).)

Sec. 8.40. - Precise street alignments for master plan streets for a street serving an area bounded by Holt Avenue, Union Avenue, Mt. Vernon
Avenue and Highway 71.
Precise street alignments for master planned streets for a new street to serve the area bounded by Holt Avenue on the north, Union
Avenue on the east, Mt. Vernon Avenue on the south and Highway 71 on the west area adopted and shall be known as Precise Street
Alignment No. 28.
(Ord. 2768 § 1 (part).)

Sec. 8.44. - Map and legal description for Precise Street Alignment No. 28.
The map and legal description for Precise Street Alignment No. 28 are contained in Exhibit "A," which is made a part of this appendix by
reference and which is on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. 2768 § 2.)

Sec. 9. - Building permits.
No building permit shall be issued contrary to the provisions of the ordinance codified in this section.
Sec. 10. - Building permit appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a building permit under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this section may file an
application for appeal requesting a hearing on the matter before the planning commission.
Sec. 11. - Appeals for building permits-to be granted.
In the matter of an appeal for a building permit the planning commission and/or the council shall authorize the issuance of such permit if
any of the following are true:
(a)

That the property of which the planned street location is a part is of such nature that the owner of the land will be
substantially damaged by the refusal to grant the permit.

(b)

That the property will not earn a fair return on the owner's investment unless the construction involved is authorized.

(c)

That balancing the interests of the public in preserving the integrity of the official planned street against the interest of
319/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

the owner of the land in using his property, the granting of the permit is required by considerations of justice and equity.
Sec. 12. - Appeals for building permits—Not to be granted.
The planning commission and/or the council shall not authorize the issuance of an appealed building permit if any of the following are
true:
(a)

That the owner of the land will not be substantially damaged by locating the proposed structure on his land outside of
the lines of the planned street.

(b)

That, balancing the interests of the public in preserving the integrity of the planned street against the interest of the
landowner in using his property as proposed to be used, the resulting disadvantages to the city would be unreasonably
disproportionate to the advantages the owner would derive from so using the property.

Sec. 13. - Appeal to planning commission—Procedure,
The planning commission shall cause to be made such investigations of facts bearing upon such application set for hearing, including an
analysis of precedent cases as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure action on each case consistent with the purpose of
this ordinance.
Summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing and the names of persons so testifying shall be recorded and made a part
of the permanent files of the case.
If, for any reason, testimony on any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the day set for such hearing, the planning
commission may before the adjournment or recess thereof, publicly announce the time and place to and at which said hearings will be
continued, and such announcement shall serve as sufficient notice of such continuance. This continuance shall not be for more than thirty
(30) days.
Upon the completion of one public hearing the planning commission shall, not later than ten (10) days thereafter, render its decision on
the matter so heard. In the event the planning commission fails to render its decision within said ten ( 10) day period the matter may be
appealed to the city council by any person aggrieved, in the same manner as though the commission had refused a building permit. In the
event of such failure on the part of the planning commission to act, and there is an appeal to the council, the secretary of the planning
commission shall immediately deliver to the city council all the records on the matter involved.
The planning commission shall announce and record its action by formal resolution, and such resolution shall recite the findings of the
planning commission upon which it bases its decision.
Not later than ten (10) days after final action by the planning commission on an application for the granting of the issuance of such
building permits, notice of the decision in the matter shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application.
The decision of the planning commission in administrative matters of granting or denying issuance of such building permits which do not
alter or seem to alter the alignment of said Principal Street and Highway Plan shall be final, except that :
(a)

Not later than twenty (20) days after the final action by the planning commission on an application an appeal may be
filed, in writing, with the city council ;

(b)

If an appeal from the action of the planning commission is filed with the city council within the time prescribed, the city
council shall set the matter for hearing. The secretary of the planning commission shall also be notified of the filing of
such appeal, and upon the receipt of such notices shall transmit to the city council the complete file in the case;

(c)

Not later than ten (10) days after the final action on such appeal by the city council, notice of the decision in the matter
shall be mailed to the applicant. The decision of the city council on such matters appealed shall be final;

In the case of an application for the granting of the issuance of a building permit which would alter or seem to alter the alignment of said
Principal Street and Highway Plan, the following procedures shall govern:
(a)

Not later than ten (10) days after final action by the planning commission on an application for the granting of the
issuance of a building permit upon which the action of the planning commission can only be advisory, the secretary of
320/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

the planning commission shall forward to the city council a copy of the resolution setting forth the findings and the
recommendations of the planning commission.
(b)

The council shall within not more than fifteen (15) days following receipt of the resolution and recommendation from the
planning commission, consider the matters therein and render a decision. The action of the council on any such
application shall be final.

Sec. 14. - Speci cations regulating building permits.
In the event that the planning commission and/or the council authorizes a building permit, it/they shall have the power to impose such
reasonable conditions as may be consistent with the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
Sec. 15. - Amendments.
The planning commission, upon its own initiative or upon instigation of the council or a petitioner, may recommend additions or
modification to the Official Plan of Principal Streets and Highways, precise alignments, precise plan measurements, and official plan lines
contained in the Book of Official Plan Lines. Upon receipt of such recommendations from the planning commission, the council may make
these additions or modifications in the form of amendments, to said plan or plans; provided, however, that before taking any such action the
provisions contained in chapter 20 of Ordinance No. 1673 of the City of Pomona, California, also known as the Code of the City of Pomona,
California, having to do with the adoption of precise plans, have been complied with.
(Ord. No. 2089, § 9.)

Sec. 16. - Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars, and in case said fine is not paid the said person may be imprisoned in the
city jail until the fine be duly satisfied which must not exceed one (1) day for every two ($2.00) dollars of the fine, or by imprisonment in the
city jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each such person as principal agent or
otherwise, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of or failure, neglect or refusal
to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted by such person.
Sec. 17. - Validity.
If any provisions of this ordinance, or the application thereof, to any persons or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the
ordinance, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 18. - E ect of passage.
The passage of this ordinance shall not serve to terminate or validate any violations existing under terms of any other ordinance
amended or repealed thereby, nor shall any permits, variances or other authority extended under any previous or existing ordinance be
terminated or nullified hereby.
Sec. 19. - Certi cation.
That the city clerk shall certify to the adoption of this ordinance, and shall cause this ordinance to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the City of Pomona.
Sec. 20. - E ective date.
This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days from the time of final passage.
Adopted, approved and signed, this 26th day of December, 1950.

321/322

7/11/2019

Pomona, CA Zoning

ALAN G. ORSBORN

Mayor of the City of Pomona.
Attest:
C. HARRY DOREMUS

City Clerk.
Approved as to form, this 26th day of December, 1950.
ARLO E. RICKETT, JR.

City Attorney.
I, C. HARRY DOREMUS, City Clerk of the City of Pomona, California, do hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance was introduced at an
adjourned regular meeting of the Council of said City, duly held on the 19th day of December, 1950, and thereafter at an adjourned regular
meeting of said Council duly held on the 27th day of December, 1950, was reread, duly passed and adopted by said Council and signed and
approved by the Mayor of said City, and that such Ordinance was so passed and adopted by the following vote, to-wit:
Ayes: Councilmen WRIGHT, HANDLEY, HITE, MAY.
Noes: Councilmen NONE.
Absent: Councilmen (MAYOR) ORSBORN.
C. HARRY DOREMUS

City Clerk of the City of Pomona.
Pub. Jan. 2, 1951.

322/322

