CITY OF RANCHO SANTA MARGARITA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
Published in 2006 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of 
RANCHO SANTA MARGARITA, CALIFORNIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
James M. Thor, Mayor 
L. Anthony Beall, Mayor Pro Tempore 
Neil C. Blais, Council Member 
Jerry Holloway, Council Member 
Gary Thompson, Council Member 
City Council 
____________ 
Steven E. Hayman 
City Manager 
____________ 
John E. Cavanaugh 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Deborah L. Wolff 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of 
RANCHO SANTA MARGARITA, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Jerry Holloway, Mayor 
Bradley J. McGirr, Mayor Pro Tempore 
L. Anthony Beall, Council Member 
Anne D. Figueroa, Council Member 
Carol A. Gamble, Council Member 
City Council 
____________ 
Jennifer M. Cervantez 
City Manager 
____________ 
Gregory E. Simonian 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Amy Diaz 
City Clerk 
  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, California. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the Orange County Code (OCC) as adopted by the City and ordinances adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The Code has been arranged in titles, and the various sections within each title have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the title. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Diana Harper, Senior Legal Technician/Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Deborah Wolff, City Clerk, and Mr. John Cavanaugh, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code that will make the active law of Rancho Santa Margarita readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of Rancho Santa Margarita's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Rancho Santa Margarita, California. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; pretitle section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, California. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and Rancho Santa Margarita, California. 2006. 
ORDINANCE NO. 06-02 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF RANCHO SANTA MARGARITA, CALIFORNIA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING THE CITY OF RANCHO SANTA MARGARITA MUNICIPAL CODE; REPEALING CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; AND PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF. 
The City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita does ordain as follows: 
WHEREAS, upon its incorporation on January 1, 2000, the City of Rancho Santa Margarita adopted the Orange County Code by reference. 
WHEREAS, since incorporation, the City has adopted a number of ordinances supplementing, changing, or otherwise superseding various provisions of the adopted Orange County Code. 
WHEREAS, the City now wishes to adopt a Municipal Code tailored to the unique needs and characteristics of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita does ordain as follows: 
SECTION 1. The "City of Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code", published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Titles 1 through 12, inclusive, is adopted. 
SECTION 2. This Code shall be known as the "City of Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as the "Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code" or "RSMMC" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this Code or in any proceeding at law or in equity. 
SECTION 3. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 30, 2005, and not included in this Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed with the exception of the Zoning Code. This repeal shall not be construed as reviving any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by an ordinance hereby repealed. 
SECTION 4. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Except as provided, any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100), for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500). Any person convicted of an infraction under the building and safety provisions of this Code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100), for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1000). Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
SECTION 5. Title, chapter and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, or section in this Code. 
SECTION 6. Additions or amendments to this Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of this Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
SECTION 7. Ordinances adopted after June 30, 2005, which amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in this Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of this Code. 
SECTION 8. References in City forms, documents, and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former City-adopted Orange County Code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
SECTION 9. The adoption of this Code does not affect prosecutions for Ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this Code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this Code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
SECTION 10. If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance, or any part hereof, for any reason is held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Ordinance or any part hereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective. 
SECTION 11. This Ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after its adoption. The City Clerk or his or her duly appointed deputy, shall certify to the adoption of this Ordinance and shall cause this Ordinance to be published as required by law. 
PASSED, APPROVED, AND ADOPTED this 25th day of January, 2006, by vote as follows: 
AYES: 	Council Members Blais, Holloway and Thompson, and Mayor Pro Tempore Beall and Mayor Thor 
NOES: 	None 
ABSENT: 	None 
ABSTAIN: 	None 
 
___________ 

James M. Thor, Mayor 
Attest: ___________ 
Debbie Wolff, City Clerk 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 	) 
COUNTY OF ORANGE 	) ss 
CITY OF RANCHO SANTA MARGARITA 	) 
 
I, Debbie Wolff, City Clerk of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, California, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing Ordinance No. 06-02 was regularly introduced and placed upon it first reading at a regular meeting of the City Council on the 11th day of January, 2006, and that thereafter, said Ordinance was duly adopted and passed at a regular meeting of the City Council on the 25th day of January, 2006. 
___________ 

DEBBIE WOLFF, CITY CLERK  
Title 1 - General Provisions  
Chapter 1.01 - Code Established 
 
Sec. 1.01.010. - Short title, reference to Code. 
This Code shall be known as the "City of Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as the "Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provisions thereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing said Code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the "Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code," or a portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.10.010), 5-18-2000) 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances, Government Code § 50022.1 et seq.  
Sec. 1.01.020. - Codification authority. 
This Code consists of all of the regulatory, penal and administrative ordinances of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.10.020), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.01.030. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the City relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1.01.040. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any City ordinance on the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1.01.050. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed below. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)  Annexing property into the City. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the City. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Calling an election. 
(7)  Granting any right or franchise or altering or withdrawing same. 
(8)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(9)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive general plan. 
(10)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street or road. 
(12)  Establishing the grade or any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(13)  Providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations. 
(15)  Levying real property taxes. 
(16)  Zoning or rezoning a particular parcel of property or adopting or amending the zoning map or providing interim zoning measures. 
(17)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(18)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(19)  The purpose of which has been accomplished.  
Sec. 1.01.060. - Effective date. 
This Code takes effect upon the effective date of the ordinance of the Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita whereby this Code is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.10.030), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.01.070. - Severability and validity of Code. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1-10-040), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.01.080. - Distribution of Code. 
At least one copy of this Code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least one copy duly certified to by the City Clerk shall be maintained on file in the City Clerk's office. Additional copies shall be prepared in loose-leaf form and mounted to withstand heavy usage in such binders as the City Clerk may prescribe. Copies thereof shall be distributed as determined by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.10.050), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.01.090. - Notation of amendments. 
Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to said Code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the volumes of said Code of the taking of such action, noting thereon the number of the ordinances pursuant to which such action is taken. Duly certified copies of every ordinance making changes in such Code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose and duly indexed for ready reference. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.10.060), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.01.100. - Amendments. 
The City Clerk shall prepare copies of such changes in the Code for insertion in the loose-leaf copies thereof. Every section of the Code so changed shall have printed thereon a notation of the ordinance number pursuant to which such change is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.10.070), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.01.110. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to titles, chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this section" or "Sections XXX to YYY" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.  
Chapter 1.02 - Definitions and Rules of Construction 
 
Sec. 1.02.010. - Construction, provisions governing. 
Unless the provisions or the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.010), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.020. - Headings, effect of. 
Title, chapter, section, and subsection headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, section or subsection hereof. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.020), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.030. - Reference to acts or omissions within this City. 
This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the City and to that territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.030), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.040. - References to titles, chapters, and sections. 
All references to titles, chapters or sections are to titles, chapters or sections of this Code, unless stated otherwise.  
Sec. 1.02.050. - Reserved.  
Sec. 1.02.060. - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever in this Code a City employee, official, manager or other position is referred to, such reference also includes his/her lawful designee or deputy.  
Sec. 1.02.070. - Writing. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.060), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.080 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Code or to any ordinance of this City, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. Whenever a reference is made to any State law, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.070), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.090. - History notes and State law references. 
A history appearing in parenthesis after a section in this Code indicates the legislative history and is not to be considered part of the Code. State law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect.  
Sec. 1.02.100. - Notices, service of. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.080), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.110. - Proof of notice. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the City, or by affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury as provided by Code of Civil Procedure § 2015.5 of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this Code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.090), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.120. - Tenses. 
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.100), 5-18-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 11.  
Sec. 1.02.130. - Gender. 
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.110), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.140. - Number. 
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.120), 5-18-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 13.  
Sec. 1.02.150. - Shall and may. 
"Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive unless the context requires otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.130), 5-18-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 14.  
Sec. 1.02.160. - Oath. 
"Oath" includes affirmation. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.140), 5-18-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 15.  
Sec. 1.02.170. - Person. 
"Person" as used in this Code or in any ordinance or Code adopted hereby, includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company, limited liability company, or corporation, and any municipal, political or governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.150), 5-18-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 17.  
Sec. 1.02.180. - State. 
"State" is the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.160), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.190. - County. 
"County" is the County of Orange. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.170), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.200. - City. 
"City" is the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.180), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.210. - Office. 
The use of the title of any officer, employee, or official shall mean such officer, employee, or official of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, or his/her duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.190), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.220. - Council. 
"Council" or "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.200), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.230. - Street. 
"Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use and accepted by resolution of the City Council, or such other public property as designated in any law of this State. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.210), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 1.02.240. - Words and phrases not defined. 
Words and phrases not defined in this Code shall be construed according to the generally accepted usage of the language, or, when appropriate, by reference to definitions contained in state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.20.220), 5-18-2000)  
Chapter 1.03 - Penalties and Remedies[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 1.03, §§ 1.03.010—1.03.030, and enacted a new Ch. 1.03 as set out herein. The former Ch. 1.03 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.30.010), 5-18-2000; Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.30.020), 5-18-2000; Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(1.30.030), 5-18-2000. 
 
Sec. 1.03.010. - General provisions. 
The provisions of this Chapter represent the means and methods by which the City may secure compliance with the provisions of this Code. The City may use any or all of the enforcement tools outlined herein, as well as any other remedies as may be available pursuant to this Code, or any other local, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 1.03.020. - Violations, penalties. 
(a)  Misdemeanor; infraction. No person shall violate any of the provisions, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code, any code adopted by reference by this Code, or any condition of any permit or license approved pursuant to any provision of this Code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this Code, any code adopted by reference by this Code, or any condition of any permit or license approved pursuant to any provision of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless: 
(1)  Such violation or failure to comply is expressly stated by this Code or state law to be an infraction; 
(2)  The City Attorney or prosecutor files a complaint charging the offense as an infraction; or 
(3)  A public safety officer, law enforcement officer, or other authorized enforcement officer, as defined in Section 1.03.040 of this Chapter, issues a citation charging the offense as an infraction. 
(b)  Punishment. 
(1)  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code shall be subject to punishment by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  Except as provided herein, any person convicted of an offense specified as an infraction under the provisions of this Code shall be subject to punishment for a first conviction by a fine of not more than $100.00, for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $200.00, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $500.00. Any person convicted of an infraction under the building and safety provisions of this Code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than $100.00, for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $500.00, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $1000.00 [Government Code § 36900]. 
(3)  Any person that violates any provision or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this Code, any code adopted by reference by this Code, or any condition of any permit or license approved pursuant to any provision of this Code shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 1.03.030. - Prohibited acts, including causing, permitting or suffering. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealment of such act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 1.03.040. - Enforcement Officer. 
The City Manager may designate an employee or employees to act as Code Enforcement Officers. Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the Code Enforcement Officers of the City may make arrests for violations of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code or other City ordinances, and may issue citations for misdemeanors or infractions pursuant to California Penal Code Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5) and this Chapter of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code, for violation of those provisions of such Code which the Code Enforcement Officers have the duty to enforce. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 1.03.050. - Public nuisance; cost recovery. 
(a)  Public nuisance . Any condition, use or activity caused or permitted to exist in violation of the provisions of this Code, any code adopted by reference by this Code, or in violation of any permit, license, approval or entitlement issued pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the City by any lawful means, including but not limited to, administrative and/or summary abatement proceedings, restraining order, or injunction. 
(b)  Cost recovery . Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code sections 38773, 38773.1, and 38775.5, the City may make the expense of abatement of any public nuisance a special assessment, or a lien against the property upon which the nuisance condition exists and a personal obligation of the property owner. Pursuant to Government Code section 38773.5(b), in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance, the prevailing party in such action shall be entitled to recovery of its attorneys' fees, expert fees, and costs if, any only if, the City seeks the award of attorneys' fees and costs at the initiation of such action or proceeding. The attorneys' fees recoverable pursuant to this section shall be limited to the reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City in the action or proceeding, regardless of the actual costs of any party's attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 1.03.060. - Civil actions. 
In addition to all other remedies, the City Attorney on behalf of the City may bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this Code, any code adopted by reference by this Code, or the provisions of any permit, license, approval or entitlement issued pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code, in which a court may impose any or all of the following remedies: 
(a)  An injunction or any other appropriate equitable remedy; 
(b)  Reimbursement of City administrative and abatement costs, including, but not limited to, investigative costs incurred in the enforcement of the provisions of this Code; and 
(c)  An award of attorney's fees, where the City has elected at the initiation of the action to seek the recovery of such fees, in which case the prevailing party in such action shall be entitled to an award of attorneys' fees in an amount which shall not exceed the reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City, regardless of the actual costs of any party's attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, 9-14-2016)  
Chapter 1.04 - Claims and Demands[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances governing claims procedures authorized, Government Code § 935. 
 
Sec. 1.04.010. - Claims for money or damages. 
As a prerequisite to bring suit thereon against the City or any officer, employee, department, commission, or board of the City, any claim for money or damages, including local tax refund claims and claims which would otherwise be excepted by Section 905 of the Government Code of the State of California, which are not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto, shall be presented and acted upon in accordance with Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910) of the Government Code of California law. This section relates only to bringing of suit upon a claim, and shall not be deemed to apply to the authority of the Finance Director and the City Council to process and pay, in the ordinary course of business, just obligations of the City, such as routine salaries and wages, principal and interest on bonds, payments for purchases and other like expenditures where there is no dispute as to the obligation and amount being payable. 
(Ord. No. 00-23, § 1(1.40.010), 9-7-2000)  
Sec. 1.04.020. - Filing. 
All claims against the City as described in Section 1.04.010 above shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 00-23, § 1(1.40.020), 9-7-2000)  
Sec. 1.04.030. - Audit and approval of demands. 
(a)  Except for claims described in Section 1.04.010, every demand, invoice, or claim for purchases, supplies, or services (hereinafter "demand") shall be presented in writing to and approved in writing by the receiving department head or officer, who shall certify to the actual delivery or rendition of the supplies, materials, property, or service for which payment is claimed, that the quality and prices correspond with the original specifications in the contract or purchase order upon which the demand is based, and that the demand in all other respects is proper and valid. The receiving department head or officer shall further indicate the budgetary account to which such demand is to be charged. 
(b)  All demands approved by the receiving department or officer shall be presented to the Finance Director, who shall satisfy himself or herself as to whether: 
(1)  The amount is legally due and owing by the City; 
(2)  There are budgeted or otherwise appropriated funds available to pay the claim or invoice; 
(3)  The demand conforms to a valid requisition, contract, or purchase order; 
(4)  The prices and computations shown on the demand are verified; and 
(5)  The demand contains the approval of other departments and officials as required. 
(c)  Payroll warrants and checks, and warrants and checks drawn for payment of demands that have been certified by the Finance Director or the City Manager as conforming to a budget approved by the City Council, need not be approved by the City Council prior to payment. Except for payroll warrants or checks, demands certified by the Finance Director and paid prior to presentation to the City Council shall be presented to the City Council for inspection and ratification at its first meeting after delivery of the warrants or checks. Should the Finance Director fail to certify a demand as in conformance with the City's budget, no check or warrant shall be issued until the City Council has approved the demand for payment. 
(d)  Department heads shall certify or approve departmental payrolls or attendance records for employees in their departments. The City Manager shall certify or approve payrolls or attendance records of other officers or employees. 
(e)  Budgeted expenses shall be presented to the City Council for ratification in the form of an audited comprehensive annual financial report prepared by the Finance Director. 
(f)  Following audit of the demands as set forth in Subsection (b) of this section, the Finance Director shall prepare a register of demands showing the claimant's name, the amount of the demand, and if paid, the warrant or check number and date thereof and shall transmit the register to the City Council with an affidavit stating that: 
(1)  "In accordance with Government Code Section 37208, the Finance Director hereby certifies that the attached demand register has been found to conform to the approved budget, except as noted, and has been paid. These demands are hereby submitted for City Council inspection and ratification." 
(2)  "In accordance with Government Code Section 37202, the Finance Director certifies to the accuracy of the attached register of demands and to the availability of monies for payment thereof. These demands are hereby submitted to the City Council for approval of payment." 
(g)  An annual audit shall be prepared by an independent certified public accountant and submitted to the City Council for review. 
(Ord. No. 00-23, § 1(1.40.030), 9-7-2000)  
Chapter 1.05 - Administrative Citations 
 
Sec. 1.05.010. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The purpose of this Chapter is to promote judicial economy by addressing and correcting local minor violations of this Code, state law, conditions of entitlements and land use approvals administratively. 
(b)  The administrative citation system and administrative hearing program contained in this Chapter are enacted under the authority of Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(c)  The issuance of an administrative citation under this Chapter shall be solely at the City's discretion and shall be in addition to any other civil, criminal or other legal remedy authorized by law. 
(d)  The City Manager is authorized to promulgate procedural rules and regulations governing the administration and implementation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent that the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative hearing means an oral proceeding before a Hearing Officer regarding the administrative citation(s). 
Enforcement Officer means any officer or employee acting on behalf of the City with the authority to enforce this Code or applicable state law, conditions of entitlements, land use approvals, or any other condition of a license, permit or other agreement made by the City pursuant to its police powers. 
Hearing Officer means the person or contracted company appointed by the City Manager, in compliance with any and all applicable legal requirements, to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings. 
Owner means the record owner of a parcel according to the County's latest equalized property tax assessment roll. 
Responsible person means any of the following: 
(1)  A person who causes a violation to occur or continue; 
(2)  A person who maintains or allows a violation to occur or continue by his/her action or failure to act; 
(3)  A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a violation to occur or continue by his/her action or failure to act; 
(4)  A person who is the owner, lessee, sublessee, or current possessor of real property where a property-related violation occurs or continues; or 
(5)  A person who is the on-site manager of a business where a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.030. - Issuance of administrative citations. 
(a)  Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation subject to this Chapter has occurred, the enforcement officer may, at his or her sole discretion, issue an administrative citation to any responsible person. 
(b)  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information, at a minimum: 
(1)  The name of the responsible person and any mailing address, residence, driver license or identification number, physical description or other identifying information; 
(2)  The date of the violation; 
(3)  The name, when applicable, and address of the location where the violation occurred; 
(4)  The provisions of the Code, law, permit, land use approval, or other regulation or entitlement violated, including a description of the violation; 
(5)  The amount of the fine for the violation and the amount of the late charge if the fine is not paid by a specified date; 
(6)  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid; 
(7)  The actions required to correct the violation(s); 
(8)  A reasonable deadline or time limitation for commencing and completing such corrective actions, not to exceed 21 days unless the enforcement officer determines that some longer period of time is reasonably warranted under the circumstances; 
(9)  A description of the administrative citation appeal process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be appealed and the place from which a form to appeal the administrative citation may be obtained; and 
(10)  The name, badge number, if applicable, and signature of the enforcement officer, and the signature of the responsible person, if that person is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of its issuance. 
(c)  Each and every day a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.040. - Violations subject to issuance of administrative citations. 
Administrative citations may be issued for violations of: 
(1)  This Code, including Uniform Codes adopted by the City, and all uncodified ordinances; 
(2)  State law; 
(3)  City regulations; 
(4)  Any condition of approval of a permit or entitlement, including a conditional use permit, development review, sign permit, variance, specific plan, parcel map, subdivision map, building or grading permit; 
(5)  Any condition of an environmental review; 
(6)  Any term or condition of any agreement with the City made pursuant to the City's police power, including a development agreement, owner participation agreement, easement, license, or other real property use agreement; 
(7)  Any plan, permit or best management practice authorized, issued or required by Chapter 5.10; 
(8)  Any encroachment or right-of-way permit; or 
(9)  Any license or permit issued pursuant to Title 6 or Title 9 of this Code; 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.050. - Schedule of fines. 
The amounts of fines imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be as specified by resolution of the City Council, or, where no amount is specified, as set forth in Subsection 1.03.010(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.060. - Service of administrative citations. 
(a)  An Enforcement Officer shall issue an administrative citation to a responsible person in the following manner: 
(1)  Personal service. The Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain that person's signature on the administrative citation, if the person is within the City's jurisdiction. If the responsible person is an entity, the Enforcement Officer may personally serve an employee over the age of 18, manager, principal, partner, director, officer or representative of the entity on behalf of said entity. The failure or refusal of a person to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceeding, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission of guilt. The date of personal service shall constitute the date of issuance of the citation. 
(2)  Mailed service. If the responsible person is outside the jurisdiction of the City or cannot be located, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, with a copy of the citation simultaneously sent by first class mail. The date indicated on the receipt, or, if returned unsigned, the date of mailing shall constitute the date of issuance of the citation. 
(3)  Posted service. If service cannot be accomplished by personal service or mailed service, the Enforcement Officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property in the City in which the responsible person is known to have a legal and possessory interest. The date of posting shall constitute the date of issuance of the citation. 
(b)  The failure of a responsible person to receive an administrative citation shall not invalidate any fine, late charge, action or proceeding, if service was given in a manner authorized in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.070. - Appeal of administrative citations. 
(a)  A recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation(s) or that he or she is a responsible person by filing an appeal on a City-approved form with the City department or contracted company designated on the form. The appeal form must be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of the fine. 
(b)  Any appeal must be received by the designated City department or contracted company within 15 calendar days from the date of issuance of the administrative citation. 
(c)  Defective appeals. 
(1)  If an appeal is not received by the proper City department or contracted company within the required period, the cited party is deemed to have waived the right to an appeal hearing and the citation shall be deemed final. 
(2)  If an appeal is not accompanied by the correct deposit, the person filing the appeal shall be notified in writing, by certified first class mail, of that fact, and given ten days to cure the defect. If the appeal is not cured within that time, the cited party is deemed to have waived the right to an appeal hearing and the citation shall be deemed final. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.080. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  The City Manager shall designate the Hearing Officer or the contracted company for the administrative hearing. The Hearing Officer shall not be a City employee and his or her compensation shall not be conditioned upon whether or not administrative citations are upheld. 
(b)  The administrative hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than 15 nor more than 60 days from the date the request for hearing is filed. The cited person shall be notified of the date, time and place of the administrative hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(c)  The cited person shall appear at the administrative hearing on the date and at the time and place specified. Failure to personally attend the administrative hearing shall be considered a nonappearance and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and shall result in forfeiture of the deposit. 
(d)  Evidence at the administrative hearing. 
(1)  The Hearing Officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the cited person is the responsible person. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(2)  The administrative citation and any additional documents prepared by the City in connection with the violation(s) are prima facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents and the enforcement officer who issued the citation should attend but is not required to attend or participate at the administrative hearing. If the City submits any additional documents concerning the administrative citation to the Hearing Officer for consideration at the hearing, whenever possible, a copy of those documents shall be served by first class mail on the person requesting the administrative hearing prior to the hearing. 
(3)  The cited party, and the Enforcement Officer, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The Hearing Officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at the hearing. 
(e)  The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the City or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.090. - Administrative hearing decision. 
(a)  After consideration of all the evidence, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and shall state the reasons for the decision and notice of the right to appeal the decision. 
(b)  The appellant and the Enforcement Officer shall each be served by first class mail, postage prepaid, with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision. The appellant shall also be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service shall be deemed made as of the date on the receipt or, if returned unsigned, as of the date of mailing of the hearing officer's written decision. 
(c)  If the administrative citation is upheld, the deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. If the administrative citation is cancelled, the City shall promptly refund the deposit. 
(d)  If the citation is upheld and the violation has not been fully corrected as of the date of the hearing, the Hearing Officer's decision shall contain an order to correct the violation and a deadline for compliance. 
(e)  The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.100. - Judicial review of administrative hearing decision. 
(a)  Either the City or the appellant may obtain judicial review of the Hearing Officer's decision by filing an appeal with the Orange County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. An appeal from a Hearing Officer's decision may not be made to the City Council. 
(b)  An appeal of a Hearing Officer's decision must be filed within 20 days after service of the Hearing Officer's administrative hearing decision. 
(c)  A person filing an appeal with the Superior Court shall also serve a copy of the appeal on the other party personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid. 
(d)  Judicial review of an administrative citation shall not be available without first exhausting administrative remedies pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Sec. 1.05.110. - Recovery of administrative citation fines, late charges and costs; additional remedies. 
(a)  The City may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies to which it may be entitled, for the collection of any unpaid and/or delinquent fines or penalties, including its collection costs and the cost of the Hearing Officer. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies. 
(b)  Any responsible person who has unpaid and/or delinquent fines may be refused the issuance of a land use approval or other City approval pertaining to the property, real or personal, that is the subject of the administrative citation issued pursuant to this Chapter for which a decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 5-24-2006)  
Title 2 - Administration and Personnel  
Chapter 2.01 - City Council and Elections 
 
Sec. 2.01.010. - Time of regular meetings. 
The regular meetings of the Rancho Santa Margarita City Council shall be held on the days and at the times established by resolution. If any such day is on a holiday, then the meeting scheduled on such day shall be held on the next regular business date that is not a holiday. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(2.10.010), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.01.020. - Place of regular meetings. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council Chamber at a location designated by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(2.10.020), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.01.030. - Council compensation. 
Each member of the City Council shall receive compensation in the amount of $463.50 per month. Such compensation shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(2.10.050), 5-18-2000) 
State Law reference— Salary of governing body, Government Code § 36516.  
Sec. 2.01.040. - Reimbursement. 
In accordance with Government Code Section 36514.5 and upon submission of an itemized amount, any council member may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(2.10.060), 5-18-2000; Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 2.01.050. - Commission appointments. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code or by state law, all City board and commission appointments shall be made by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-17, § 1(2.10.060), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.01.060. - Consolidation of City election with statewide election 
The general municipal election shall be held on the same day as the statewide election in November of even-numbered years. 
(Ord. No. 00-21, § 2(2.10.090), 8-3-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, Election Code § 1301(b).  
Sec. 2.01.070. - Term of person appointed to fill a vacancy 
Any person appointed to fill a vacancy on the City Council shall hold office until the date of a special election, which shall immediately be called to fill the remainder of the term. The special election shall be held on the date of the next general municipal election that is not less than 114 days from the call of the special election. 
(Ord. No. 00-21, § 2(2.10.100), 8-3-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, Government Code § 36512(c).  
Chapter 2.02 - City Manager 
 
Sec. 2.02.010. - Office of the City Manager created. 
The office of the City Manager of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita is hereby established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council. The City Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. No person elected to membership on the City Council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such person has ceased to be a member of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1(2.20.010), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.02.020. - Manager Pro Tempore, appointment procedure. 
The City Manager shall appoint, subject to approval of the City Council, one of the other officers or department heads of the City to serve as Manager Pro Tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In case of absence or disability of the City Manager and his or her failure to appoint a Manager Pro Tempore, the City Council may designate a City employee to perform the duties of the City Manager during the period of absence or disability of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1(2.20.020), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.02.030. - Compensation, expenses. 
The City Manager shall receive such compensation and reimbursement for expenses as the City Council shall from time to time determine and fix, and said compensation shall be a proper charge against general funds of the City or as against such funds as may be indicated by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1(2.20.030), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.02.040. - Powers and duties. 
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City under the direction and control of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City that are under the City Manager's control and for implementing policy as set by the City Council. In addition to the general duties and powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the City Manager's duty and the City Manager shall have the power: 
(1)  To see that the laws of the State of California pertaining to the City and all laws and ordinances of the City are duly enforced and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed. 
(2)  To appoint, remove, promote, and demote any City officer or employee, except the City Attorney. 
(3)  To supervise and direct all department heads, officers and employees, except the City Attorney. 
(4)  To attend all meetings of the City Council and its committees unless excused therefrom by the City Council. 
(5)  To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures or ordinances as the City Manager deems necessary or expedient. 
(6)  To keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City. 
(7)  To prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget and to administer it after adoption. 
(8)  To purchase or cause to be purchased all materials, supplies, services and equipment for all of the departments or divisions of the City. No purchase shall be made, contract let, or obligation for any item or service which exceeds the current budget appropriation, without a supplemental appropriation by the City Council. No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the City Council except on report to and approval of the City Manager. 
(9)  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the City and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City, to remedy all meritorious grievances within the scope of authority provided by the City ordinances and policies, and to report to the Council all injustices suffered by reason of defects or omissions in the laws, policies, or practices of the City which he/she is not authorized to rectify. 
(10)  To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, streets, and other public property that are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council. 
(11)  To devote his or her time as required by the duties and interest of the City. 
(12)  To make reports and recommendations as may be desirable or as requested by the City Council. 
(13)  To serve in any appointed office or as head of a department within the City government to which the City Manager may be qualified when appointed thereto by the City Council and to hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the City Council. 
(14)  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1(2.20.040), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.02.050. - Ex-officio member of Boards and Commissions. 
The City Manager shall be an ex-officio member of all Boards and Commissions appointed by the Mayor or the City Council pursuant to law, with a right to participate in all deliberations or actions by voice but without vote. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1(2.20.050), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.02.060. - Orders and directions. 
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the City Council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1(2.20.060), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.02.070. - Limitations imposed. 
The City Manager shall not establish policy that is the province of the Council to determine, nor shall he/she bind the City to any action, plan or program requiring official Council action. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1(2.20.070), 5-18-2000)  
Sec. 2.02.080. - Emergency contracts and purchases; authority. 
In case of accident, disaster, or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the City Manager may in accordance with the City's disaster preparedness plan, award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting such emergency. The City Manager shall file promptly with the City Council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 00-18, § 1(2.20.080), 5-18-2000)  
Chapter 2.03 - Planning Commission[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Planning, Government Code § 65000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2.03.010. - Planning Commission established. 
A Planning Commission performing planning and zoning functions, as well as traffic and transportation related functions, on behalf of the City is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1(2.40.010), 5-18-2000; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 5-23-2012) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish planning commission, Government Code §§ 65100, 65101.  
Sec. 2.03.020. - General provisions. 
(a)  Membership. The Planning Commission shall consist of five City residents who are registered voters of the City. No City officer or City employee shall be qualified for membership. 
(b)  Appointment process. Each City Councilmember shall propose to the City Council in the form of a nomination one City resident to serve on the Planning Commission. Unless there is a 4/5 vote taken against a nomination, each nominee shall be automatically appointed to the Planning Commission. 
(c)  Term of Office. Each Planning Commissioner shall serve a term of two years. Each term shall coincide with the City's regular general election date. The first Planning Commissioners appointed shall serve until the first Planning Commission meeting after the election results of the first general municipal election are certified. 
(d)  Removal. Planning Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. A Planning Commissioner may be removed at any time during a term of office by an affirmative vote of three Councilmembers. 
(e)  Vacancies. If a vacancy in the Commission occurs, other than by expiration of term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. A resignation shall be in writing to the City Council, and a vacancy does not exist until the City Council accepts the resignation. 
(f)  Absence from meetings. Any Commission member absent from two consecutive regularly scheduled meetings, or absent from three regularly scheduled meetings of the Commission during a calendar year, may be removed from office. By an affirmative vote of three Councilmembers, the City Council may declare a vacancy on the Planning Commission and direct the City Clerk to post the notice of vacancy and begin the application process to fill the unexpired term. 
(g)  Stipend. Each Planning Commissioner shall receive a monthly stipend for service on the Planning Commission. The stipend shall be set by City Council resolution. 
(h)  Duty of loyalty. The Planning Commission's duty of loyalty shall be to the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. City residents who are appointed to the Planning Commission shall not simultaneously serve on any other community board of directors, commission, or council that is either located within the City or is doing business with the City as either an elected or appointed member. City residents who are appointed to the Planning Commission shall perform their planning and zoning responsibilities, duties, and functions independently and free from any interference, conflict, or other influence that may arise as a result of simultaneously serving on another community board of directors, commission, or council that is either located within the City or is doing business with the City. In the event such conflict arises, such member shall either immediately resign from the Planning Commission or from the community board of directors, commission, or council they serve. 
(i)  Current Planning Commissioners. The prohibition stated herein shall not apply to any individual who is both currently serving on the Planning Commission and who is currently serving on an existing community board of directors, commission, or council that is either located within the City or is doing business with the City as of the effective date of the ordinance amendment from which this subsection is derived. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1(2.40.020), 5-18-2000; Ord. No. 04-03, §§ 2, 3, 10-27-2004) 
State Law reference— Planning commission membership, Government Code § 65101.  
Sec. 2.03.030. - Meetings, quorum. 
The Planning Commission shall establish, by resolution, bylaws for the purpose of establishing regular meeting dates, times, and a place for meetings of the Commission, rules for the conduct of business, and compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act, Government Code Sections 54950 et seq. A quorum of three shall be required to transact business. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1(2.40.030), 5-18-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish procedural rules, etc. for planning commission, Government Code § 65102.  
Sec. 2.03.040. - Duties. 
The Planning Commission shall undertake and have duties, responsibilities, and functions, together with any incidental powers thereto, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Studying and making recommendations to the City Council regarding the enactment or amendment of a City general plan; 
(2)  Developing and making recommendations to the City Council on specific plans; 
(3)  Advising the City Council regarding the City's proposed capital improvement program for consistency with the City's general plan; 
(4)  Assisting, advising, and making recommendations to the City Council regarding the development of a comprehensive City zoning ordinance; 
(5)  Recommending to the City Council actions to be taken on proposed projects, or taking final action on projects, as provided for under the State planning law and City ordinance, including this Code; 
(6)  Reviewing and/or advising the City Council on all traffic engineering and transportation related matters, including but not limited to traffic engineering rules and regulations, traffic control and related devices, speed limits, stopping, parking, or standing of vehicles, as well as vehicular and pedestrian safety; 
(7)  Undertaking such other duties as may be assigned to the Planning Commission by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1(2.40.040), 5-18-2000; Ord. No. 12-03, § 2, 5-23-2012) 
State Law reference— Planning commission duties, Government Code § 65103.  
Chapter 2.04 - Personnel System 
[2]
Footnotes: 
 
Sec. 2.04.010. - System adopted. 
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the following personnel system is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.020. - Definitions. 
The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel policies adopted pursuant to Section 2.04.050 herein. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.030. - Administration. 
The City Manager shall administer the City personnel system and may delegate any of the powers and duties of such administration to any other officer or employee of the City or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.60.130. The City Manager shall: 
(1)  Act as the appointing authority for the City in accordance with this Code; 
(2)  Administer all the provisions of this Chapter and of the personnel policies not specifically reserved to the Council; 
(3)  Prepare or cause to be prepared personnel policies and revisions, as needed. The City Attorney shall approve the legality of such policies and revisions prior to their submission and implementation; 
(4)  Recommend to the City Council personnel policy issues involving financial commitments such as, but not limited to, pay rates and employee benefit programs; 
(5)  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan; 
(6)  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classification titles for authorized City positions. The plan and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval of the Council; 
(7)  Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this Chapter and the personnel policies; 
(8)  Provide for the recruitment and selection of City employees based upon open or promotional recruitments; and 
(9)  Perform any duties that may be required to administer the personnel system. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.040. - Competitive service. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all offices, positions, and employment in the service of the City which offices, positions and employments shall be in the competitive service, except the following: 
(1)  Members of the City Council; 
(2)  Members of the City's appointive boards, commissions and committees, 
(3)  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, or technical services for a definite period of time in accordance with Section 2.04.130; 
(4)  Volunteer personnel, who receive no regular compensation from the City; 
(5)  City Attorney, City Clerk, City Manager, City Treasurer, Assistant City Manager and/or Assistant to the City Manager; 
(6)  Department heads and other management positions so designated by the City Manager; 
(7)  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as an extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property; 
(8)  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this Section, who are not regularly employed in positions, including but not limited to temporary and/or part-time positions. "Regularly employed in positions" means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than 40 hours per week and has successfully completed the initial probationary period and been retained as provided in this Chapter and the personnel policies; 
(9)  Any position, including but not limited to grant funded positions, primarily funded under a state or federal employment program; 
(10)  Any new position hereafter created by the City Council, unless declared by the City Council to be in the competitive service at the time of creation or thereafter. 
Employees not included in the competitive service shall serve at the will of their appointing authority, and may be terminated from employment without cause and without right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.050. - Adoption and amendment of policies. 
Personnel policies shall be prepared and may be amended from time to time by the City Manager, subject to review by the City Attorney and, where appropriate, approval of the City Council. Any policy matters involving the commitment of financial resources shall be recommended and must be approved by the City Council prior to implementation. The policies shall govern the personnel system, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class; 
(2)  Preparation, revision, and administration of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan providing a rate or range of pay for each class; 
(3)  Open and promotional recruitments to fill regular positions; 
(4)  The making of temporary and emergency appointments; 
(5)  Establishment of probationary periods; 
(6)  Transfer, promotion, demotion, suspension and reinstatement of employees; 
(7)  Evaluation of the job performance of employees; 
(8)  Separation of employees from City service; 
(9)  Content, maintenance, and use of personnel records and forms; 
(10)  The establishment of appeal procedures. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.060. - Appointments. 
(a)  Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel policies. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness. Examinations shall be used in and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests and other written tests, personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, or any combination of these tests. The probation period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical, and psychological tests may be given as part of any examination. 
(b)  In any examination, the City Manager or his designee may include, in addition to the competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests and set minimum standards therefore. 
(c)  The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the City Manager. The City Manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.070. - Probationary period. 
All appointments in the competitive service, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period in accordance with applicable provisions of the personnel policies. Determinations as to satisfactory completion or extension of said period, and/or rejection of an employee during said period, shall also be consistent with the applicable provisions of the personnel policies. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.080. - Status of present employees. 
Any person holding a position in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the amendments to this Chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the personnel policies for his or her class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without a qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this Chapter and the personnel policies. 
Any other persons holding positions included in the competitive service pursuant to Section 2.04.040 shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the personnel policies and procedures before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. 
All employees as defined under this Section are employed subject to the personnel system established herein which, in accordance with Government Code Section 53291, supersedes any other system. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.090. - Demotion dismissal, reduction in pay, suspension, and reprimand. 
The City Manager or any appointing authority shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend without pay, any regular employee in the competitive service for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel policies. New-hire probationers may be dismissed without cause and right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.100. - Right of appeal. 
The appeal rights of regular employees in the competitive service shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and the procedures as set forth in the personnel policies. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.110. - Layoff and reemployment. 
Layoff and reemployment actions shall follow the process set forth in the personnel policies. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.120. - Political activity. 
The political activities of all City employees shall conform to the pertinent provisions of State law and any local provision adopted pursuant to State law. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.130. - Contract for special services. 
The City Manager shall consider and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the extent to which the City should contract for the performance of aspects of the personnel system. The City Council may contract with a qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the responsibilities and duties imposed by this Chapter, except the appointment power may not be contracted. Persons engaged under contract shall only be entitled to receive compensation for services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract and are not entitled to benefits of any type that are provided to persons regularly employed in City positions. Contracts pursuant to this section shall be reviewed by the City Manager on an annual basis and a list of persons performing services pursuant to a contract shall be identified. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.140. - Appropriation of funds. 
The Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 2.04.150. - Abolishment of position. 
Whenever in the judgment of the Council it becomes necessary in the interests of economy or because the necessity for the position involved no longer exists, the Council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive service and the City Manager may thereafter discharge the employee or officer holding such position or employment, or less senior employee or officer, subject to any layoff and reemployment rights set forth under the personnel policies. 
(Ord. No. 06-07, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2006)  
Chapter 2.05 - City Treasurer 
 
Sec. 2.05.010. - Office of the City Treasurer created. 
The Office of the City Treasurer is established pursuant to California Government Code Section 36501. The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the City Council solely on the basis of qualifications and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the Council. The City Manager is appointed the City Treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 2.05.020. - Bond requirement. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36518, the City Treasurer shall furnish a corporate surety bond, or insurance policy in lieu thereof, in a reasonable amount recommended by the City Attorney and fixed by resolution of the City Council, which amount may be changed by the City Council during the City Treasurer's term of office. The bond shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory performance of the duties imposed upon the City Treasurer by statute, ordinance, or resolution. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 2.05.030. - Functions. 
The City Treasurer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by California Government Code Sections 41001 through 41007 and by any other provisions of law applicable to deposit, investment and safekeeping of public funds of the City. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 1-11-2012)  
Chapter 2.06 - City Attorney 
 
Sec. 2.06.010. - Office of the City Attorney created. 
(a)  The Office of the City Attorney is established. It shall consist of the City Attorney and such assistants and deputies as assigned, or as may be otherwise authorized by the City Council. The City Attorney shall administer the office and be responsible for the successful performance of its functions. The City Attorney shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the City Council as its legal advisor. The City Attorney may be an employee of the City or provide services under contract to the City. 
(b)  The City Council may retain or employ special counsel as may be needed to take charge of any litigation or legal matters or to assist the City Attorney therein. 
(c)  This Chapter shall be applicable to an attorney who provides legal services to the City under contract insofar as the provisions of this Chapter are consistent with the written contract between the attorney and the City. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 2.06.020. - Compensation. 
The City Attorney shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the City Council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 2.06.030. - Functions. 
The functions of the Office of the City Attorney shall be to: 
(1)  Advise the City Council and City officers in all matters of law pertaining to their offices; to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City most efficiently, economically, and effectively so far as may be consistent with duties prescribed by law and the ordinances of the City; 
(2)  Furnish legal services at all meetings of the City Council, except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinion on the legality of all matters under consideration by the City Council or by any of the boards, commissions, committees, or officers of the City; 
(3)  Prepare and/or approve as to form all ordinances, resolutions, agreements, contracts, and other legal instruments as shall be required for the proper conduct of the business of the City and approve the form of all contracts, agreements, and bonds given to the City; and 
(4)  Perform such other legal duties as may be required by the City Council or as may be necessary to complete the performance of the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, § 1, 1-11-2012)  
Title 3 - Revenue and Finance  
Chapter 3.01 - Demands Generally 
 
Sec. 3.01.010. - Checks and warrants. 
No check, order, or warrant upon the City treasury shall be drawn unless there are sufficient monies in the fund upon which it is drawn. All checks, orders, and warrants upon the City treasury for payment of any money shall bear the signature of the persons authorized by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-23, § 1(1.60.040), 9-7-2000)  
Chapter 3.02 - Assessor and Tax Collector 
 
Sec. 3.02.010. - Assessor and Tax Collector. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the State of California, assessment and tax collection shall be performed by the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County of Orange. 
(Ord. No. 00-03, § 1, 1-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority to so transfer, Government Code § 51501.  
Chapter 3.03 - Special Gas Tax Improvement Fund 
 
Sec. 3.03.010. - Special gas tax street improvement fund. 
To avail itself of the benefits of Streets and Highways Code §§ 2105—2107, there is hereby created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.03.020. - Payment of monies for real property and/or interest. 
All monies received by the City from the State of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein, research, planning, construction improvement, maintenance and operation of public streets by the City (and their related public facilities for nonmotorized traffic), including the mitigation of their environmental effects, the payment for property taken or damaged for such purposes and the administrative costs necessarily incurred in the foregoing purposes, shall be paid into the special gas tax street improvement fund. 
(Ord. No. 00-05, § 2, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.03.030. - Expenditure of monies in fund. 
All monies in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-05, § 3, 1-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Special gas tax street improvement fund required, Streets and Highways Code § 2113.  
Chapter 3.04 - Sales and Use Tax[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Sales and use taxes, Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.; local sales and use taxes, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3.04.010. - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 2, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.020. - Purpose. 
The City Council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes. 
(1)  To adopt a sates and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.); 
(2)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.) insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.); 
(3)  To adopt a sates and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
(4)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 4, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.030. - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 5, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.040. - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City, at the rate stated in section 3.04.010, of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 6, 1-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy sales tax, Government Code § 37101.  
Sec. 3.04.050. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 7, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.060. - Use tax. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased form any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City, at the rate stated in Section 3.04.010, of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 8, 1-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority to use tax, Government Code § 37101.  
Sec. 3.04.070. - Adoption of provisions of State law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), all of the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.) are hereby adopted and made apart of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 9, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.080. - Limitations on adoption of State law. 
In adopting the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.), wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.), or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 10, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.090. - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Revenue and Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 11, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.100. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) by any city and county, county, or city in this State, shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(d)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202(h)(7)-(8); Mandatory that City so provide, Government Code § 37101(a). 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 12, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.110. - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Sales and Use Tax Law (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.) which are not inconsistent with Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) shall automatically become part of this chapter. This chapter also shall be deemed to adopt by reference the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7202 to 7203, inclusive, as now in effect or as later amended, which are required to be included in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 13, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.04.120. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2, Pt. 1.5 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 14, 1-1-2000)  
Chapter 3.05 - Real Property Documentary Transfer Tax[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Documentary Transfer Tax Act, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3.05.010. - Short title; adoption. 
The real property documentary transfer tax is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Revenue and Taxation Code Div. 2., Pt. 6.7 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 00-06, § 2, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.05.020. - Imposition of tax. 
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 00-06, § 3, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.05.030. - Payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.05.020 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or issued. 
(Ord. No. 00-06, § 4, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.05.040. - Exemptions. 
The tax levied by this chapter shall be subject to all exemptions and exclusions required by State law. 
State Law reference— Exemptions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11921 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 00-06, § 9, 1-1-2000)  
Sec. 3.05.050. - Administration by County Recorder. 
The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of applicable law and the provision of any applicable county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 00-06, § 10, 1-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Administration of tax, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11931 et seq.  
Sec. 3.05.060. - Claims for refund. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 00-06, § 11, 1-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11934; refund claims, Revenue and Taxation Code § 5096.  
Chapter 3.06 - Motor Vehicle Registration Fee 
 
Sec. 3.06.010. - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality Management District's (SCAQMD's) imposition of the vehicle registration fee to be used to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, the California Clean Air Act of 1988, or other applicable plans, and to bring the City into compliance with applicable law in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 2, 2-3-2000) 
State Law reference— Requirements for ordinances, Health and Safety Code § 44243  
Sec. 3.06.020. - Administration of vehicle registration fee. 
(a)  Receipt of fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the City, pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the Finance Director. 
(b)  Establishment of air quality improvement trust fund. The Finance Director shall establish a separate interest-bearing air quality improvement trust fund account. 
(c)  Transfer of funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the Finance Director shall deposit such funds into the air quality improvement trust fund. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account. 
(d)  Expenditure of air quality trust fund revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively spent to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the Clean Air Act amendments of 1991, the California Clean Air Act of 1988, or other applicable plan. Such revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within the time required by law. 
(e)  Audits. The City consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 4, 2-3-2000) 
State Law reference— Audit, Health and Safety Code § 44244.1(a).  
Chapter 3.07 - Procurement Code[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, adopted May 13, 2015, amended Chapter 3.07 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Chapter 3.07, §§ 3.07.010—3.07.110, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 01-02, § 1(2.50.010—2.50.110), adopted December 6, 2001. 
State Law reference— Purchasing policies required, Government Code § 54201 et seq.; Local Agency Public Construction Act, Public Contract Code § 20100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3.07.010. - Adoption of purchasing system. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of goods and supplies, equipment, and services for the City at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the suitability and fitness of purchases, the purchasing system set forth in this chapter is adopted for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. Except as otherwise provided herein, the procurement regulations, policies, and procedures set forth in this chapter shall apply only to the purchase of goods and supplies, equipment, and professional and nonprofessional services, and shall not apply to public works construction projects. Procedures and processes for the procurement of public works construction contracts are set forth in Chapter 3.08 and are subject to the California Public Contract Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.020. - Authority and responsibility; definitions. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for the purchase of goods and supplies and equipment, procurement of professional and nonprofessional services, and disposition of surplus supplies and equipment, is vested in the City Manager and City Council. The Purchasing Officer shall be the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. The Purchasing Officer may promulgate additional administrative rules, procedures, and orders necessary to implement the policies and procedures established by this chapter with regard to the purchase of goods and supplies, equipment, and services on behalf of the City. Each City department head is responsible for administering and implementing for that department the purchasing policies and procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to administering these policies and procedures, the Purchasing Officer and each City department head shall: 
(1)  Consider that the City Council has encouraged all residents and businesses located within the City to shop locally at businesses located in the City. In keeping with this policy, the Purchasing Officer should make every attempt to purchase goods and supplies and equipment from Rancho Santa Margarita businesses. Except as otherwise required by law, where other factors are equal, goods and supplies and equipment should be procured from Rancho Santa Margarita businesses. 
(2)  Keep informed of current developments in market conditions and new products and maintain a bidder's list, vendor catalogue files, or other records needed for the efficient purchase of goods and supplies, equipment, and services. 
(3)  Cause goods and supplies and equipment delivered to the City, as well as contract services, to be inspected or reviewed to determine their conformance with specifications. 
(4)  Evaluate contract services performed to determine conformance to the specifications set forth in the contract. 
(5)  Consider and encourage the purchase and use of recycled and recyclable materials and products, whenever practicable and cost effective or efficient. 
(c)  The term "City department head" as used in this chapter means the person who is designated by the City Manager as being responsible for each particular City department, including, but not limited to, Administration, Development Services, City Attorney, City Clerk, Community Services, Finance, Police Services, and Public Works. 
(d)  The term "estimated value" means the estimated total value as determined by the Purchasing Officer at the beginning of the procurement process for the proposed acquisition of goods and supplies, equipment, and services. When making this initial threshold determination, the Purchasing Officer shall make reasonable use of all available market data and pricing information to estimate the total cost to the City, inclusive of taxes, licenses, freight charges, installation charges, fees, and other consideration, for the proposed procurement. The Purchasing Officer shall not use the value of any anticipated exchange or trade-in amount to reduce the estimated value of the proposed procurement. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.030. - Determination of purchasing requirements and surplus. 
(a)  The City Council is responsible for and shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. The adopted budget for each City department for each fiscal year shall include funding for the necessary goods and supplies, equipment, and services for that department during the fiscal year. Except in cases of emergency, the City Manager shall not issue any purchase order or contract for goods and supplies, equipment, or services unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the department's account against which such purchase may be charged. The City Manager has the authority to transfer unencumbered funds between and among City departments and divisions as necessary for the procurement of goods and supplies, equipment, and services as necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Each City department head shall ensure that sufficient documentation is submitted to the Purchasing Officer with the proper purchase request form to demonstrate compliance with these policies and procedures and to justify the acquisition of goods and supplies, equipment, and services. 
(c)  Each City department head shall notify the City Manager of all equipment on hand in the department that is no longer useful to the department. The City Manager may direct the transfer of such equipment to another City department, or the trade-in, disposal, or donation of such surplus equipment in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.040. - Purchasing limitations. 
The procurement of goods and supplies, equipment, and nonprofessional services may be made by the employees designated in this section subject to compliance with the procedures and limitations contained in this section. 
(1)  For purchases of $150 or less, petty cash may be used and the respective City department head must approve the purchase. It is not required that quotes or bids be obtained for such purchases. 
(2)  For purchases that are greater than $150, up to and including $2,500, the respective City department head must approve the purchase. No purchase order is necessary, and it is not required that quotes or bids be obtained for such purchases. Requests for payment shall be made on forms prescribed and provided by the Purchasing Officer (check request forms). 
(3)  For purchases that have an estimated value greater than $2,500, up to and including $7,500, the Purchasing Officer shall approve and execute the purchase order or contract for the purchase. Contracts shall be subject to approval as to form by the City Attorney. At least three informal quotes should be obtained for such purchases when practicable. Requests for purchases shall be made on forms prescribed and provided by the Purchasing Officer (purchase requisition forms and purchase orders forms). 
(4)  For purchases that have an estimated value greater than $7,500, up to and including $30,000, the City Manager shall approve and execute the purchase order or contract for the purchase. Contracts shall be subject to approval as to form by the City Attorney. Before the purchase is made, three written informal bids must be obtained from vendors and each of these bids must be documented in accordance with Section 3.07.050. Verbal bids shall not satisfy this requirement. Requests for purchases shall be made on forms prescribed and provided by the Purchasing Officer (purchase requisition forms and purchase order forms). 
(5)  For purchases that have an estimated value greater than $30,000, the City Council shall approve the purchase order or contract for the purchase. Contracts shall be subject to approval as to form by the City Attorney. Prior to City Council approval, three written formal bids must be obtained from prospective vendors in accordance with Section 3.07.060. Verbal bids shall not satisfy this requirement. The City Council may authorize that such purchase orders or contracts be executed by either the Mayor or the City Manager, or the City Council may otherwise delegate such signature authority. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.050. - Competitive informal bidding procedures. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for purchases of goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services that have an estimated value greater than $7,500, up to and including $30,000, at least three informal bids or proposals must be obtained, and each City department shall solicit such informal bids or proposals by written request to qualified prospective bidders or proposers. The purchase order or contract for such purchases shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder consistent with the best qualified vendor selection criteria set forth in Section 3.07.111. Informal bids or proposals shall be submitted to the requesting City department, which shall keep a record of all informal orders and bids for a period of no less than two years after placement of the order. This record, while kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.060. - Competitive formal bidding procedures. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for purchases of goods and supplies, equipment, and nonprofessional services that have an estimated value greater than $30,000, such procurements shall be let by the formal procedures set forth in this section. 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. Notices inviting formal bids from prospective vendors shall be publicly noticed and posted and mailed no later than ten calendar days before the submission date for formal bids. The notices shall describe the requested goods or supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information concerning the procurement, and state the time, place, and deadline for submission of sealed bids. The notices shall be mailed to all qualified vendors on the bid list or who have requested their name to be added to thereto. 
(2)  Public notice. The notice inviting formal bids shall be noticed in any generally accepted manner of public notification and posted in at least three public places in the City that have been duly designated by the City Clerk as the official places for the posting of public notices and on the City's official website. In addition, such notice may include trade publications when practicable. 
(3)  Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the office of the City Clerk and shall be identified as formal competitive bids on the outside of the sealed envelope. The City Clerk shall store all sealed bids in a secure location until opening. The City Clerk shall open all bids in public at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public review and inspection in the office of the City Clerk during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. In its sole discretion, the City Council may reject any and all bids for any reason or for no reason, and may suspend, delay, or otherwise cancel the procurement, or may order the re-advertisement of the request for bids. If all formal bids are rejected and the City Council resolves by a recorded majority vote of the total membership of the City Council that the procurement can be performed more economically by informal procedures or through open market purchases, then it may dispense with further formal competitive formal bidding. 
(5)  Tie bids. If two or more formal bids received are the same and are the lowest, the City Council may accept the one it chooses. 
(6)  Award of contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the City Council to the lowest responsible bidder consistent with the best qualified vendor selection criteria set forth in Section 3.07.111. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(7)  No bids received. If no bids are received, the purchase may be let in the open market or by the informal procedures set forth in Section 3.07.050, subject to City Council approval. 
(8)  Performance bonds. The Purchasing Officer shall have authority to recommend that a performance bond or other form of security or guarantee be required before entering into a contract in such amount as may be reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. If a performance bond or other form of security or guarantee is required, the form and amount of the bond, security or guarantee shall be described in the notice inviting bids, and the performance bond, security or guarantee shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney. 
(9)  Defects, irregularities, and informalities. The City Council may, in its sole discretion, waive any defect, irregularity, or informality in the formal bids or in the competitive procedures established in this section, and no such defect, irregularity, or informality shall void any contract entered into by the City. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.070. - Exemption from bidding upon determination of Purchasing Officer or City Council. 
Except as otherwise provided below, the requirements and procedures set forth in Sections 3.07.050 and 3.07.060 may be waived, at the discretion of the Purchasing Officer or City Council, when any of the following are applicable: 
(1)  When goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services are of a unique, sole source nature because of their quality, durability, availability, or fitness for a particular use and are available only from one source. A sole source procurement is a procurement where only one source is practicably available for the type of procurement required; 
(2)  When the goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services are proprietary. A proprietary procurement is a procurement where the desired good or service must be restricted to one manufacturer because the good or service is compatible with or is an integral component of existing equipment or products, is necessary to support a specific need of a program, is covered by patent or copyright, must yield continuity of results, or is one with which a user has extensive experience and the use of any other similar good or service would require considerable reorientation and training. Under such circumstances, an equitable evaluation of comparable goods or services should be made showing that rejection of other goods or services is based solely on their failure to meet that need; 
(3)  When after a reasonable attempt has been made to obtain informal bids or proposals, and it has been determined by the Purchasing Officer that three informal bids or proposals cannot be obtained; 
(4)  When the Purchasing Officer finds that emergency conditions require the immediate purchase of goods and supplies, equipment, or services. For purposes of this section, emergency purchases are those procurements that are required to prevent immediate interruption or cessation of necessary City services or to safeguard life, property, or the public health and welfare. The Purchasing Officer shall file promptly with the City Council a report showing such conditions and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures; 
(5)  When in the opinion of the Purchasing Officer competitive formal bidding is not likely to result in the lowest price; 
(6)  When in the opinion of the Purchasing Officer a specific make, model, or brand is necessary to match existing city goods and supplies or equipment or to facilitate the continuity of effective maintenance and support; 
(7)  When the goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services are available from a vendor who has been selected as the lowest bidder through a procurement with another government entity using competitive bidding procedures substantially the same as or similar to those normally utilized by the City for the acquisition of such goods and supplies, equipment, or services, and when the price offered to the City is substantially equivalent to that offered to the other public agency; 
(8)  When the goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services are available from suppliers who have been awarded contracts by the State of California for the purchase of goods and supplies, information technology, and services where State procurement is made in the form of master agreements, price schedules, or multiple award schedules that allow the State to take advantage of leveraged pricing that can be obtained through the State's buying power and where the State has determined that such vendor pricing is deemed to be reasonable, fair, and competitive. Pursuant to such State multiple award programs, the Purchasing Officer or City Council may make these purchases directly from the vendors without competitive bidding, or the State may provide assistance to the City in making such purchases; 
(9)  When in the opinion of the Purchasing Officer it is determined that an unusual or unique situation exists, in that due to experience, specialized qualifications, the unique nature of the goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services, particular expertise, performance history, and/or reputation, a particular vendor is uniquely qualified for a particular task or project, which makes application of the requirements for competitive solicitation under this chapter contrary to either the intended purpose of the project or the public interest; 
(10)  When in the opinion of the City Council, it is determined that compliance with the requirements and procedures is not in the best interest of the City; 
(11)  When goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services are for information technology, computer hardware, software, or related equipment and devices, government affairs, public relations, legislative advocacy or affairs, or economic development, irrespective of their estimated value, such procurements shall be subject to the informal bidding procedures set forth in Section 3.07.050. 
(12)  When goods and supplies, equipment, and professional or nonprofessional services are for any of the following, irrespective of their estimated value, such procurements shall not be subject to the informal or formal bidding procedures set forth in Sections 3.07.050 or 3.07.060, or the procedures set forth in Section 3.07.080, but are otherwise subject to the purchasing limitations set forth in this chapter: 
a.  Contracts for professional or other expert witnesses if the purpose of such contracts is to provide for professional services or testimony relating to an existing or probable judicial proceeding in which the City is or may become a party, including contracts for special investigative services; 
b.  Contracts to commission original works of art, and for fine art or any form of public art; 
c.  The purchase of miscellaneous books, magazines, newspapers, subscriptions, on-line library reference services, film, videos, and assorted materials; 
d.  Intergovernmental payments, purchases, and agreements, including but not limited to contracts for the procurement of law enforcement or other public safety services; 
e.  Specialized seminar, training, and educational classes; 
f.  Contracts for election services; 
g.  Contracts for appraisal services; 
h.  Contracts for entertainment services; 
i.  Contracts for community support and/or recreation services; 
j.  Contracts for printing and/or graphical design services. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.080. - Professional services contracts, exempt from competitive bidding. 
(a)  The informal and formal bidding procedures contained in this chapter shall not apply to contracts for professional services. Rather, to secure professional services, the City shall utilize a request for proposals procedure, which may be promulgated by the Purchasing Officer in the form of administrative regulations. The Purchasing Officer may award any contract for professional services when the total not to exceed contract amount of such services is $30,000 or less. Any contract for professional services having an aggregate contract amount greater than $30,000 shall be awarded by the City Council, and the City Council may authorize that such contracts be executed by either the Mayor or the City Manager, or the City Council may otherwise delegate such signature authority. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter, the term professional services means those services provided by any specially trained and/or experienced person, company, corporation, or firm in areas including but not limited to private architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, construction project management, management and administration, financial, accounting, auditing, actuarial, and/or development and planning, which involve the exercise of discretion and independent judgment together with an advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise, training, or unique skills gained by formal studies or experience. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary: 
(1)  Selection by the City of professional services in areas including but not limited to private architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, construction project management, management and administration, financial, accounting, auditing, actuarial, and/or development and planning, which involve the exercise of discretion and independent judgment together with an advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise, training, or unique skills gained by formal studies or experience, shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required, and shall not be awarded solely on the basis of cost. 
(2)  In order to implement this method of selection, the Purchasing Officer may promulgate administrative regulations concerning contracting for professional services to ensure that such services are engaged on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications for the types of services to be performed and at fair and reasonable prices to the City. In accordance with State law, the City shall consider price after the City is satisfied that the would-be person, company, corporation, contractor, consultant, or firm has demonstrated the competence and professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. Price alone shall not be the determining factor, but shall be considered along with qualifications. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all contracts for the performance of the annual audit of the City financial statements shall be competitively bid by the Purchasing Officer by utilizing the informal competitive bidding method set forth in Section 3.07.050 and by evaluating the bids or proposals received and making the contract award in accordance with the selection criteria set forth in subsection (2) above. The award of all contracts for municipal financial audit services, regardless of cost, shall be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.090. - Prohibited activity. 
City officers and employees are prohibited from engaging in any unlawful activity in the procurement of goods and supplies, equipment, and services, including, but not limited to, receipt of any form of compensation, rebates, kickbacks, or any other unlawful consideration. City officers and employees are prohibited from participating in the selection process when those persons have a financial interest in the purchase or contract as proscribed in Government Code Section 1090 et seq. or 87100 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.100. - Change orders; contract amendments. 
(a)  Following the award of a contract or issuance of a purchase order for goods and supplies, equipment, services, or public works construction contracts, the contract or purchase order may be amended by the issuance of a change order or contract amendment. A change order may be issued provided that the change is reasonably related to the scope of the original contract. An amendment to a contract is required when the subject of the change order alters or is outside the scope of the original contract. 
(b)  The Purchasing Officer will maintain control relative to the scoping, estimating, and negotiating of the proposed change(s) of a change order or contract amendment. The Finance Director will certify the availability of funds for the proposed change(s) in the event the change increases the contract cost. 
(c)  Any public works construction contract change order where the original contract cost is in the amount of $30,000 or less may be approved by the Purchasing Officer, provided the aggregate amount of all changes to that particular contract, including the change order under consideration, does not exceed $30,000. Any change order to a public works construction contract with an original contract amount greater than $30,000, or any change order that, when considered with the aggregate amount of all other changes to that particular contract, exceeds ten percent of the original contract cost, shall be approved by the City Council. For public works construction contracts greater than $30,000, the Purchasing Officer shall notify the City Council of change orders that have been issued for public works construction contracts pursuant to this section at the time the notice of completion is issued. 
(d)  Any change order or contract amendment to a contract for goods and supplies, equipment, or professional or nonprofessional services where the original contract cost is in the amount of $30,000 or less may be approved by the Purchasing Officer, provided that the aggregate cost resulting from the original contract and all change orders or amendments to such contract, including the change order or amendment under consideration, does not exceed $30,000. If the change order or contract amendment would cause the aggregate cost of the contract to exceed $30,000, it shall be approved by the City Council. All contract amendments shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
(e)  If a proposed contract amendment, change order, or request for extra work exceeds the limitations imposed upon the Purchasing Officer by this section or by regulation, and if any extended delay in obtaining City Council approval is reasonably determined to subject the City to liability for damages incurred by a contractor, or to jeopardize the public health, welfare, or safety, or to otherwise result in potential detriment to the City, then the Purchasing Officer shall have authority to exceed the dollar amounts or other limitations specified herein. The Purchasing Officer shall file promptly with the City Council a report showing such conditions and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.110. - Disposal of surplus goods and supplies or equipment. 
(a)  Any City department head may declare goods and supplies or equipment (collectively "personal property") held by such department as surplus. Such declaration shall be in written list form and shall be delivered to the City Manager, who shall circulate the list to all City departments for review. If any department has use for such personal property, the City Manager has the authority to reassign the personal property at his or her discretion. If no City department head has use for such personal property, the personal property shall be deemed surplus. 
(b)  The City Manager shall have the authority to dispose of surplus personal property by auction, sale, donation, or any other method which, in his or her judgment, provides the best return or most benefit to the City. Notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary, the City Manager is authorized to dispose of surplus personal property in any manner he or she deems appropriate, including via disposal or donation, where such personal property is determined to be of little to no value or is determined to be damaged, worn-out, or otherwise obsolete without further compliance with this section. Where surplus personal property is disposed of by sale, the City Manager shall utilize one of the following procedures: 
(1)  Sale on the open market. The City Manager shall cause to be noticed, at least three days before the sale, in any generally accepted manner of public notification, a notice of sale setting forth a general description of the personal property to be sold, and the day, time, and location of the sale. 
(2)  Sale by sealed bid or auction. As an alternative to the sale on the open market, the City Manager may, when in his or her judgment it is in the best interests of the City, sell surplus personal property by means of sealed bid or public auction. In the case of sale by sealed bid or public auction, the City Manager shall cause to be noticed, at least three days before the sale, in any generally accepted manner of public notification, a notice setting forth a general description of the surplus personal property to be sold, and the day, time, and location of the sale. 
(c)  All sales, trade-ins, and donations shall be "as-is" with no warranty, guarantee, or representation made of any kind, express or implied, as to the condition, utility, usability, or fitness for a particular use. All transactions shall be paid to the City in cash, or in any manner acceptable to the City Manager. 
(d)  In conducting an auction, the City Manager may contract with a professional auctioneer and allow a flat fee, hourly fee, or percentage of the amount of the sale to be paid based upon that which is common and customary method and rate for such auctioneering services. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.111. - Best qualified vendor selection criteria. 
In determining the best qualified vendor, consideration is to be given to price, quality, and performance of the goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services to be provided by the vendor. Criteria for determining the best qualified vendor shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The cost and quality of the goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services; 
(2)  The ability, capacity, and skill of the vendor to perform and to provide the goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services requested; 
(3)  The ability of the vendor to provide the goods and supplies, equipment, or nonprofessional services requested promptly or within the time specified, without delay, interference, or service interruption; 
(4)  The ability of the vendor to demonstrate the attributes of trustworthiness, quality, fitness, capacity, and experience to satisfactorily perform; 
(5)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, references, experience, and efficiency of the vendor; 
(6)  The quality of the vendor's performance history and record on previous purchases or contracts with the City; 
(7)  The ability of the vendor to provide future maintenance, repair parts, and services for the use of the goods and supplies, equipment, or materials purchased; and 
(8)  The ability of the vendor to demonstrate its prior, current, and continued compliance during the contract term with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, statutes, ordinances and all lawful orders, rules, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Sec. 3.07.112. - Exemptions to provisions of this chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to the following procurements, which are to be approved by the City Council: contracts for banking and/or investment services; contracts for legal services; franchise agreements; and, contracts for procuring and maintaining insurance policies for the benefit of the City. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 5-13-2015)  
Chapter 3.08 - Public Construction; Informal Bidding[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Bidding on public contracts, Public Contract Code § 22000 et seq.; ordinance on informal bidding required, Public Contract Code § 22034. 
 
Sec. 3.08.010. - Public project defined. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, and in accordance with the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act ("Act") (Public Contract Code § 22000 et seq.), the term "public project" is defined in relevant part as follows: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility; 
(2)  Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility; 
(b)  "Public project" does not include maintenance work. "Maintenance work" includes all of the following: 
(1)  Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes; 
(2)  Minor repainting; 
(3)  Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch; 
(4)  Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(5.10.010), 2-7-2002)  
Sec. 3.08.020. - Informal bidding procedures. 
A public project, as defined herein, of one $100,000 or less may be contracted by the informal bidding procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(5.10.020), 2-7-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Public Contract Code § 22032(b).  
Sec. 3.08.030. - Contractors list. 
A list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work, shall be developed and maintained by the City in accordance with the minimum criteria determined by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission ("Commission"). 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(5.10.030), 2-7-2002) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, Public Contracts Code § 22034(a).  
Sec. 3.08.040. - Notice inviting informal bids. 
Where a public project, as defined herein, is to be performed and is subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 3.08.030 above, and to all appropriate construction trade journals as specified by the Commission. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the City. If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the City for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission. If the product or service required to be performed is, at the discretion of the City, determined to be proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(5.10.040), 2-7-2002) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, Public Contract Code § 22034(b).  
Sec. 3.08.050. - Mailing of notices inviting informal bids and project description. 
All mailing of notices to contractors or construction trade journals pursuant to Section 3.08.040 above shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due. The notice inviting bids shall: (1) describe the public project in general terms; (2) explain how more detailed information about the proposed public project may be obtained; and (3) state the time, date, and location for the submission of bids. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(5.10.050), 2-7-2002) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, Public Contract Code § 22034(c), (d).  
Sec. 3.08.060. - Award of bid. 
Pursuant to state law, the City may reject any bids presented. If, after the first invitation for bids, all bids received are rejected, the City shall have the option, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, of one of the following: 
(1)  The City may abandon the project or re-advertise for bids in the manner described in this chapter; 
(2)  By passage of a resolution by a 4/5 majority of the City Council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by its employees, the City may have the project done by force account (i.e. by using internal resources including, but not limited to, labor, equipment, materials, supplies and subcontracts of the City, without further compliance with this chapter); 
(3)  If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder; if two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the City may accept the one it chooses; 
(4)  If no bids are received, the project may be performed by employees of the City by force account, as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(5.10.060), 2-7-2002)  
Sec. 3.08.070. - Bids received in excess of $100,000. 
If all bids received are in excess of $100,000, the City Council may, by passage of a resolution by a 4/5ths vote, award the contract for $110,000, or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if the City Council determines that the cost estimate was reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(5.10.070), 2-7-2002) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, Public Contract Code § 22034(f).  
Sec. 3.08.080. - Award of contracts. 
Except as specified under Section 3.08.060 above, dealing with informal bids in excess of $100,000, the City's Purchasing Officer is authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(5.10.080), 2-7-2002)  
Title 4 - Business Regulations  
Chapter 4.01 - Miscellaneous Licenses and Regulations 
 
Sec. 4.01.010. - County Code provisions saved from repeal. 
Except insofar as specifically superseded by the Title, nothing in the Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of Title 5 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, as heretofore adopted by the City Council. Such provisions continue in full force and effect as if set out at length in this Code.  
Chapter 4.02 - Regulation of Massage Establishments[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, adopted March 22, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 4.02, §§ 4.02.010—4.02.090, and enacted a new Ch. 4.02 as set out herein. The former Ch. 4.02 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 4-14-2010. 
 
Sec. 4.02.010. - Findings and purpose. 
The City Council finds and declares as follows: 
(1)  The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this Chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(2)  The City is authorized, by virtue of Section 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution, California Business and Professions Code §§ 460(c), 4612(b) and 16000, and California Government Code § 51030 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, to regulate massage establishments by imposing reasonable conditions on the operation of massage establishments. 
(3)  There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly trained and/or educated massage technicians and this Chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss. 
(4)  Massage establishments present an opportunity for acts of prostitution, human trafficking, and the use and sale of illegal drugs. Such illegal activity has been documented by police reports in cities in Orange County, including but not limited to Garden Grove, Huntington Beach, and Lake Forest, which have several massage establishments. Courts have long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity and that some massage establishments are brothels in disguise. The enactment of reasonable standards and restrictions on the operation of massage establishments will serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity. 
(5)  The regulations and restrictions contained in this Chapter reduce the burdens on the City's police personnel and permit the deployment of the police personnel such that more serious crimes may be prevented and more important laws be enforced. 
(6)  The regulations and restrictions contained in this Chapter tend to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution or sites for illegal drug use and sales; the means utilized in this Chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent that the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acupressure shall be defined as the act of applying manual pressure to parts of the body with the intention of treating illness and/or disease or relieving pain. 
Application filing fees shall be defined as: (1) the appropriate filing fee(s) established by the City Council, which represents the City's reasonable cost to process an application for a new or renewed massage establishment permit and provide regulatory functions necessary to enforce this Chapter, including without limitation inspections of massage establishments, and (2) the appropriate filing fee(s) as established by resolution of the Orange County Board of Supervisors, which represents the Orange County Sheriff's Department's cost to conduct an investigation in connection with an application for a new or renewed massage establishment permit. 
CAMTC shall be defined as the California Massage Therapy Council, a non-profit organization formed pursuant to California Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq. 
Certified massage practitioner shall be defined as any individual certified by CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner or as a certified massage therapist pursuant to California Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
Chief of Police Services shall be defined as the Chief of Police Services of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita or the member of the Orange County Sheriff's Department who serves as the commanding officer for the area of Orange County which includes the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, or his or her designee. 
City Council shall be defined as the City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
City Manager shall be defined as the City Manager of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita or the City Manager's designee. 
Conviction and convicted shall be defined as a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. 
Director shall be defined as the Development Services Director of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita or the Development Services Director's designee. 
Employee shall be defined to include every owner, partner, operator, manager, supervisor, person and worker, whether paid or not, full-time or part-time, who renders personal services of any nature or is otherwise employed or retained in support of the operation of a massage establishment. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "employee" includes independent contractors. Additionally, the term "employee" shall also include certified massage practitioners who provide massage, whether as independent contractors or otherwise, in or for a massage establishment. 
Manager shall be defined as the person or persons designated or authorized by the owner or operator of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the owner or operator in managing day-to-day operations with the same liabilities and responsibilities. Evidence of management may include, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules, or purchase supplies. A manager may also be an owner or operator. A massage establishment may have more than one manager. 
Massage or massage services shall be defined as any method of applying pressure on, causing friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, acupressure, or bodywork, stimulating, compression on or movement of the external parts of the human body of another, either directly with the hands or some other body part, with or without the aid of or by means of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, hot stones, or other appliance or device, for money or any form of consideration. Massage may incorporate supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
Massage establishment shall be defined as any business or establishment with a fixed location within the City of Rancho Santa Margarita where any individual, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or combination of individuals, offers, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massage services within the City, including the business office of a sole provider who provides massage services at such business office. Any type of business or establishment at which massage services are provided shall be considered a massage establishment for purposes of this Chapter, regardless if the business holds itself out as something other than a massage establishment and/or also offers or provides other types of products or services. Any business or establishment that offers any combination of massage services and sauna facilities, including, but not limited to, showers, baths, wet and dry heat rooms, pools and hot tubs, shall be deemed a massage establishment under this Chapter. 
Massage establishment permit shall be defined as the permit required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter to operate a massage establishment. 
Out-call massage shall be defined as the provision of massage at a location other than at a massage establishment. Such locations may include, but are not limited to, hotel rooms, offices, business establishments, or patron residences. 
Owner or operator shall be defined as any and all persons who have an ownership interest in a massage establishment who are responsible, in whole or in part, for its day-to-day operations including, but not limited to, any of the following persons: the sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship, any general or limited partner of a general or limited partnership, any shareholder of a corporation, any member or manager of a limited liability company. 
Person shall be defined as any individual or combination of individuals, sole proprietor, firm, association, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, or other entity. 
Police Services Department shall be defined as the Police Services Department of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, under contract with the Orange County Sherriff's Department. 
Seated massage shall be defined as any massage of the neck, arms, hands, shoulders, head, scalp and back area above the waist where the patron is fully clothed, sitting in a special chair designed for upper body massage and performed without the use of supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage. 
Sole provider shall be defined as any legal form of business organization where the business owner owns 100 percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active state certificate, and has no other employees or independent contractors. 
State certification or state certificate shall be defined as a valid and current certificate issued by CAMTC pursuant to California Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.030. - State certification and massage establishment permit required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 4.02.110, no individual shall engage in, conduct, carry on, administer, provide, practice or perform massage services within the City without first obtaining and thereafter maintaining state certification and presenting proof of such state certification, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 4.02.110, no person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged, conducted, or carried on in or upon any premises within the City, the operation of a massage establishment without first obtaining and thereafter maintaining a massage establishment permit pursuant to this Chapter, and without otherwise complying with the provisions of this Chapter and Title 9 of this Code. 
(c)  No owner, operator or manager shall employ as an employee or otherwise retain any individual to conduct, carry on, administer, provide, practice or perform massage services within the City unless such individual has a state certificate. For purposes of this Chapter, an owner, operator or manager employs or retains an individual if: (1) that individual is a directly paid employee of the massage establishment; (2) that individual's association with the massage establishment is that of an independent contractor who receives compensation for massage services provided to patrons of the massage establishment; or (3) that individual receives a patron referral(s) from the massage establishment and arranges in any way for compensation to flow to such owner, operator, manager or massage establishment. 
(d)  No massage establishment may operate within the City unless: 
(1)  The massage establishment is located and conducted within a zoning district that permits such uses; 
(2)  An occupancy permit has been issued by the City for the massage establishment; and 
(3)  The massage establishment is operated in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.040. - Application for massage establishment permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring a massage establishment permit shall file a written application on the required form with the Director, who shall process the application. The application shall be accompanied by an appropriate filing fee established by the City Council, which represents the City's reasonable cost to process the application and provide regulatory functions necessary to enforce this Chapter, including without limitation inspections of massage establishment, and an appropriate filing fee as established by resolution of the Orange County Board of Supervisors, which represents the Orange County Sheriff's Department's costs to conduct an investigation, collectively referred to herein as the "application filing fees". The application shall be completed and signed by the operator of the proposed massage establishment, if a sole proprietorship; one general partner, if the operator is a partnership; one officer or one director, if the operator is a corporation; one member or one manager, if the operator is a limited liability company; and one participant, if the operator is a joint venture. The application for a massage establishment permit does not authorize operation of a massage establishment unless and until such permit has been properly granted. The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The type of legal entity or entities owning the proposed massage establishment, i.e., whether a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or otherwise. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter together with the state and date of incorporation and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and of each shareholder holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the name of the limited liability company shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of organization or other organizational document together with the state and date of organization and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and of each member or other person who has an ownership interest in the limited liability company. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners. If it is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the Secretary of State. If one or more of the partners is a corporation or limited liability company, the provisions of this Subsection pertaining to corporations and limited liability companies shall apply. An applicant that is a corporation, limited liability company or partnership shall designate one of its officers, members, managers, or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated individual shall complete and sign all application forms required for an individual applicant under this Chapter, but the application filing fees shall only be charged once in connection with the application. 
(2)  The precise name under which the massage establishment is to be conducted. 
(3)  The present or proposed address and telephone numbers of the massage establishment. 
(4)  A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all current or proposed employees of the massage establishment and the name and residence address of each manager proposed to be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment. 
(5)  True and correct copies of a valid and current state certificate and CAMTC-issued identification card for each employee proposed to provide massage services at the massage establishment. 
(6)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises as the massage establishment. 
(7)  The name, address, and description of any other business within the City or the state, which is owned or operated by the applicant. 
(8)  The following personal information concerning the applicant: 
a.  Full complete name and all aliases used by the applicant. 
b.  A valid and current driver's license and/or identification card issued by a state or federal government agency or other photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government. 
c.  Current residential address and all previous residential addresses for eight years immediately preceding prior to the present address of the applicant. 
d.  Date of birth. 
e.  Height, weight, color of hair, eyes, and sex. 
f.  Two front faced portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches in size taken within 30 days of submission of the application. 
g.  The applicant's complete business, occupation, and employment history for eight years preceding the date of application, including, but not limited to, the massage or similar business history and experience of the applicant. 
h.  The complete massage permit history of the applicant; whether such person has ever had any permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license; whether any such permit or license was ever denied, revoked, or refused to be renewed and the reason therefore. 
i.  All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last ten years including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code § 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor. 
j.  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the Police Services Department. 
(9)  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the massage establishment is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property, and that the massage establishment shall be subject to this Chapter. 
(10)  A statement signed by the applicant authorizing the City, its officers, agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(11)  A statement signed by the applicant confirming that the massage establishment shall only employ as employees certified massage practitioners to provide, perform, and administer massage services at the massage establishment. 
(12)  A statement signed by the applicant acknowledging that the applicant, owner(s), operator(s) and manager(s) shall each be responsible for the conduct of all employees on the premises of the massage establishment, and that failure to comply with this Chapter, or any local, state, or federal law, including California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq. (Massage Therapy Act), may result in the suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of the massage establishment permit and civil, administrative, or criminal penalties. 
(13)  Such other identification and information as the Director and/or Chief of Police Services may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application. 
(14)  A statement signed by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(b)  If, during the term of a massage establishment permit, the permittee has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permittee shall notify the Director in writing of such change within ten business days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.050. - Issuance or denial of massage establishment permit. 
Upon receipt of a complete application for a massage establishment permit the Chief of Police Services shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether such permit should be issued as requested. The Chief of Police Services shall report his or her findings to the Director and the Director shall make a recommendation to the City Manager for action on the permit. The City Manager shall, within 60 days of receipt of a complete application, approve or deny the application. The 60 day period shall not commence unless and until the Director deems the application complete. The 60 day period may be extended by the City Manager at the request of the Chief of Police Services for up to 30 additional days, to complete the investigation. The City Manager shall issue such permit as requested, unless he or she makes any of the following findings: 
(a)  The applicant, if an individual; any of the officers or directors of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation; any of the managers or officers of the company, if the applicant is a limited liability company; any partner, if the applicant is a partnership; or any manager or employee of the massage establishment, has within eight years preceding the date of the application: 
(1)  Been convicted of a violation of Sections 236.1 (Human trafficking), 266h (Pimping and pimping of a minor), 266i (Pandering and pandering with a minor), 314 (Lewd or obscene conduct; indecent exposure), 315 (Keeping or residing in a house of ill-fame), 316 (Keeping of disorderly houses), 318 (Place of illegal gambling or prostitution), Subsections (a) or (b) of Section 647 (Solicitation of lewd conduct or prostitution) of the California Penal Code, or any other provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 (Sex Offender Registration Act) of the California Penal Code, or being required to register as a sex offender in any other state, or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contender to a charge or violation of any lesser included or lesser related offense, in satisfaction of or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes. 
(2)  Been convicted of a felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code §§ 11054 (Schedule I), 11055 (Schedule II), 11056 (Schedule III), 11057 (Schedule IV), or 11058 (Schedule V), or has been convicted in any other state of any offense that, if committed or attempted in the State of California, would have been punishable as one or more of the aforementioned offenses. 
(3)  Been convicted of any offense in any other state that is the equivalent of any of the offense set forth in this Section 4.02.050. 
(4)  Engaged in conduct in another jurisdiction which, if it had occurred within the City, would constitute grounds for denial, revocation or non-renewal of a massage establishment permit under this Chapter. 
(5)  Been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code (Red Light Abatement Law), or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state. 
(6)  Engaged in conduct which would constitute an offense as described in Subsection (a)(1) of this Section. 
(7)  Committed an act in another jurisdiction which if committed in this state would have been a violation of law and/or, which, if done by a permittee under this Chapter, would be grounds for denial, revocation or non-renewal of the massage establishment permit. 
(8)  Committed any act involving fraud, deceit, dishonesty, corruption, moral turpitude or violence, which act or acts are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a massage establishment operator. 
(9)  Has had a massage establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied, revoked, or refused to be renewed for cause by a licensing authority or by any other city, county, or state. 
(10)  Been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, infraction, or municipal code violation, or held liable in any administrative or civil action for an act, that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a massage establishment operator. 
(b)  The applicant has made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the City in the permit application process. 
(c)  The application does not contain all of the information required by Section 4.02.040 of this Chapter. 
(d)  The massage establishment as proposed does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(e)  The massage establishment would be conducted as a home occupation within a residential zone. 
(f)  Within a 12 month period prior to the submittal of the application, the City has revoked or refused to renew a massage establishment permit for a massage establishment previously operating at the same address following the issuance of a notice of intent to revoke the massage establishment permit or a notice of intent to refuse to renew the massage establishment permit and a timely appeal was not filed by the permittee in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(g)  Within a 12 month period prior to the submittal of the application, the City has revoked or refused to renew a massage establishment permit for a massage establishment previously operating at the same address following the issuance of a notice of intent to revoke the massage establishment permit or a notice of intent to refuse to renew the massage establishment permit, which revocation or refusal to renew decision was upheld by an administrative hearing officer on appeal in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(h)  Within a 12 month period prior to the submittal of the application, a massage establishment previously operating at the same address was voluntarily closed and/or the provision of massage services at the address discontinued after the issuance of a notice of intent to revoke the massage establishment permit or a notice of intent to refuse to renew the massage establishment permit and a timely appeal was not filed by the permittee in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(i)  The application was filed within six months from the date a previous application by the applicant was denied for failure to comply with Subsections (b) or (c) of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.060. - Operational requirements. 
Each owner, operator and manager shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the following operational requirements, which shall apply to all massage establishments: 
(a)  Facilities. 
(1)  No massage establishment shall, during business hours, block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, shades or any other material that obstructs, blurs or darkens the view into the massage establishment. 
(2)  The hours of operation shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the reception area and in any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage establishment. Patrons and visitors shall be permitted in the massage establishment only during the posted hours of operation. 
(3)  Front doors used for patron access shall remain unlocked during business hours unless the massage establishment is a business entity owned by one individual with only one or no employees. All doors leading into rooms where massage is performed shall remain unlocked during business hours. Internal offices or areas where cash or valuables are stored may be locked. 
(4)  The following notice in a minimum 16-point font shall be displayed in an accessible and conspicuous public place in the reception area of the massage establishment and in each room where massage is performed: 
NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS: THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY LAW ENFORCEMENT AND AUTHORIZED CITY OF RANCHO SANTA MARGARITA PERSONNEL WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. 
(5)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the City's electrical code and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage is performed and shall be activated at all times while a patron is in such room or enclosure. 
(6)  Closed cabinets or other covered space shall be provided and utilized for the storage of clean linens, and receptacles acceptable to the City shall be provided for the deposit of soiled linen. 
(7)  The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable, mold-resistant surface. 
(8)  A minimum of one toilet and one separate wash basin shall be provided for patrons in each massage establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot running water at all times. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service towel dispenser shall be provided at the restroom hand wash sink. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room. Showers may be provided at the operator's option. 
(9)  All massage establishments shall have clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens in sufficient quantity to meet the requirements of this Chapter. Reuse of towels, sheets and linens is prohibited unless the same have first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is used only once and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
(10)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities including appliances and apparatuses for the massage establishment shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use. 
(11)  Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in the performance of massage and the instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use. 
(12)  A massage table shall be provided in each massage room or enclosure and the massage shall be performed on this massage table. The tables shall have a minimum height of 18 inches. Two-inch thick foam pads with a maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. Beds, mattresses, waterbeds, futons, sofa beds, or any type of portable or convertible beds are not permitted on the premises. 
(13)  No part of the massage establishment shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes. 
(14)  A sign, measuring at least 8.5 inches by 11 inches in size, containing the following written notice in minimum 16-point font, shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the public entrance of the massage establishment or in another conspicuous location in clear view of the public and employees where similar notices are customarily posted, displayed in English, Vietnamese, Mandarin, Spanish, Cantonese, and Korean: 
Slavery and Human Trafficking Notice
(Cal. Civil Code § 52.6) 
If you or someone you know is being forced to engage in any activity and cannot leave—whether it is commercial sex, housework, farm work, construction, factory, retail, or restaurant work, or any other activity—call the National Human Trafficking Resource Center at 1-888-373-7888 or the California Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking (CAST) at 1-888-KEY-2-FRE(EDOM) or 1-888-539-2373 to access help and services. 
Victims of slavery and human trafficking are protected under United States and California Law. 
The hotlines are: 
•  Available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 
•  Toll-free. 
•  Operated by nonprofit, nongovernmental organizations. 
•  Anonymous and confidential. 
•  Accessible in more than 160 languages. 
•  Able to provide help, referral to services, training, and general information. 
(b)  Operations. 
(1)  No massage establishment shall be kept open for business or operated between the hours of [9:00] p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  A register of all certified massage practitioners who are currently providing, or who have previously provided, massage services on the premises, showing the names, nicknames, and aliases used by such employees, along with the dates of their employment and termination, if applicable, and copies of each certified massage practitioner's current state certificate and CAMTC-issued identification card, shall be maintained on file on the premises of each massage establishment, and shall be made available upon request to any individual, including but not limited to, any regulatory official of the City. 
(3)  Within ten business days of a massage establishment hiring or contracting with a new certified massage practitioner to provide massage services, written notice of the name and residential address of the new employee and copies of his or her current state certificate and CAMTC identification card shall be filed with the Director. 
(4)  Written notice shall be provided to the Director within ten business days of the expiration, revocation, suspension, or surrender of an employee's state certification, and no employee whose state certification is expired, revoked, suspended, or surrendered shall be permitted to provide massage at the massage establishment until and unless valid state certification has been reestablished and notice and copies of such employee's current state certificate and CAMTC identification card have been provided to the Director. 
(5)  All documents or information pertaining to a certified massage practitioner that is required to be maintained or provided pursuant to this Section 4.02.060(b) shall be maintained at the massage establishment for a minimum of two years following the date that a certified massage practitioner ceases providing massage at the massage establishment; such documents or information shall be provided to City regulatory officials upon demand. 
(6)  A manager shall be present on the premises during all times that the massage establishment is open. A written statement designating the person or persons authorized to act as a manager shall be filed with the Director prior to commencement of operation of the massage establishment and within ten business days of any managerial change. 
(7)  The name of each on-duty manager and each on-duty certified massage practitioner shall be posted daily in an accessible and conspicuous public place in the reception area of the massage establishment. 
(8)  No massage establishment shall be open for business without having at least one certified massage practitioner on the premises and on-duty. 
(9)  Any and all employees providing massage services shall carry and have on their persons, visible for the patron to see, a current and valid CAMTC-issued identification card that was issued to them; such identification card shall be provided to City regulatory officials upon demand. 
(10)  Any and all changes of address or ownership of a massage establishment shall be reported immediately to the Director. Massage establishment permits are issued to specific owners and for specific fixed locations only. A new massage establishment permit shall be obtained prior to the proposed relocation of a massage establishment, opening of another location, or change in ownership of the massage establishment. 
(11)  No massage establishment shall operate as a massage school, or use the same facilities as that of a massage school. 
(12)  Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in an open and conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. All letters and numbers shall be capitals, and not less than one inch in height. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. Nothing herein prohibits a voluntary tip from being paid by the patron. All arrangements for services to be performed shall be made in a room in the massage establishment which is not used for administration of massages, baths or health treatments, unless no other room exists in the massage establishment. 
(13)  Any posted signs which are in a language other than English shall also be posted in English. 
(14)  The massage establishment permit issued to the massage establishment shall at all times be displayed in an accessible and conspicuous public place in the reception area of the massage establishment. 
(15)  Copies of the current state certificates held by the employees providing massage services at the massage establishment shall at all times be displayed in an accessible and conspicuous public place in the reception area of the massage establishment; such copies shall be provided to City regulatory officials upon demand. 
(16)  No controlled substances shall be sold, served, furnished, kept, consumed, or possessed on the premises of any massage establishment. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  Each owner, operator and manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees on the premises of the massage establishment. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of each of the owners, operators and managers for purposes of determining: (a) compliance with this Chapter; and (b) whether the massage establishment permit shall be suspended, revoked or renewed. 
(2)  No owner, operator or manager shall hire, employ or allow any person to perform massage services unless such person possesses a valid and current state certificate. Each owner, operator and manager of a massage establishment shall have a continuing obligation to verify that all employees providing massage services hold the state certification required by this Chapter. 
(3)  No electrical, mechanical or artificial device shall be used by any massage establishment employee for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, of the conversation or of other sounds in the massage rooms or enclosures, without the prior written consent of the patron. 
(4)  No employee shall violate the provisions of Section 647(b) of the California Penal Code (Solicitation of prostitution), or any other state law involving a crime of moral turpitude. 
(5)  No employee shall engage in any form of unprofessional conduct as defined by Section 4609(a)(1) of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended from time to time, including without limitation: 
a.  Engaging in any form of sexual activity on the premises of a massage establishment. 
b.  Engaging in sexual activity while providing massage services for compensation. 
c.  Providing massage of the genitals or anal region. 
d.  Providing massage of female breasts without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral from a licensed California health care provider for such massage. 
(6)  No employee shall dress, while engaged in the practice of massage, or while visible to patrons in the massage establishment, in any of the following: 
a.  Attire that is transparent, see-through, or substantially exposes the person's undergarments. 
b.  Swim attire, if not providing a water-based massage modality approved by CAMTC. 
c.  A manner that exposes the employee's breast, buttocks, or genitals. 
d.  A manner that constitutes indecent exposure in violation of Section 314 (Lewd or obscene conduct; indecent exposure) of the California Penal Code. 
(7)  No employee shall expose their genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or in the case of a female, her breasts below a point immediately above the top of the aureole, to the view of a massage establishment patron. 
(8)  A massage establishment patron's genitals, anus, and in the case of a female, her breasts, except as may be permitted by Subsection (c)(5)(d) of this Section, must be fully covered at all times while a certified massage practitioner or other employee is present in the same room as the patron. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.070. - Inspections. 
Any duly authorized official of the City, including but not limited to, representatives of the Police Services Department, code enforcement officers, health officials and building and fire inspectors, shall have the right to enter any massage establishment premises from time to time during regular business hours prior to the issuance of a massage establishment permit and subsequently thereafter for the purposes of making reasonable inspections to ensure compliance with this Chapter and any other applicable laws, including building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health and safety regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.080. - Out-call massage. 
No person shall perform an out-call massage in the City without possessing a valid and current state certificate. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.090. - Home occupation prohibited. 
No person shall operate a massage establishment as a home occupation within any residential zone in the City. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.100. - Transfer, duration and renewal of massage establishment permits. 
No massage establishment permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any attempt to sell, transfer, or assign a massage establishment permit shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the City Manager, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partners. A massage establishment permit issued to a corporation or limited liability company shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock or membership interest of the corporation or limited liability company is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock or membership interest authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued or sold, transferred, or assigned. 
(a)  A massage establishment permit shall be valid for and expire in 12 months from the date of issuance, unless earlier suspended or revoked. 
(b)  An application for renewal of a massage establishment permit shall be filed with the Director no later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the 12-month permit term to prevent lapse of the permit. The renewal application shall be accompanied by an appropriate filing fee established by the City Council, which represents the City's reasonable cost to process the renewal application and provide regulatory functions necessary to enforce this Chapter, including without limitation inspections of massage establishment, and an appropriate filing fee as established by resolution of the Orange County Board of Supervisors, which represents the Orange County Sheriff's Department's costs to conduct an investigation. 
(c)  Each applicant for renewal of a massage establishment permit shall provide such information as may be required by the Director and/or Chief of Police Services to update the information contained in the original permit application. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.110. - Exemptions. 
This Chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Healing arts professionals duly licensed pursuant to Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the California Business and Professions Code, including but not limited to physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, physical therapists, physician assistants, or nurses while performing activities encompassed by such professional licenses and when other individuals under their direction and as an adjunct to their practice are engaging in any act, providing any treatment, or performing any procedure that falls within the professionally recognized scope of practices authorized by their respective professional licenses; however, 
(1)  Massage technicians are required to be certified by CAMTC, 
(2)  If the licensed healing arts professional's facility is used for the purpose of providing nonmedical massage, and/or an employee of the licensed healing arts professional is engaged in the business of massage on the same premises as the professional, the facility itself shall be licensed as a massage establishment pursuant to this Chapter; 
(b)  Cosmetologists, barbers, estheticians, or manicurists that are duly licensed pursuant to the California Barbering and Cosmetology Act, California Business and Professions Code § 7300 et seq., while performing activities encompassed by such professional licenses, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face, head and/or scalp of the customer or client of a barber, cosmetologist, or esthetician, or in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves and/or feet; 
(c)  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health facilities duly licensed by the State of California, or activities engaged in by employees of such facilities in the course of their employment while working on the premises of such State-licensed facilities; 
(d)  Coaches or trainers employed by accredited junior high schools, high schools, junior colleges, colleges, or universities, while acting within the scope of such employment, as well as trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams while acting in that capacity; 
(e)  Schools of cosmetology or barbering which comply with the requirements of California Business and Professions Code § 7362 et seq.; 
(f)  Schools of massage approved by CAMTC pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 4601(a); and 
(g)  Any business where only seated massage is administered, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Seated massage shall only be performed by a certified massage practitioner, 
(2)  Seated massage shall only be performed in areas open to the public view, 
(3)  Seated massage shall not be performed as a home occupation within any residential zone in the City. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.120. - Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal. 
(a)  Violation and noncompliance . After an investigation, notice and opportunity to be heard, the City Manager may refuse to renew a massage establishment permit or may revoke or suspend an existing massage establishment permit on the grounds that the permittee has failed to comply with the requirements of this Chapter. If the term of a suspended permit expires during the suspension period, a new application must be made at the end of the suspension period. In any such case, the permittee shall have the right to appeal a decision of the City Manager in the time and manner set forth in this Section. 
(b)  Revocation and suspension of massage establishment permit . 
(1)  The City Manager may revoke or refuse to renew a massage establishment permit if he or she makes any of the findings for denial of a permit under Section 4.02.050, upon any violation of Subsections (a) or (c) of Section 4.02.030, upon any violation of Subsections (b)(8) or (b)(16) of Section 4.02.060, upon any violation of Section 4.02.060(c), or upon any subsequent violation of any provision of this Chapter within one (1) year following prior suspension under Subsection (b)(2) of this Section, or upon demonstrated inability to operate or manage the massage establishment in a law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(2)  The City Manager may suspend a massage establishment permit for a period of ninety (90) days for each violation of Section 4.02.060 of this Chapter not listed in Subsection (b)(1) above. 
(c)  Notice . When the City Manager concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation, or refusal to renew a massage establishment permit exist, the City Manager shall serve the operator, either personally or by certified mail, with proof of service, addressed to the business or residence address of the operator, with a notice of denial or notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the massage establishment permit. This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision, the right of the applicant or permittee to appeal the decision of the City Manager, and that the decision will be final, if no appeal is filed within the time permitted. 
(d)  Appeal. 
(1)  The right to appeal the decision of the City Manager to deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a massage establishment permit shall terminate upon the expiration of 15 days from the date of mailing of the notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the massage establishment permit. 
(2)  Requests for appeal must be in writing and filed with the City Manager. If an appeal is timely filed by the applicant or permittee, the matter will be scheduled for a hearing before a City-appointed administrative hearing officer within 60 days. In any such event, the suspension, revocation or refusal to renew shall not be in effect until a final decision has been rendered by the hearing officer. If no appeal is filed, the suspension, revocation or refusal to renew shall become effective upon expiration of the period for filing appeals. 
(3)  The appellant shall be entitled to notice of the basis for the proposed action, a copy of the documents upon which the City Manager's decision was based, and the opportunity to present contrary evidence at the hearing. 
(4)  Notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, by the U.S. Mail, with proof of service attached, addressed to the address listed on the massage establishment application, or, the address given in the request for appeal, as the case may be. 
(5)  The City-appointed administrative hearing officer shall conduct the hearing on appeal, receive relevant evidence, and shall decide whether to uphold the City Manager's decision to refuse to renew, revoke, or suspend the massage establishment permit. Within 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall file with the City Manager, a written decision, supported by written findings based on the evidence submitted, and a statement of his/her decision. A copy of such report shall be mailed to the appellant on the same day it is filed with the City Manager. The decision of the hearing officer shall become effective three days after its mailing to the appellant. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(6)  The following rules of evidence shall apply: 
a.  Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall have authority to administer oaths, and to receive and rule on admissibility of evidence. 
b.  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who have testified under direct examination. The hearing officer may call and examine any witness. 
c.  Technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply to administrative hearings provided for in this Chapter. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay testimony may be admissible and used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any evidence given in direct examination, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless such testimony would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, undue, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded. 
(e)  No massage establishment permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the permit period. All massage establishment owners, operators, managers, and employees subject to this Chapter shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter as they may be amended hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.130. - Application to existing massage establishments. 
Each owner or operator of a massage establishment doing business in the City on the effective date of this Chapter is subject to the licensing and operational standards set forth in this Chapter. 
(a)  Each owner or operator of a massage establishment doing business in the City with a massage establishment permit on the effective date of this Chapter may continue under its current massage establishment permit unless otherwise revoked or suspended pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Each owner or operator of a massage establishment doing business in the City without a massage establishment permit on the effective date of this Chapter shall file an application for a massage establishment permit no later than 120 days following the effective date of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Sec. 4.02.140. - Violations and remedies. 
(a)  Violators of this Chapter may be cited and enforcement action taken pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.03 of this Code. 
(b)  Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 3-22-2017)  
Chapter 4.03 - Taxicabs and Taxicab Businesses[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, adopted June 12, 2019, amended Ch. 4.03 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4.03, §§ 4.03.010—4.03.160, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 01-09, 9-20-2001. 
 
Sec. 4.03.010. - Definitions. 
For purpose of this Chapter, the words and phrases herein defined shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions. 
City means the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
City authorization means City authorization to operate a taxicab business in the City. 
Driver means a person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab. 
Driver's permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to drive or control the movements of a taxicab. 
OCTAP means the Orange County Taxi Administration Program administered by the Orange County Transportation Authority. 
Operate a taxicab means to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the City. 
Owner means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab. 
Person includes natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity. 
Taxicab means a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the City, capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission. 
Taxicab business permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to operate a taxicab business. 
Taxicab vehicle permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.020. - City authorization required. 
(a)  A person shall only operate a taxicab if the owner of that taxicab is authorized by the City to operate a taxicab business in the City. 
(b)  An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated if the owner is authorized by the City to operate a taxicab business in the City. 
(c)  The procedures for City authorization to operate a taxicab business in the City shall be established by separate resolution or ordinance of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.030. - Driver's permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab if that person possesses a driver's permit and if City authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by the owner if that driver possesses a driver's permit and if City authorization has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.040. - Taxicab vehicle permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if City authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated in the City if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if City authorization has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.050. - Taxicab business permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab business in the City if that person possesses a taxicab business permit and if City authorization has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.060. - Application for permits. 
Application for a driver's permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab business permit shall be made to OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing said application as established by OCTAP. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.070. - Testing for controlled substances and alcohol. 
A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by applicable state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.080. - Insurance required. 
A driver operating a taxicab in the City shall carry with him/her at all times proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. Said proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.090. - Nontransferability. 
No permit issued under this Chapter shall be assigned to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.100. - Equipment. 
A taxicab operated under the authority of this Chapter shall be equipped according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.110. - Mechanical condition. 
A taxicab operated under the authority of this Chapter shall be maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.120. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  A driver shall only carry a passenger to his/her destination by the most direct and accessible route. 
(b)  A taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger's compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council: 
(1)  A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said taxicab; 
(2)  The driver's name and address; 
(3)  The owner's name, address and telephone number; 
(4)  The taxicab identification number; 
(5)  The driver's permit issued pursuant to this Chapter; 
(6)  The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this Chapter; and 
(7)  Any other information required by the City. 
(d)  A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare. 
(e)  A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(f)  A driver shall not leave his taxicab to solicit passengers. 
(g)  The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.130. - Rates and charges. 
No driver shall charge rates and charges other than those established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.140. - Separate from business licensing. 
The requirements of this Chapter are separate and independent from the business licensing and any other provisions under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Sec. 4.03.150. - Penalty. 
(a)  Violators of this Chapter may be cited and enforcement action taken pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.03 of this Code. 
(b)  The City Attorney, at the request of the City Council, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 6-12-2019)  
Title 5 - Health and Sanitation  
Chapter 5.01 - Alcoholic Beverages Warning Signs[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, Business and Professions Code § 23000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5.01.010. - Legislative purpose. 
The Surgeon General of the United States has recommended that women who are pregnant, or considering pregnancy, be advised not to drink alcoholic beverages, and to be aware of the alcoholic content in anything they eat, because alcohol consumption during pregnancy, especially in the early months, can harm the fetus. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the purpose of this chapter is to educate the public by requiring that warning signs be placed at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold to the public. 
(OCC § 4-4-60; Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 3-21-1989)  
Sec. 5.01.020. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Alcoholic beverages shall include, without limitation, beer, malt liquors, wine and distilled spirits. 
Health Department shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
Health Officer shall mean the County Health Officer or his or her deputy. 
(OCC § 4-4-61; Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 3-21-1989)  
Sec. 5.01.030. - Duty to post signs. 
Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents a premises offering wine, beer, distilled spirits, malt liquors or other alcoholic beverages for sale, or who dispenses such beverages for consideration to the public, shall cause signs to be posted in compliance with the following: 
(1)  For alcoholic beverages intended for consumption off the premises where sold or distributed, at least one notice or sign shall be placed in the retail establishment so as to assure that it is readable and likely to be read either at the retail point of sale or each point of display. Signs or notices placed at the point of display shall be placed no more than ten feet from any display of any alcoholic beverage container in a manner associating the sign or notice with the display. 
(2)  For alcoholic beverages provided for consumption on the premises at tables served by food or beverage persons, at least one notice or sign shall be placed so as to assure that it is readable and likely to be read by the public being served on the premises, or a notice or sign shall be conspicuously displayed at each of the tables. 
(3)  For alcohol sold or distributed through over-the-counter service, at least one notice or sign shall be placed in the retail establishment so that it is readable and likely to be read from all counter locations available to the public. 
(4)  Any sign required to be posted or displayed under this section, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall bear the following warning message: 
"WARNING: Drinking distilled spirits, beer, coolers, wine and other alcoholic beverages may increase cancer risk, and, during pregnancy, can cause birth defects." 
(OCC § 4-4-62; Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 3-21-1989; Ord. No. 3775, § 1, 12-12-1989)  
Sec. 5.01.040. - Language. 
In the event that 25 percent or more of the public patronizing a premises offering for sale or dispensing, for consideration, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages uses a language other than English as a primary language, any sign or notice required under section 5.01.030 shall be worded in both English and the primary language or languages involved. 
(OCC § 4-4-63; Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 3-21-1989)  
Sec. 5.01.050. - Enforcement. 
The Health Officer shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The Health Department shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this chapter, including rules and regulations for alternative signs and warning messages and placement of required signs. 
(OCC § 4-4-64; Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 3-21-1989; Ord. No. 3775, § 2, 12-12-1989)  
Sec. 5.01.060. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(OCC § 4-4-65; Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 3-21-1989)  
Sec. 5.01.070. - Sign availability. 
Warning signs may be obtained, free of charge, from the Health Department. Vendors of alcoholic beverages may also prepare and post signs of their own making meeting the requirements of this chapter, at their expense. In no event shall the language of the warning sign be altered from that specified in subsection (4) of section 5.01.030. 
(OCC § 4-4-66; Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 3-21-1989)  
Chapter 5.02 - Construction Site Sanitation Facilities[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Construction site sanitation facilities, Health and Safety Code § 5416; local ordinances not prohibited, Health and Safety Code § 5415. 
 
Sec. 5.02.010. - Definitions. 
The following terms as used in this chapter shall, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the respective meanings herein set forth: 
Health Department means the Health Department of the County of Orange. 
Person means any person, firm, corporation or any County, municipal corporation or public district of the State of California. 
Sanitary facility means water flush toilet approved by the Health Department connected to an approved sewage disposal system or chemical type toilet approved by said Health Department. 
Work means the erection, construction, alteration, repair, razing, adding to, removal or demolition of any building or buildings; the construction or repair of any street, road, highway, railroad, installation of sewers, water lines; or the improvement of any grounds for parks, playgrounds, airports or for any similar purpose. 
(OCC § 4-3-1)  
Sec. 5.02.020. - Sanitary facilities to be provided. 
It is unlawful for any person to commence or proceed with any work unless before commencing or proceeding with said work adequate and suitable sanitary facilities are provided for the use of persons employed on said work. The sanitary facilities provided shall be located upon the site upon which such work is being done, or in case it is impractical to locate said facilities upon the site, such sanitary facilities must be located not more than 250 feet from the site of the work. Not less than one sanitary facility shall be provided for each 20 persons or fraction thereof employed upon the work. 
(OCC § 4-3-2)  
Sec. 5.02.030. - Sanitary facility specifications. 
All sanitary facilities shall be completely enclosed on all sides and top and shall be equipped with a self-closing door. The floor of the enclosure shall be six inches above ground level and shall be smooth, and screened ventilation shall be provided for sanitary facility compartment. All sanitary facility enclosures shall have an inside area of at least 15 square feet for each sanitary facility enclosed. Each sanitary facility enclosure shall contain at least one sanitary facility with seat and cover and one separate urinal. The ceiling height of the sanitary facility enclosure shall be a minimum of six feet. 
(OCC § 4-3-3)  
Sec. 5.02.040. - Maintenance of sanitary facility. 
All sanitary facility enclosures provided for by this chapter shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall be kept supplied with toilet paper. 
(OCC § 4-3-5)  
Sec. 5.02.050. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer, the Health Department and all peace officers charged with the enforcement of law to enforce this chapter and all the provisions of the same. 
(OCC § 4-3-6)  
Chapter 5.03 - Food Handling Businesses[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, Health and Safety Code § 113700 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5.03.010. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, said definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections of the California Health and Safety Code after January 1, 1991. 
Certified farmers' market shall be as defined in section 113745 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Commissary shall be as defined in section 113750 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Enforcement Officer means an environmental health specialist, as defined in Health and Safety Code section 106615, employed by the Health Department, or the Health Officer or any deputy health officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this chapter. 
Food establishment shall be as defined in section 113780 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Food facility shall be as defined in section 113785 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Food processing establishment shall be as defined in section 111955 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Health Department or department means the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
Health Officer means the County Health Officer or his or her deputy. 
Mobile food facility shall be as defined in section 113900 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Mobile food preparation unit shall be as defined in section 113815 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Open-air barbecue facility shall be as defined in section 113830 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Person shall be as defined in section 113840 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Premises includes land, buildings, vehicles and ships and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or food facilities or on such premises. 
Produce stand shall be as defined in section 113855 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Restricted food service transient occupancy establishment shall be as defined in section 113870 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Satellite food distribution facility shall be as defined in section 113880 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Temporary food facility shall be as defined in section 113895 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Vending machine shall be as defined in section 113903 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Vending machine business means the business of selling food or beverages by means of vending machines, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. 
(OCC § 4-4-14; Ord. No. 3160, § 1, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991; Ord. No. 98-15, § 44, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 5.03.020. - Permit required; conditions and terms. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, without first applying for and receiving a food vending permit issued by the Health Department under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the Health Department a written application that shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this chapter, and such other information as the Health Department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food preparation unit shall, in addition, provide a list of three service stops which shall include the address of exact location and time of each stop. 
(c)  A permit may be issued when investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales, or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated. 
(d)  Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provisions of law or regulation. Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter for which the permit has been suspended or revoked shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued. 
(e)  Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. 
(OCC § 4-4-15; Ord. No. 3160, § 2, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 3318, § 1, 4-13-1982; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 5.03.030. - Construction, conversation and alteration. 
A person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, shall submit three copies of the complete plans and specifications to the department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. The Health Officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(OCC § 4-4-16; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 5.03.040. - Suspension of permits. 
A permit issued under this chapter or its predecessor may be suspended or revoked under the procedure set forth in this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of State law; 
(2)  Violation of this chapter; 
(3)  Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter; or 
(4)  Upon recommendation by the Health Officer. 
(OCC § 4-4-17; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 5.03.050. - Notice of violation. 
When any laws, this chapter, or rules and regulations have been violated, an enforcement officer may serve written notice thereof entitled, "Notice of Violation," specifying: 
(1)  The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged. 
(2)  The provision or provisions violated thereby. 
(3)  The corrective steps required. 
(4)  The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor. 
(5)  That the permittee has a right to a hearing upon written request or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled. 
(6)  That if no hearing is requested or the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing, and if the Health Department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before 9:00 a.m. of the date specified under subsection (4) above, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until all violations have been corrected. 
(OCC § 4-4-18; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991; Ord. No. 98-15, § 45, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 5.03.060. - Hearing. 
(a)  The hearing shall be held by the Health Officer or his or her duly authorized representative who is a qualified Environmental Health Specialist as defined by State law and registered as provided in by State law, but shall not be the enforcement officer who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective measure taken. 
(b)  The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the Hearing Officer may order this 15-day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process. 
(c)  The hearing shall be held within 15 calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the Hearing Officer may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within five working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension or that the permit has been revoked. 
(e)  The Health Officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend, or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of the applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(OCC § 4-4-19; Ord. No. 3160, § 3, 10-9-1979; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991; Ord. No. 98-15, § 45, 12-8-1998) 
State Law reference— Environmental health specialist defined, Health and Safety Code § 106613; registration of environmental health specialists, Health and Safety Code § 106600 et seq.  
Sec. 5.03.070. - Mobile food preparation units generally. 
In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this chapter, mobile food preparation units shall comply with the following safety requirements: 
(1)  Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters, and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the unit. 
(2)  All equipment installed in any part of the unit shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn. 
(3)  All equipment installed within the interior of the unit, including the interiors of cabinets or compartments, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges. 
(4)  All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent them from being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision, or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes, or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the Health Officer. 
(5)  Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush-mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the Health Officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixture shall be at least 188 centimeters (76 inches), or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area. 
(6)  High voltage (110-120 V) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet or switch as to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding 183 centimeters (six feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weatherproof design with cover. 
(7)  Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts, shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisleway is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisleway when not in use and be held with a self-latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least 35.5 centimeters by 35.5 centimeters (14 inches by 14 inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts, and shall not cook or prepare food while the units is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter three requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(8)  A first-aid kit approved by the Health Officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case. 
(9)  All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the unit. All liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) equipment shall be installed as follows: 
a.  The LP gas tanks and relief valves shall be ASME-approved for intended use. 
b.  Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They may be located in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank or fittings must not protrude beyond the body. 
c.  Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor-tight partition. 
d.  When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partitions shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met: 
1.  All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from outside the unit. 
2.  The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward. 
3.  The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment. 
4.  The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the unit so as to prevent accumulation of gas. 
e.  Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials. 
f.  Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chafing. 
g.  Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance. 
h.  ASME-approved LP gas tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout. 
i.  Protective "thread" caps shall be installed on fill-line check valves. 
j.  Every appliance fueled by LP gas shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device which will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished. 
(10)  A minimum 5 B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (UL or State Fire Marshal approved design) shall be installed in plain sight and within easy reach, immediately inside the front driver's door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. 
(OCC § 4-4-20; Ord. No. 3160, § 4, 10-9-1978; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 5.03.080. - Additional requirements for mobile food preparation units operating in multi-locations on any day. 
In addition to the requirements specified in section 5.03.070 above, mobile food preparation units that operate at more than one location in any calendar day, shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Coffee urns shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the unit in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn, or, as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid level sight gauges. 
(2)  Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup that could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(3)  Water bath or steam food insert tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry heat units, their insert food containers, and similar equipment that contains hot liquids or hot foods shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup that could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(4)  An alternate means of exit in the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the unit, with unobstructed passage of 61 centimeters by 92 centimeters (24 inches by 36 inches) minimum to the outside, shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or key. The exit shall be labeled "Safety Exit" in contrasting colors with at least 2.54 centimeters (one inch) high letters. 
(OCC § 4-4-21; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 5.03.090. - Suspension for refusal of entry. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to deny or hinder entry by any enforcement officer for the purpose of inspecting any of the premises described in section 5.03.020 above, or any portion thereof; and in such event the enforcement officer may forthwith suspend the food vending permit used for the premises. 
(OCC § 4-4-25; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991; Ord. No. 98-15, § 46, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 5.03.100. - Summary suspension. 
(a)  If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an enforcement officer may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. "Immediate danger to the public health and safety" means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission, or hazardous condition, including but not limited to unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, nonpotable water supply, or an employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the enforcement officer shall issue to the permittee a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent Code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing. 
(c)  At any time within 15 calendar days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection (b), the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a Hearing Officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within 15 calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within 15 calendar days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
(OCC § 4-4-26; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991; Ord. No. 98-15, § 46, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 5.03.110. - Supervision of closing down premises. 
When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the Health Department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. 
(OCC § 4-4-27; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 5.03.120. - Rules and regulations. 
The Health Officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this chapter including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to: 
(1)  Forms for applications, permits and notices. 
(2)  Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits. 
(3)  Inspections of premises and reporting thereon. 
(OCC § 4-4-28; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 5.03.130. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(OCC § 4-4-29; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 12-3-1985; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 5.03.140. - Preemption. 
This chapter shall not apply to any matter to which it concerns to the extent that the regulation of such matter is preempted by State law. 
(OCC § 4-4-29; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 8-13-1991)  
Chapter 5.04 - Noise Control[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Noise Control Act, Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5.04.010. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds emanating from the City, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in this chapter. 
(b)  It is determined that certain sound levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and contrary to public interest. 
(OCC § 4-6-1; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973)  
Sec. 5.04.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, phrases and terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Ambient noise level shall mean the all encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
Cumulative period shall mean an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
Decibel (dB) shall mean a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities that are proportional to power: the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Emergency machinery, vehicle or work shall mean any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Fixed noise source shall mean a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment. 
Grading shall mean any excavating or filling of earth material, or any combination thereof, conducted at a site to prepare said site for construction or other improvements thereon. 
Impact noise shall mean the noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest. 
Mobile noise source shall mean any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
Noise level shall mean the "A" weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of 20 micronewtons per square meter. The unit of measurement shall be designated as dB(A). 
Residential property shall mean a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels. 
Simple tone noise shall mean a noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished. 
Sound level meter shall mean an instrument meeting American National Standard Institute's Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment that will provide equivalent data. 
Sound pressure level of a sound, in decibels, shall mean 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
(OCC § 4-6-2; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 10-1-1975)  
Sec. 5.04.030. - Noise level measurement criteria. 
Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in section 5.04.020. 
(OCC § 4-6-3; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973)  
Sec. 5.04.040. - Designated noise zone. 
The entire territory of the City is hereby designated as "Noise Zone 1." 
(OCC § 4-6-4; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 10-1-1975)  
Sec. 5.04.050. - Exterior noise standards. 
(a)  The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone: 
NOISE STANDARDS 
Noise zone 	Noise level 	Time period 
1 	55 dB(A) 	7:00 a.m—10:00 p.m. 
	50 dB(A) 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
 
(b)  In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five dB(A). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured on any other residential property, to exceed: 
(1)  The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than 30 minutes in any hour; or 
(2)  The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any hour; or 
(3)  The noise standard plus ten dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or 
(4)  The noise standard plus 15 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
(5)  The noise standard plus 20 dB(A) for any period of time. 
(d)  In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first four noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
(OCC § 4-6-5; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973; Ord. No. 2715, § 1, 11-13-1973; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 10-1-1975)  
Sec. 5.04.060. - Interior noise standards. 
(a)  The following interior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone: 
INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS 
Noise Zone 	Noise Level 	Time Period 
1 	55 dB(A) 	7:00 a.m—10:00 p.m. 
	45 dB(A) 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
 
(b)  In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five dB(A). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured within any other dwelling unit on any residential property, to exceed: 
(1)  The interior noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or 
(2)  The interior noise standard plus five db(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
(3)  The interior noise standard plus ten db(A) for any period of time. 
(d)  In the event the ambient noise level exceeds either of the first two noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased in reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
(OCC § 4-6-6; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973; Ord. No. 2715, § 1, 11-13-1973; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 10-1-1975)  
Sec. 5.04.070. - Special provisions. 
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college. 
(2)  Outdoor gatherings, public dances and shows, provided shall events are conducted pursuant to a license issued by the City. 
(3)  Activities conducted on any park or playground, provided such park or playground is owned and operated by a public entity. 
(4)  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work. 
(5)  Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling, or grading of any real property, provided said activities do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday. 
(6)  All mechanical devices, apparatuses or equipment which are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions. 
(7)  Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations, provided such operations do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or any time on Sunday or a federal holiday. 
(8)  Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application, provided that the application is made in accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced by the Agricultural Commissioner. 
(9)  Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property, provided said activities take place between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or a federal holiday, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday or a federal holiday. 
(10)  Any activity, to the extent regulation thereof, that has been preempted by State or Federal law. 
(OCC § 4-6-7; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973; Ord. No. 2715, § 1, 11-13-1973; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 10-1-1975)  
Sec. 5.04.080. - Schools, hospitals, and churches; special provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise that either causes the noise level at any school, hospital or church while the same is in use to exceed the noise limits, as specified in section 5.04.050, prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital, or church is located, that unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions, or that unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three separate locations within 1/10th of a mile of the institution indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital. 
(OCC § 4-6-8; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973)  
Sec. 5.04.090. - Motor vehicle racing. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct motor vehicle racing, testing, timing or similar noise-producing activities at raceways, speedways, off-road vehicle courses, drag strips, or other similar places, including, but not limited to, the operation of midget race cars, drag cars, motorcycles, off-road vehicles, and specialty automobiles, between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(OCC § 4-6-8.1; Ord. No. 3093, § 1, 10-24-1978)  
Sec. 5.04.100. - Noise level measurement. 
The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected dwelling unit. The measurement shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling, or floor nearest the alleged offensive noise source and may be made with the windows of the affected unit open. 
(OCC § 4-6-10; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973; Ord. No. 2870, § 1, 10-1-1975)  
Sec. 5.04.110. - Manner of enforcement. 
(a)  The Orange County Sheriff, the County Health Officer, and the City Engineer are directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of this chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of his duty. 
(OCC § 4-6-11; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973; Ord. No. 2715, § 1, 11-13-1973; Ord. No. 3961, § 1, 4-2-1996)  
Sec. 5.04.120. - Variance procedure. 
The owner or operator of a noise source that violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an application with the Health Officer for a variance from the provisions thereof wherein said owner or operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with said provisions, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method of achieving compliance, and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $75.00. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. Upon receipt of said application and fee, the Health Officer shall refer it with his recommendation thereon within 30 days to the Noise Variance Board for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(OCC § 4-6-12; Ord. No. 2700, § 1, 9-19-1973; Ord. No. 2715, § 1, 11-13-1973)  
Chapter 5.05 - Public Smoking[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— California Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976, Health and Safety Code § 118875 et seq.; local anti-smoking ordinances, Health and Safety Code § 118910. 
 
Sec. 5.05.010. - Legislative finding. 
The City Council finds and declares that tobacco smoking is a hazard to the health of the general public. Studies clearly demonstrate that smoking is a hazard to the health of those who smoke. Smoking is responsible for the premature death of approximately 3,000 Orange County residents each year from lung cancer, heart disease, respiratory illness, and other diseases. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has concluded that secondhand tobacco smoke is a human carcinogen and responsible for over 3,000 lung cancer deaths in nonsmoking adults each year. Therefore, secondhand smoke is a proven health hazard to those who are present in confined spaces. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this division is to prohibit the smoking of tobacco, or any weed or plant, in buildings or motor vehicles owned or leased by the City and in City spaces in buildings partially leased by the City, and in certain other places subject to the jurisdiction or control of the City, except as otherwise provided in this division. In addition, the City Council declares that vending machines that sell or distribute tobacco products contribute to the onset of tobacco use. Studies have found that 90 percent of all current smokers become addicted by the age of 19. Therefore, the U.S. Secretary of Health, the U.S. Surgeon General, and leading voluntary health organizations all recommend the elimination of such vending machines in public places for health reasons. 
(OCC § 4-7-1; Ord. No. 3900, § 1, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 98-15, § 47, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 5.05.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City shall include all entities of which the City is the governing body. 
Department Head shall mean the person who is the principal officer or employee of an agency, department or district for the discharge of duties provided by law of particular delegated functions. 
Smoke or smoking shall include the carrying, holding, possession, or smoking of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
(OCC § 4-7-10; Ord. No. 3900, § 1, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 98-15, § 48, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 5.05.030. - Prohibition. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in buildings or motor vehicles owned or leased by the City and in City spaces in buildings partially leased by the City. 
(OCC § 4-7-11; Ord. No. 3900, § 1, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 5.05.040. - Notice to employees. 
Provisions of Section 5.05.030 shall be communicated to all City employees at the time of their entry into employment. 
(OCC § 4-7-11.1; Ord. No. 3900, § 1, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 5.05.050. - Tobacco vending machine elimination. 
No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale, or distributed by or from a vending machine or other appliance, or any other device designated or used for vending purposes in any public place within the City or at any other public place subject to the jurisdiction or control of the City. 
(OCC § 4-7-14; Ord. No. 3900, § 1, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 5.05.060. - Duty to post signs. 
Signs which designate no-smoking areas established by this chapter shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in rooms, buildings, or other places so covered by this chapter, as reasonably deemed necessary, by the department head, operator, manager, private employer, or other person having control of such room, building, or other place. Where possible, ashtrays, receptacles, or other devices used for extinguishing or discarding smoking materials shall be removed from all "no-smoking" areas. 
(OCC § 4-7-21; Ord. No. 3900, § 1, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 5.05.070. - Additional regulations. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable health, safety, or fire code ordinances. 
(OCC § 4-7-36; Ord. No. 3900, § 1, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 98-15, § 49, 12-8-1998)  
Chapter 5.06 - Solid Waste[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-01, § 1(5.2.010—5.2.110, 5.2.200—5.2.320, 5.2.400—5.2.620, 5.2.700—5.2.840), adopted January 11, 2006, enacted provisions relating to solid waste, in effect repealing and reenacting Chapter 5.06 to read as herein set out. Formerly, Chapter 5.06 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from original codification. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 5.06.010. - Declaration of purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate solid waste handling in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to meet the City's obligations under the California Integrated Waste Management Act 1989 (Public Resources Code Sections 40,000 et seq.) (Hereinafter "AB 939"). 
(b)  The City is obligated by AB 939 to implement plans for solid waste source reduction, reuse, and recycling to meet specified achievement milestones. 
(c)  Pursuant to the California Constitution, the City is authorized to enact ordinances to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 40059 aspects of solid waste handling of local concern include, but are not limited to, the frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of service, charges and fees, and whether solid waste services are to be provided by means of non-exclusive, partially exclusive, or wholly exclusive franchise, contract, license or permit, and the terms and conditions of such franchise, license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.020. - Severability. 
If any Section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The City Council declares that it would have passed this Chapter and each Section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional, and would have passed and adopted the same even though any parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases that may be held invalid had been omitted therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.030. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows: 
AB 939 or Act means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in part at Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time and as implemented by the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or its successor. 
Applicant means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the City for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, remodeling or demolition project within the City. 
C&D means construction and demolition. 
C&D compliance official means the person designated by the City Manager who is authorized and responsible for implementing the C&D debris diversion regulations of the city. 
City project C&D debris policy means the city's policy concerning recycling C&D debris from landfills for city-owned projects. 
City shall mean the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
C&D debris or construction and demolition debris shall mean used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on any pavement, residential building, commercial or industrial building, or other structure and shall include, but is not limited to concrete, asphalt paving, asphalt roofing, lumber, gypsum board, rock, soil and metal. 
Construction, remodeling or demolition project means the erection or demolition of or the making of changes to any building, structure or landscaping which generates C&D debris. 
Contractor means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor's license of any type under the laws of the State, or who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor or owner-builder) any construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the City. 
Covered project has the meaning set forth in Section 5.06.740. 
Diversion requirement means the percentage of C&D debris for each project that must be diverted from landfills. 
Divert means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
Franchise means the right or privilege conferred by the City on one or more private entities for the collection, transportation or other handling of solid waste. 
Franchisee means a solid waste enterprise having a solid waste franchise agreement with the City. 
Green waste means vegetative cuttings, shrubs, stumps, brush, tree trimmings, grasses, and related materials that have been separated from other solid waste. Green waste does not include stumps or branches with a diameter exceeding 18 inches or a length exceeding four feet. 
Gross receipts means any and all revenue receipts, or compensation in any form received for the collection, transportation, disposal and/processing of solid waste generated and/or collected in the City, including, but not limited to, customer charges for collection of Solid Waste, without subtracting permit fees, AB 939 fees, or other fees or any other cost of doing business. Sales revenue from the sale of recyclable materials is excluded from gross receipts for purposes of calculating fees due the City. 
Hazardous waste means any substance, waste or mixture of wastes defined as "hazardous substance" or "hazardous waste" pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., and all future amendments to either of them, or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board, and all substances defined as hazardous waste, acutely hazardous waste, or extremely Hazardous Waste by the State in Health and Safety Code § 25110.02, § 25115, and § 25117 or in the future amendments to or recodifications of such statutes or identified and listed as Hazardous Waste by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term "hazardous waste" shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition. 
Non-covered project has the meaning set forth in Section 5.06.740. 
Permittee shall mean a person to whom the city has issued a solid waste permit under Article 2. 
Person shall mean any solid waste enterprise, individual, partnership, joint venture, firm, corporation, nonprofit corporation, association, organization, unincorporated private or public organization, or any other combination or entity. 
Premises means any building, dwelling, or site in any zone within the City from which any activity is conducted, including, without limitation, residential, service, nonprofit, governmental, institutional, educational, industrial, commercial or agricultural uses. 
Project means any activity that requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the City. 
Recyclable solid waste shall mean all solid waste which can be recycled and which is separated from other solid waste for the purpose of being recycled such as, but not limited to, aluminum, cardboard, glass, grass, and yard cuttings, metal, newspaper, paper, and plastic. 
Recycle or recycling shall mean the process of collecting, transferring, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products that meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
Remodel means any change, addition, or modification to an existing structure. 
Reuse means further or repeated use of C&D debris or other types of solid waste. 
Roll-off box means a container used for solid waste collection, usually 10 to 50 cubic yards in size, which is removed from the premises and transported to a recycling or disposal site for solid waste removal. Roll-off boxes are typically used for C&D debris, other temporary solid waste collection needs, and for large solid waste generators. 
Salvage means the controlled removal of C&D debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
Scavenging means the unauthorized removal of solid waste from containers or bins of City franchisee or permittees. Scavenging is prohibited by this Chapter. 
Security deposit means the cash or cash equivalent deposit required as security for performance for all covered projects as set forth in Section 5.06.780. 
Solid waste container shall mean any bin, roll-off box, cart, receptacle, or other container used to hold solid waste for collection and disposal or processing. 
Solid Waste Coordinator shall mean the solid waste coordinator of the City or such other designee of the City Manager charged with coordinating, monitoring, controlling, or regulating municipal solid waste within the City. 
Solid waste means all discarded putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, green waste, recyclable materials, bulky goods, discarded home and industrial appliances, C&D debris, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. "Solid waste" does not include: 
(1)  Hazardous waste or low-level radioactive waste regulated under Chapter 7.6 (commencing with Section 25800) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code; 
(2)  Medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act (Chapter 6.1 (commencing with Section 25015) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code); or 
(3)  Abandoned vehicles or parts thereof. 
Solid waste collectors means any individual, joint venture, partnership, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation permitted or franchised by the City to perform solid waste collection services within the City. 
Solid waste handling services shall mean the transportation, storage, transfer, processing, disposal or collection (whether from the curbside, bins, roll-off box or any other type of solid waste container or location) of solid waste for residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or any other originators, users or customers. 
Source-separated C&D processing shall mean source separated streams of construction and demolition debris, e.g. wood, concrete, and soil from commercial accounts, self-haul, and government agencies, which are processed separately for the purposes of preparing them for transport to market and/or end users. 
Temporary collection container means a bin or roll-off box, or other similar type of container used for the temporary collection of solid waste. Such a container does not include the franchisee's containers placed for scheduled, regular collection service. 
Temporary collection service means collection of occasional, non-continuing accumulations of solid waste which is not generated from on-going activities or operations, but which is either: 
(1)  Solid waste resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, demolition, site preparation, or grading; or 
(2)  Other temporary solid waste collection where a container is provided for no more than 30 consecutive days, or no more than 60 days in any 90-day period. 
Universal waste are any of the hazardous wastes that are listed in section 66261.9 of Article 1, Chapter 11, Division 4.5 of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations [22 CCR § 66261.9], which includes electronic devices, batteries, electric lamps, fluorescent tubes and bulbs, high intensity discharge lamps, sodium vapor lamps and lamps that contain added mercury, mercury-containing equipment, CRT, CRT glass, and non-empty aerosol cans. 
Waste reduction and recycling plan or WRRP means a completed form submitted by an applicant for any covered project approved by the City for the purpose of compliance with this Chapter. The first portion of the form is submitted when applying for a permit, and the second portion when the project is completed. 
WRRP means waste reduction and recycling plan. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 19-01, § 2, 1-23-2019)  
Sec. 5.06.040. - Authorization to issue franchisees and permits for solid waste handling services. 
(a)  The City may provide for the collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste by franchise and/or permit. The City Council may award one or more franchises for collection of solid waste from all or a portion of residential, commercial, industrial and City properties in the City. City may issue permits to provide solid waste handling services not exclusively covered by the City's solid waste franchise agreement. City-authorized franchisee(s) and permittees shall be collectively referred to as the City's solid waste collectors. The City Council may suspend and/or revoke a solid waste permit described herein in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Each solid waste collector providing services within the City shall obtain and maintain all appropriate licenses and all forms of authorization, permit, franchise, or contract as may be required by the City Council. Each solid waste collector shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and requirements governing solid waste. 
(c)  No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management enterprise or facility including, but not limited to, a material recovery facility, landfill, composting facility, or buy-back recycling center, or collect any form of solid waste in the City, without first satisfying all applicable City requirements for land use approval, franchises, permits, and any other approvals required under any local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.050. - Collection by persons other than City-authorized solid waste collectors. 
(a)  Except for franchisee(s) and permittees and except for any person described in Subsections (b)—(i), it is unlawful for any person to engage in solid waste handling services within the City, and all persons currently engaging in solid waste handling services within the City shall cease such operations immediately upon receiving written notice from the City. 
(b)  Actual solid waste generators. The actual producers of solid waste and the owners of property upon which solid waste has accumulated may personally engage in solid waste handling services, but only as to the solid waste which they have actually produced or which has accumulated on their own property, and provided that they comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with any other governing laws. Except in accordance with Subsections (c) and (d), actual producers and property owners shall not allow any other person, except the City's solid waste collectors, to perform solid waste handling services for the solid waste which they have produced, which has accumulated on their property, or which they otherwise own or control. 
(c)  Construction contractors. The actual producers of C&D debris and the owners of property upon which C&D debris has accumulated may engage the contractor who produced all or a part of said C&D debris to perform solid waste handling services for all or part of the C&D debris generated during the construction project; provided, that all such contractors comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with any other governing laws. Said actual producers and property owners shall not allow any other person, except for the City's solid waste collectors or the contractor described in this subsection, to perform solid waste handling services for the C&D debris which they have produced, which has accumulated on their property, or which they otherwise own or control. 
(d)  Gardeners and landscapers. Gardeners or landscapers may transport green waste or solid waste generated by their work, only if transported by their own employees in the gardener or landscaper's own vehicles to permitted facilities, without obtaining a solid waste collection permit. 
(e)  Cleanup services. Any person whose primary business is the cleanup of solid waste on the property of another and who, incidental to such business: 
(1)  Hauls only the solid waste which he cleans up and no other solid waste; 
(2)  Performs cleanup services such as removing junk from businesses, garages, and residential properties, but does not remove solid waste from C&D sites; 
(3)  Uses his own vehicle to haul the solid waste which he cleans up; 
(4)  Does not use a bin, roll-off box or other container, whether or not such bin, roll-off box, or container is left at the cleanup site, to accomplish the cleanup, collection, or transportation of the solid waste, may transport solid waste in accordance with this subsection without a permit or franchise; and 
(5)  Does not use a commercial solid waste vehicle such as a front loader, side loader, rear loader, end-dump truck or roll-off truck. 
(f)  Compactor lessors. Persons may lease stationary compactors, which are solid waste containers approximately ten to 50 cubic yards in capacity with a trash compaction mechanism attached that pushes and compresses waste into the container, and that must be removed from the collection site for disposal, or compaction units that attach to smaller collection bins that are typically one to eight cubic yards, without obtaining a permit. 
(g)  Non-profit charities. Non-profit charities registered with the attorney general of the State periodically accepting donations of recyclables may transport the recyclables, provided that the charity transport the recyclables to a recycling facility and that charity volunteers and employees comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with any other governing laws. 
(h)  Transport only. Any person may haul solid waste generated and collected in other jurisdictions over City streets provided they comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with any other governing laws, and provided further that they do not engage in any solid waste handling services within the City. 
(i)  Document destruction companies. Companies whose primary purpose is the destruction of documents/records that, incidental to this purpose, collect paper and deliver such paper, after shredding/destruction, to a recycling facility, are not required to obtain a solid waste and recycling permit to transfer and recycle this material. 
(j)  Emergencies. In the event of an emergency, including, but not limited to, the breakdown of equipment or other unforeseen or unpreventable circumstances, or where in the judgment of the City the particular situation justifies such action, the City may issue limited or temporary contracts to any person to perform solid waste handling services, subject to reasonable fees, charges and conditions as the circumstances may warrant and as the parties involved may agree upon; provided that such fees and charges received from or paid to any person under this subsection for any period exceeding 15 days in duration shall be approved by the City Council. 
(k)  The City Council may, at its election, waive any permit, license, franchise or other fee for selected categories of permittees or franchisees. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.060. - Rates. 
Rates charged by franchisee(s) shall be as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges approved by the City. Permittees may set their own rates. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.070. - Solid waste fees—General. 
In accordance with Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 1 of the Public Resources Code, Sections 40000 et seq., and other applicable laws, the City may levy fees within the City for solid waste purposes, including but not limited to, implementation of an integrated waste reduction and recycling plan; inspection, auditing, review and planning for solid waste or household hazardous waste collection, transfer and disposal; planning related to responses to solid or hazardous waste releases and spills; and franchise fees as permitted by law. Such fees may include, but are not limited to, fees for the costs of preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements, household hazardous waste elements, non-disposal facility elements and integrated waste reduction and recycling plans, and fees for the use and maintenance of public streets, highways, public rights-of-way, and other public property. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.080. - Refundable performance deposit. 
City may implement bonds and security deposit requirements for franchisee(s) and/or permittees. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.090. - Collection arrangements required; unauthorized accumulation prohibited and declared a public nuisance. 
(a)  In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to prevent the spread of vectors, the owner, occupant, or other person responsible for any premise in the City shall arrange with a solid waste collector for the collection of solid waste, as set forth in this Chapter. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the person having control or possession of a premise in the City to fail or neglect to provide for the removal of solid waste. Each day's violation of this Section shall be treated and considered as a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any property or premise is hereby declared a public nuisance and is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.100. - Enforcement authority, impounding of solid waste containers; civil remedies. 
(a)  Authority. The City Manager and/or his or her designee shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police officers pursuant to the Code. 
(b)  Impounding of containers. If a solid waste container is not properly identified as belonging to a City-approved solid waste collector, or if the terms of the permit, the franchise agreement, or of this Chapter are not complied with, then the solid waste container shall be subject to removal and impound by order of the City Manager or the City Manager's designee pursuant to Section 5.06.570. 
(c)  Civil remedies. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of a City franchisee or the City to bring a civil action against any person who violates this Chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by a City franchisee or the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.110. - Franchise agreement; relation to code. 
The franchise agreement will govern requirements placed on the franchisee(s) for services covered under the franchise. Where the franchise agreement is silent, the requirements applicable to permittees and other applicable requirements of this Chapter will apply, including insurance, liability and bonding requirements, diversion requirements, and general collection issues. To provide services not covered under the franchise, the franchisee must obtain a permit and meet all requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 5.06.200. - Permit required prior to container delivery. 
No person may deliver a roll-off box, bin, or other solid waste container within the City, or collect solid waste from a customer within the City, prior to City approval and issuance of that person's solid waste collection permit, unless otherwise exempted under this Chapter. Green waste and recyclables are included in the definition of solid waste and collectors of such materials, not otherwise exempted per this Chapter, must obtain permits. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.210. - Solid waste permit application and issuance process. 
(a)  A permit shall become effective when an application has been approved by the City, and upon the applicant's satisfying all of the requirements and conditions set forth in both this Article and the permit. 
(b)  Prior to performing any services provided under the permit, the permittee must provide to the City a completed solid waste and recyclables collection permit application, along with all information and documentation requested within the application and receive City's approval. 
(c)  Permit applicants may obtain an application from the City Clerk. Applications for such permits shall include, but not be limited to, the following information and documentation: 
(1)  Name and title of the applicant. 
(2)  Business address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Address where all vehicles and operating equipment used within the City will be stored. 
(4)  For waste disposal or other waste-related services provided by applicant during the five-year period preceding the date of the application, a complete listing and explanation of any criminal convictions against the applicant and key employees of the applicant's local operating division that would provide service in the City. 
(5)  A list of all affiliated companies whose names might appear on collection vehicles to be used within the City. 
(6)  Verification of insurance required under Section 5.06.290. 
(7)  Any other relevant information or documentation deemed necessary by the City Manager or City Manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.220. - Solid waste permit application review process. 
(a)  In determining whether to approve a permit, the City shall take into consideration all components of the completed application, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The ability of the applicant to meet all terms listed in the permit application and this Code; 
(2)  Applicant's past compliance with this Code and permit requirements; 
(3)  Any history of civil or criminal convictions, accidents or safety violations that make the award of a permit detrimental to the public's health, safety and welfare; and 
(4)  The completeness, accuracy, and validity of the application. 
(b)  The City shall also have the authority to verify independently all statements made and implied in the application. The City may also request clarification from the applicant of any or all elements of the submitted application. 
(c)  After review of the permit application, the City may deny the issuance of a solid waste and recyclables collection permit based on information disclosed in the permit application. Denial of a permit may be based on an incomplete application, failure to demonstrate qualifications or financial responsibility necessary to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, failure to supply required reports, failure to accurately report the origin of waste collected to the City or the disposal site, failure to pay fees to the City in a timely manner, or previous violations of any provision of this Chapter. Upon denial, the City shall provide the applicant written notification of the reasons therefore and shall include the effective date of such denial. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.230. - Solid waste permit term. 
The solid waste permit shall be valid until June 30, 2013, with up to a 24-month extension permitted at the City's option. A permit may be revoked for noncompliance with any requirement under this Chapter. The City may, upon 90-day advance written notice to the permittee prior to permit expiration, exercise the extension option. If such extension notice is provided by City, the permit will automatically renew monthly, up to a maximum of 24 months unless City gives permittee a 30-day written notice of termination. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.240. - Suspension, revocation, renewal and transfer of permit. 
(a)  Summary suspension of permit. It shall be unlawful for a permittee to collect solid waste in the City during such time as the permit of the said permittee is suspended. The City shall have authority to summarily suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Article whenever the permittee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit or violates any provision of this Chapter or other City ordinance. The City shall notify the permittee in writing of such summary suspension, which notice shall also advise the permittee of the time and place of a hearing before the City Council to consider the termination of the permit pursuant to Subsection (b). The hearing before the City Council shall be held not less than ten nor more than 30 days from the date of such notice. 
(b)  Council hearing on revocation of permit. 
(1)  Any permit issued or granted pursuant to the provisions of this Article may be revoked after a public hearing before the City Council. It is unlawful for any solid waste collector to operate under a permit that has been revoked or suspended. A permit may be revoked under the following circumstances: 
a.  Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or has failed to comply with any of the terms or conditions of the permit, including failing to file a complete, timely and accurate quarterly report; 
b.  Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or has failed to comply with any ordinances, resolutions, or regulations of the City, or of state or federal law, applicable to collection and disposal of solid waste; 
c.  Where it has been determined that the permit was granted pursuant to false or fraudulent information contained in the application; 
d.  Where it has been determined that preservation of public health, safety, and welfare require revocation of the permit. 
(2)  The City may initiate a proceeding to revoke a permit by written notice delivered to the permittee, setting forth the reasons for the proposed revocation. The notice shall also indicate the time and place of a hearing before the City Council, which shall be scheduled not less than ten or more than 30 days from the date of such notice. 
(3)  At such hearing, the permittee may present evidence in writing and through testimony of its employees and others relevant to the proposed termination. During such hearing, the City Council may demand from the applicant such additional information as the City Council may deem relevant and necessary. Any hearing may be continued or adjourned to a stated time and place without the giving of further notice. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may revoke a permit upon the adoption of a resolution which sets forth in writing the findings relied on to conclude that the permit shall be revoked. The resolution revoking the permit shall set forth the notice required by Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. The City Council's decision shall be final. 
(4)  The City, without a hearing, may suspend a permit for not more than 60 days, if the City Manager or City Manager's designee finds that continued operation by the permittee will constitute a threat to public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(c)  Waiver of hearing. Failure of permittee to respond to a notice to appear for a hearing before the board is a waiver of the right to a hearing and action may be taken without the permittee being present. 
(d)  Confiscation of solid waste permit items. The City may take possession of any badge, card, permit, or license, issued under the provisions of this Chapter, upon expiration, revocation, cancellation, or suspension thereof, or which is fictitious or which has been unlawfully or erroneously issued. 
(e)  Transfer of solid waste permit. A permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferred, delegated, or assigned without prior written City approval. No permittee shall sell, assign, hypothecate, relinquish, surrender or transfer interest in a permit to any person or solid waste collector or allow another person or entity to use the permit in any act for which a permit is required without the prior written consent of the City. The restriction includes the transfer of ownership or the majority of ownership or control of the permittee, or a transfer of a majority of the permittee's stock to another person. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.250. - Operations under solid waste permit. 
(a)  Scope of solid waste permit. A solid waste permit issued pursuant to this article shall authorize only the following activities: 
(1)  Collection of source separated recyclable solid waste; provided that transformation, mixed waste processing, or other collection or processing methods that do not require prior separation of recyclable solid waste from the waste generated by the waste generator prior to collection by the permittee shall not be considered the collection of recyclable solid waste. 
(2)  Temporary collection services, such as solid waste collection from specific projects such as yard clean-up, remodeling, construction, or demolition, as more fully defined under the definitions of "temporary collection service" and "temporary collection containers." 
(b)  Notice for non-collection. When any solid waste is left on premises by the permittee, the permittee shall at that time leave a red tag indicating the reasons for refusing to collect the solid waste, and giving reference to the City ordinance which provides permittee grounds for such refusal. The tag shall carry the permittee's business or firm name and telephone number and shall be securely fastened to the container or the Article refused. Permittee shall keep a record of such notices including the addresses of all premises where it is necessary to leave such notices. 
(c)  Property rights of solid waste collected. All solid waste collected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be and become the property of the permittee from and after the time of collection thereof. 
(d)  Customer contracting. All customer agreements must contain clauses that automatically terminate such customer agreements in the event that the permittee's permit to collect is revoked or not renewed. 
(e)  Other permit provisions. The city council may modify permit requirements from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.260. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5.06.270. - Solid waste permit fees. 
Permittees shall submit the following fees within 30 days of the end of the preceding quarter, for quarters ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31, accompanied with the quarterly reports detailed in Section 5.06.300: 
(1)  Permit fee. Permittee will submit five percent of the gross receipts collected for all solid waste services provided in the City during the preceding calendar quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. 
(2)  AB 939 fee. In addition to the permit fee, permittee will submit ten percent of gross receipts collected for all solid waste services provided in the City during the preceding calendar quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31, if the permittee does not divert a minimum of 60 percent of the material it collects. A permittee that does not divert 60 percent of the waste it collects may have the opportunity to demonstrate that it took all reasonable actions to divert the maximum amount of solid waste it collected and that 60 percent diversion was not possible due to the unique characteristics of the loads collected. The City, in its sole discretion, shall determine if the AB 939 fee shall be waived. 
(3)  Late fees. Permittee shall pay to the City a service charge, in an amount equal to ten percent of any amount due City after due date has passed. Permittee shall pay an additional ten percent service charge on any unpaid balance for each additional 30-day period the fees remain unpaid. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-08, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 5.06.280. - Permittee diversion requirements. 
Permittees must divert a minimum of 60 percent of the solid waste that the permittee collects within the City each calendar year. Fees paid by permittees are reduced relative to the level of waste diversion achieved by each permittee. To count as waste diversion for the purpose of this Chapter, the permittee must provide documentation of delivery to a recycling facility and documentation as to the quantity of the delivered waste that was diverted. Failure to meet this requirement over one calendar quarter is grounds to deny issuance of, suspend and/or revoke a solid waste collection permit. A permittee that does not divert 60 percent of the waste it collects may have the opportunity to demonstrate that it took all reasonable actions to divert the maximum amount of solid waste it collected and that 60 percent diversion was not possible due to the unique characteristics of the loads collected. The City, in its sole discretion, may determine whether such permit will be continued or renewed. Diversion rates under 50 percent during one calendar quarter will result in the automatic revocation of the permit. 
If, in the future, the California Integrated Waste Management Board passes legislation through the State Senate or the State Assembly, requiring that cities divert more than 60 percent of the solid waste, each permittee shall be required to meet the new State requirements. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-08, § 3, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 5.06.290. - Insurance. 
(a)  Each solid waste permittee shall, during the term of any solid waste permit, maintain in full force and effect, and shall furnish City with a policy or certificate of insurance in an amount determined as appropriate by the City for: 
(1)  Comprehensive general liability; 
(2)  Automobile liability; and 
(3)  Workers' compensation and employers' liability. 
(b)  Evidence of insurance shall be provided on City forms or approved substitutes. The insurance policy or policies shall be issued by an admitted insurance company with a Best Key Rating of A VII, or as otherwise acceptable to the City. The above limits shall be subject to approval of and to annual review by the City for the purpose of reasonably adjusting to current insurance conditions and requirements. 
(c)  Such insurance shall be primary and not excess, shall be procured from an insurer authorized to do business in the State, and shall not be cancelled or modified without first giving to the City 30 days' prior written notice. 
(d)  All such insurance shall remain in effect, uninterrupted, through the term of the permit. Applicants and permittees shall provide the City with certificates of insurance annually with the solid waste and recyclables collection permit application. 
(e)  All such insurance shall name the City as an additional insured in a separate endorsement. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-08, § 4, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 5.06.300. - Solid waste report content and submission. 
Each quarter permittees are required to submit reports on City-provided reporting forms. Reports shall be submitted both electronically and on paper within 30 days of the end of the preceding quarter, for quarters ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31. Reports shall contain the following data: 
(1)  The tonnage and/or volume of waste collected according to each category (refuse, recyclables, green waste) and according to how much was disposed versus diverted from landfilling; 
(2)  The location, site, and/or facility where such said waste has been disposed, delivered or diverted; 
(3)  Gross receipts from all solid waste and recycling services provided in the City; 
(4)  Other information required by law or deemed necessary by the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.310. - Audit of permittee's books and records. 
The City or City's designee may audit the permittee's books and records for the purposes of verifying the correct payment of all City fees, and confirming the accurate reporting of tonnage recycled and disposed, and other information. Each permittee shall make records available to the City or to agents of the City during normal business hours at the permittee's local office upon one business day's notice from the City. Should the audit of the permittee's books and records show more than a $1,000.00 discrepancy between fees paid and fees due for a one-year period, the permittee shall reimburse the City for the cost of the audit. The City has the option to review a period less than a year and annualize the results. Over or under-paid fees shall be remitted within 30 days of the finalization of the review, or of discovery if determination is made outside of a review by the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.320. - Solid waste permittee indemnification. 
(a)  General. The permit shall require the permittee to defend, with counsel to be agreed upon by both parties, indemnify, and hold harmless, the City and its agents, officers, servants, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, damages, liabilities, costs, or expenses for any damages or injuries to any person or property, including but not limited to, injury to the permittee's or City's employees, agents or officers which arise from, are connected with, or are caused or claimed to be caused by, the permittee, or its agents, officers, or employees, in the issuance of the permit, or in performing the services permitted by the permit, and all costs and expenses of investigating and defending against same; provided, however, that the permittee's duty to indemnify and hold harmless shall not include any claims or liability arising from the sole negligence or intentional misconduct of the City, its agents, officers, or employees, determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Hazardous waste indemnity. Permittees are required to indemnify, defend, with counsel to be agreed upon by both parties, protect and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents, assigns, and any successor or successors to the City's interest from and against all claims, actual damages, (including but not limited to special and consequential damages), natural resources damages, punitive damages, injuries, costs, response, remediation and removal costs, losses, demands, debts, liens, liabilities, causes of action, suits, legal or administrative proceedings, interest, fines, charges, penalties and expenses (including but not limited to attorneys' and expert witness fees and costs incurred in connection with defending against any of the foregoing or in enforcing this indemnity) of any kind whatsoever paid, incurred or suffered by, or asserted against, the City or its officers, employees, or agents arising from or attributable to any repair, cleanup, or detoxification, or preparation and implementation of any removal, remedial, response, closure, or other plan (regardless of whether undertaken due to government action) concerning any hazardous wastes at any disposal or processing facility where solid waste is or has been transported, transferred, processed, stored, disposed of, or has otherwise come to be located by the permittee or permittee's activities pursuant to the permit resulting in a release of any hazardous waste into the environment. Without limiting the substance of the indemnification, the foregoing indemnity is intended to operate as an agreement pursuant to 107(e) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), also known as "Superfund," 42 U.S.C. Section 9607(e), and California Health and Safety Code Section 25364, to defend, protect, hold harmless, and indemnify the City from all forms of liability under CERCLA, other applicable statutes or common law for any and all matters addressed in this provision. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 5.06.400. - Office for inquiries and complaints. 
(a)  Solid waste collectors shall maintain an office at a fixed place and shall maintain a telephone at the office listed in the current telephone directory in the name under which it conducts business in the City, and shall at all times between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays and between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Saturdays, have an employee or agent at the office to receive service request, complaints and inquiries. Each office shall be staffed with a knowledgeable person, trained to respond to customer questions and complaints. An emergency telephone shall be provided to the City for use outside normal business hours. 
(b)  The protection of the public health, safety, and well-being require that service complaints be acted on promptly and that a record be maintained in order to permit the City and its solid waste collectors to identify potential public health and safety problems. During office hours, solid waste collectors shall record all complaints, including the date, time, complainant's name and address if the complainant is willing to give this information, and date, and manner of resolution of the complaint. This information shall be maintained for the term of permit or franchise agreement, or longer if indicated in the permit application or franchise agreement. The record of service complaints shall be made available for review by representatives of the City during the solid waste collector's office hours. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.410. - Frequency of solid waste collection. 
(a)  Solid waste created, produced or accumulated in or about premises in the City shall be removed from premises at a minimum of: 
(1)  Every four days for putrescible waste, or 
(2)  Once each week for non-putrescible waste. 
(b)  The following materials may be collected less frequently unless the City deems otherwise: 
(1)  Temporary solid waste containers on construction or demolition sites containing no food waste, food wrappers, yard waste, or any form of organic waste. 
(2)  Recyclables containers containing no food waste, food wrappers, yard waste, or any form of organic waste. 
(c)  If conditions warrant, the County Health Officer or the City may require a greater frequency of removal. 
(d)  It is unlawful for the person having control or possession of the premises within the City to fail or neglect to provide for the removal of solid waste. Each day's violation of this Section shall be treated and considered as a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.420. - Recyclable solid waste collection. 
(a)  Ownership of recyclable solid waste. Upon placement of recyclable solid waste at a designated recycling collection location, such recyclable solid waste shall become the property of the solid waste collector engaged to collect such material. 
(b)  Collection by persons other than an authorized solid waste collector prohibited. It is unlawful for any person, except for the permitted solid waste collector engaged to provide such service, to collect recyclable solid waste from a designated recycling collection container. The City may, at its option, arrange for collection in the event of health and safety issues or of a dispute between the solid waste collector, the customer or the City. 
(c)  Generator's right to recycle. Nothing in this Chapter limits the right of any person to sell, donate, or otherwise divert their own recyclables from landfilling, except that recyclables deposited into containers provided by a solid waste collector and placed for collection shall become solid waste and the property of the solid waste collector as provided for in subsection a above. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.430. - Collection hours. 
No collection of solid waste, or delivery or removal of containers by a solid waste collector, shall be made from within 200 feet of any residence in the City between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. any day unless prior written approval has been obtained from the City Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.440. - Holiday schedule. 
Solid waste collectors may only postpone collection for the following holidays: January 1st, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. Service due on the holiday, and on each day during the remainder of the holiday week, shall be delayed no more than one day. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.450. - Placement of solid waste containers for collection. 
Residential solid waste containers (e.g. carts) shall be placed curbside or in the gutter, not earlier than 24 hours before collection is scheduled and removed not later than 24 hours after collection. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.460. - Solid waste container storage enclosures. 
(a)  All solid waste containers, for both residential and commercial customers, must be shielded from view within a building or area enclosed by a wall not less than six feet in height. No solid waste container storage shall be within 50 feet of any residential or open space planning areas unless it is fully enclosed. 
(b)  All new construction of residences and businesses must include sufficient storage area for both solid waste and recycling containers. City may require sufficient storage area for both solid waste and recycling containers be built when an existing facility is being renovated. City will review plans to ensure adequate space will be provided prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.470. - Containerization of solid waste. 
All solid waste shall be placed for collection in containers provided by solid waste collectors or provided by customers and serviced by solid waste collectors, except when special collections are authorized by this Code or the City's franchise agreement. Special collection items, such as bulky items, holiday trees, bundled residential green waste, and household hazardous waste placed for curbside collection, must be placed for collection in accordance with the terms of this Code or the City's franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.480. - Encroachment permit for solid waste container placement in public right-of-way. 
(a)  Except for curbside collection or storage enclosure collection pursuant to Sections 5.06.450 and 5.06.460, prior to placement of a solid waste collection container in the public right-of-way, the person placing the container must obtain an encroachment permit from the City. A performance bond and letter of credit may be required prior to issuance of the encroachment permit. Only a solid waste collector authorized by the franchise or a permit to provide temporary collection service, or customer hiring such a franchisee or permittee, may obtain an encroachment permit for a temporary collection bin. Applications for such permit shall be on forms supplied by the City and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and business telephone; 
(2)  Evidence of solid waste franchise or permit; 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of person or persons who will have the responsibility for the placement, servicing, and removal of the temporary solid waste collection bin(s), as described above. 
(b)  Applications shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set by the City. Encroachment permits shall be issued for a time certain, and are revocable at any time by the City, if the holder of the encroachment permit violates City ordinances or State law, any term of the permit, or if the encroachment is deemed to constitute a traffic hazard or public nuisance. A holder of an encroachment permit shall promptly remove or cause the removal of the container(s) if the permit is revoked. All decisions of the City regarding the issuance and revocation of encroachment permits are final and are not appealable. 
(c)  Encroachment permits are not transferable by assignment, sale, or other means without the express written permission of the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.490. - Noise. 
A solid waste collector shall so conduct its operations as to offer the least possible disruption to the existing noise levels of the area within which collections are made, but in no event exceed the City's noise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.500. - Litter. 
Any solid waste collector who releases, or permits or causes the release of any solid waste on public or private property in the City at any time shall forthwith clean up, contain, collect and remove same. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.510. - Trespass. 
No person authorized to collect or transport solid waste or recyclables shall enter private property beyond the extent necessary to collect the solid waste or recyclables placed for collection. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.520. - Scavenging. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than a solid waste collector, the City, or the owner thereof, to remove solid waste, including recyclable solid waste, from containers placed for collection, including temporary containers. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.530. - Transfer of solid waste on city streets. 
Under no circumstances may solid waste be transferred between vehicles or otherwise in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.540. - Prohibited disposal methods. 
(a)  Burning waste. It shall be unlawful at anytime for any person, including solid waste collectors, to burn any solid waste or recyclables within the City. 
(b)  Illegal dumping. It shall be unlawful for any person, including solid waste collectors, to cast, place, sweep, deposit, or dump solid waste upon any private or public property in the City, except as provided for in this Code. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or dump hazardous waste, medical waste, or abandoned vehicles, or parts thereof, upon any private or public real property in the City. 
(c)  Unauthorized disposal. No unauthorized person shall cause the placement of solid waste, originating from other premises, within a waste container designated to serve the premises for which the container has been assigned. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.550. - Hazardous solid waste. 
(a)  Disposition. Generators, owners, and/or possessors of hazardous solid waste shall dispose of all hazardous solid waste that they generate, own, or possess in accordance with all zoning laws. 
(b)  Regulation. The County Health Official and the City may promulgate regulations regarding the handling, transportation, and/or disposal of hazardous solid waste within the City. 
(c)  Collection. It is unlawful for City franchisee(s) or permittees to perform solid waste handling services for hazardous solid waste, unless they are properly permitted and meet all local, State and Federal regulations regarding the handling of such materials. 
(d)  Placement in containers for collection. It is unlawful for any person to place solid waste or hazardous solid waste in containers for regular collection by a solid waste collector or at a designated recycling collection location. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.560. - Hazardous waste inspection and reporting. 
(a)  Solid waste collectors shall inspect solid waste placed for collection in their respective bins and containers, and shall reject for collection solid waste observed to be contaminated with hazardous waste. Solid waste collectors, as applicable, shall promptly notify the City and all agencies with jurisdiction, if appropriate, including the State Department of Toxic Substances Control, local emergency response providers and the National Response Center of reportable quantities of hazardous waste found or observed in solid waste anywhere within the City. In addition to other required notifications, if a franchisee or solid waste permittee observes any substances which it or its employees reasonably believe or suspect to contain hazardous waste unlawfully disposed of or released on any City property, including storm drains, streets or other public rights-of-way, the solid waste collector, as applicable, shall immediately notify the City Manager or his or her designee. 
(b)  Solid waste collectors shall each maintain records showing the types and quantities, if any, of hazardous waste found in solid waste and which was inadvertently collected from service recipients within the City, but diverted from landfilling. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.565. - Universal waste disposal. 
Universal waste (such as batteries, electronic waste, electronic lamps, cathode ray tubes/glass, non-empty aerosol cans) shall be diverted from landfills and disposed of in accordance with state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 3, 1-23-2019)  
Sec. 5.06.570. - Unlawfully placed solid waste containers. 
(a)  Unauthorized solid waste containers. No person shall place or leave standing a solid waste container on any public or private property within the City except for collection and disposal of solid waste by solid waste collectors or as otherwise specifically authorized in this Chapter. 
(b)  Containers for collection of recyclable solid waste exempted. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the placement of containers for the collection of recyclable solid waste sold or donated by the generator of such solid waste. If, however, the generator of the recyclable solid waste is required to pay monetary or non-monetary consideration for the collection, transportation, transfer, or processing of the recyclable solid waste, or for the use of containers for such solid waste, this exemption shall not apply. The person providing containers for the collection of recyclable solid waste shall have the burden of showing that the recyclable solid waste was sold or donated in compliance with the exemption herein. 
(c)  Removal of unlawfully placed solid waste containers. 
(1)  The City Manager or his or her designee may cause the posting of a notice to remove, in a conspicuous place, on any solid waste container placed on any public or private property within the City in violation of this Chapter. 
(2)  Notices to remove posted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall specify the nature of the violation and shall state that the solid waste container must be removed within 24 hours or it may be removed and stored by the City, and the contents disposed of, at the expense of the owner of the container. The posting of a notice to remove shall constitute constructive notice to the owner and user of the container of the requirement to remove the solid waste container. 
(3)  If the solid waste container is not removed within 24 hours after the notice to remove is posted, the City Manager or his or her designee may direct the removal and storage of the solid waste container and the disposal of its contents. 
(4)  If the identity of the owner of a solid waste container that has been removed by the City is known to the City Manager or his or her designee, the City Manager or his or her designee shall promptly cause notice to be mailed to the owner to claim the stored property. If the solid waste container is not claimed within 90 days after removal and notice to the owner, or 90 days after removal if the identity of the owner is unknown, the solid waste container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly. 
(5)  After a solid waste container has once been removed by the City pursuant to a notice to remove, the owner thereof shall be deemed to have actual notice of the provisions of this Chapter, including the prohibition of placement of solid waste containers by any person other than those exempted. In the event of a subsequent placement of a solid waste container owned by the same owner, the City Manager or his or her designee may immediately, without the posting of a notice to remove, direct the removal and storage of the unlawfully placed solid waste container and shall, in such case, give notice to the owner to claim the solid waste container. In such event, the owner shall be responsible to reimburse the City for the actual cost of removal, storage and disposal of its contents, which cost shall be paid by the owner before the solid waste container is returned to the owner. If the solid waste container is unclaimed after notice is mailed to the owner and the expiration of the period set forth in subsection (4), the solid waste container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly. 
(6)  The owner of the solid waste container shall be responsible to reimburse the City for the actual cost of the removal, storage and disposal. All amounts due to the City for the cost of the removal, storage and disposal shall be paid before the solid waste container is returned to the owner. The costs incurred by the City for removal, storage and disposal shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the owner, who shall be liable therefore in an action by the City for the recovery of such amounts. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.580. - Employees of solid waste collectors. 
All field employees of a solid waste collector shall wear nametags to enable identification while providing public service. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.590. - Solid waste collectors' vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicle standards. To protect public health, safety and well-being, any truck used for the collection or transportation of solid waste within the City shall be leak-proof and equipped with a close-fitting cover that shall be affixed in a manner that will prevent spilling, dropping or blowing of any waste, oil, grease or other substance upon the public right-of-way during collection or transportation. No person shall park, or cause to be parked within the City any vehicle containing solid waste unless the vehicle is free from odor and in a sanitary condition. Solid waste collectors shall comply with all regulations promulgated by all agencies with jurisdiction over the safe, sanitary operation of all of their equipment. 
(b)  Displays. Vehicles shall display the name of the solid waste collector in prominent letters so that the vehicle may be easily identified as belonging to that solid waste collector. If a solid waste collector uses a vehicle displaying the name of an affiliated company, the affiliated company's name must be indicated on the permit application for permittees, or be approved in advance in writing by the City Manager or designee for franchisee(s). Improperly identified vehicles may be treated as belonging to non-permitted haulers. 
(c)  Noise levels. To protect the public health, safety and quiet enjoyment of the residents of the City, the noise level for the collection vehicles during the stationary compaction process shall not exceed 75 decibels (dB) at a distance of 25 feet from the collection vehicle and at an elevation of five feet from the horizontal base place of such vehicles. A Solid Waste Collector shall submit to City, upon City's request, a certificate of vehicle noise level testing by an independent testing entity of a representative sample of all vehicles. 
(d)  Damage to streets. Solid waste collectors shall not damage public or private streets over which their respective collection equipment may be operated and shall obtain all required approvals for operation of its respective collection vehicles on private streets. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.600. - Solid waste collectors' containers. 
(a)  Each solid waste collector shall maintain its containers within the City in a manner to protect public health and safety and prevent the spread of vectors. 
(b)  All bins shall be steam-cleaned or replaced at least once per year by the solid waste collector servicing bin. 
(c)  Each solid waste collector shall remove from its solid waste containers (including carts, bins and roll-off boxes), any exterior paint or markings commonly referred to as "graffiti" or "tagging" within 24 hours of either notification by City or service recipient or the solid waste collector's last servicing of the container, whichever is sooner. 
(d)  The City has the authority to require a solid waste collector to replace promptly any container which, in the City's reasonable discretion, is not in a clean, painted, or serviceable condition. 
(e)  Each solid waste collector shall post each container with a notice that the container is not to be used for the disposal of hazardous waste. 
(f)  All containers in City, excluding franchisee's residential carts, must carry a label identifying the solid waste collector that owns or collects from the container and that solid waste collector's phone number. Letters must be at least three inches high. 
(g)  All recycling and green waste containers must carry labels, in both English and Spanish, identifying which materials are to be placed in each container. Solid waste collectors are responsible for designing and producing such labels and replacing labels when they become worn. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.610. - Sanitary transportation of solid waste. 
No person shall convey or transport solid waste upon or along any public street in the City unless such solid waste is contained and/or covered or otherwise secured to prevent it from leaking, dripping, falling, blowing, or scattering from the vehicle in which it is being conveyed or transported. All vehicles and equipment used in the transport of any form of solid waste shall be kept clean. No person shall drain the liquid from any such vehicle upon any road or highway or upon any other land in the City. Persons hauling solid waste on the City streets shall completely empty the solid wastes from their vehicles and/or containers at the disposal site, or re-cover them if they are not completely emptied, in order to prevent the scattering of residue on the return trip. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.620. - Violation. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, violations of this Chapter are punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.30. 
(b)  In addition, in the event any violation of this Chapter constitutes an imminent danger to public health, safety or the environment, the City Manager or any agent or person designated by the City Manager, may enter upon the premises from which the violation emanates, abate the violation and danger created to the public safety or the environment, and restore any premises affected by the alleged violation, without notice to or consent from the owner or occupant of the premises. An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances created by a disposal of solid or hazardous waste where such disposal creates a significant and immediate threat to the public health or safety, or the environment. 
(c)  Violations of this Chapter are deemed public nuisances, which may be abated by administrative, civil, or criminal action in accordance with the terms and provisions of this code and state law. All costs and fees incurred by the City because of any violation of this Chapter, which constitutes a nuisance, including all administrative fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses, shall become a lien against the subject premises from which the nuisance emanated, and a personal obligation against the owner. The owner of record of the premises subject to any lien shall receive notice of the lien prior to recording. The City attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for money judgment, or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the premises. 
(d)  The City may utilize any and all other remedies as otherwise provided by law to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS DIVERSION 
 
Sec. 5.06.700. - Declaration of purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to promote the recycling of C&D debris in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to meet the City's obligations under AB 939. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.710. - Designated recyclable and reusable materials. 
Designated recyclable and reusable materials means all C&D debris that fits within any of the following categories: 
(1)  Masonry building materials including all products generally used in construction including, but not limited to, asphalt, concrete, rock, stone, and brick. 
(2)  Wood materials including all dimensional lumber, fencing, or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA pressure treated, contaminated, or painted. 
(3)  Plant materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps, logs, brush, or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for construction or other use. 
(4)  Metals including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to, pipes, siding, window frames, doorframes, and fences. 
(5)  Roofing materials, including wood shingles, asphalt, stone, and slate-based roofing material. 
(6)  Salvageable materials including, but not limited to wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures, toilets, sinks, bath tubs, and appliances. 
(7)  Any other construction or demolition debris that is non-hazardous and available for recycling or reuse. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.720. - Minimum construction and demolition debris requirements. 
(a)  All covered projects shall reuse, recycle, or divert the minimum percentage amount of designated recyclable and reusable materials as set forth by state law and regulations. The 2016 CALGreen (Part 11 of Title 24, California Code of Regulations) requires a minimum diversion of 65 percent, which is expected to increase to 75 percent for the 2019 edition that will be applicable in 2020. 
(b)  Diversion may be satisfied by any of the following methods: 
(1)  Use of new construction methods, approved by the City, that reduce the amount of C&D debris generated. 
(2)  On-site reuse of the C&D debris. 
(3)  Delivery of the C&D debris from a site to a recycling facility as described in this Article. 
(4)  Other methods approved by the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 19-01, § 4, 1-23-2019)  
Sec. 5.06.730. - Requirements for covered projects. 
(a)  Covered projects. All construction, demolition, addition, alteration, and remodel projects within the City not otherwise exempted under Section 5.06.770, are required to divert the minimum percentage amount of designated recyclable and reusable materials from landfills. Failure to comply with the diversion requirements of this Article shall cause the project applicant to forfeit its security deposit set forth in Section 5.06.780. Concurrent permits at the same site are considered one project for the purposes of this Article. 
(b)  City-sponsored projects. Documentation and diversion requirements for City-sponsored construction and demolition projects shall be included in the project contract with the City. These projects shall only be considered covered-projects if City identifies them as such on a project-by-project basis. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-08, § 5, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 19-01, § 4, 1-23-2019)  
Sec. 5.06.740. - Definition of covered projects. 
(a)  Covered projects. All construction, addition, alteration, remodeling and demolition projects within the City that generate construction and demolition debris requiring a permit are considered covered projects, are required to divert the minimum percentage amount of designated recyclable and reusable materials from landfills, require the submittal of a waste reduction and recycling plan prior to beginning any construction, remodeling or demolition activities, and shall be subject to the provisions of this Article. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this Article shall subject the building/demolition permit applicant to the full range of enforcement mechanisms set forth in Sections 5.06.800 and 5.06.840. 
(b)  Deconstruction/recovery interval for covered demolition projects. Every covered demolition project shall be made available for deconstruction, salvage, and recovery prior to demolition. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to recover the maximum feasible amount of designated recyclable and reusable materials prior to demolition. Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable material from every project shall qualify to be counted in meeting the diversion requirement. Recovered or salvaged designated recyclables and reusable materials may be given away or sold on the premises, or may be removed to re-use facilities for storage or sale. 
(c)  All permits for construction, remodeling, and/or demolition issued for a covered project shall be conditioned to comply with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 19-01, § 4, 1-23-2019)  
Sec. 5.06.750. - Waste reduction and recycling plan (WRRP) required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specified in this Article, each applicant who applies for a building permit for a covered project shall submit a WRRP. The WRRP forms shall be provided by City. No building permit or exemption shall be issued for covered projects unless a WRRP has been approved by the C&D compliance official. 
(b)  Prior to starting the project, every applicant shall submit a properly completed WRRP to the City, in a form as prescribed by C&D compliance official, as a portion of the building or demolition permit process. The completed WRRP shall contain the following: 
(1)  The estimated volume or weight of project waste to be generated by material type; 
(2)  The maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling by material type; 
(3)  The vendor(s) that the applicant proposes to use to haul the materials; 
(4)  Facility(s) the materials will be hauled to, and their expected diversion rates by material type; 
(5)  Estimated volume or weight of C&D debris that will be disposed. 
(c)  Because actual material weights are not available at this stage, estimates may be used. In estimating the volume or weight of materials as identified in the WRRP, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the City for this purpose. Approval of the WRRP as complete and accurate shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any building or demolition permit. If the applicant calculates the projected feasible diversion rate as described above, and finds that the rate does not meet the diversion goal, the applicant must then submit information supporting the lower diversion rate. If this documentation is not included, the WRRP shall be deemed incomplete. 
(d)  Approval. No building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the C&D compliance official has approved the WRRP. Approval shall not be required, however, where emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety. The C&D compliance official shall only approve a WRRP if he or she determines that all of the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The WRRP provides all of the information set forth in this Article; 
(2)  The WRRP indicates how the minimum percentage amount of all C&D debris generated by the project shall be diverted; and 
(3)  The permit applicant has submitted an appropriate security deposit for the project. 
(e)  Non-approval. If the C&D compliance official determines that the WRRP is incomplete or fails to indicate how at least the minimum percentage amount of all C&D debris generated by the project will be diverted, he or she shall either: 
(1)  Return the WRRP to the applicant marked "Disapproved", including a statement of reasons, and will notify the building department, which shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit application; or 
(2)  Return the WRRP to the applicant marked "Further Explanation Needed." 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 19-01, § 4, 1-23-2019)  
Sec. 5.06.760. - Certified recycling facilities. 
For the purposes of this Article, a certified recycling facility means a recycling, composting, materials recovery, or re-use facility which (a) has obtained all applicable federal, state, and local permits; (b) is in full compliance with all applicable regulations; and (c) diverts from landfill disposal the minimum percentage established in this Article of all incoming waste from construction and demolition activities. The C&D Compliance Official may maintain a list of certified recycling facilities. Any facilities not included in the list maintained by the C&D Compliance Official shall first be approved by the C&D Compliance Official before being accepted as a certified recycling facility for purposes of compliance with the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-08, § 6, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 19-01, § 4, 1-23-2019)  
Sec. 5.06.770. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Neither a C&D debris "waste reduction and recycling plan" nor a security deposit is required for the following: 
(1)  Work for which only a plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit is required. 
(2)  Seismic tie-down projects. 
(3)  Roofing projects that do not include tear-off of existing roof. 
(4)  New fencing (but not replacement of existing fencing). 
(5)  Installation of pre-fabricated patio enclosures and covers where no foundation or other structural building modifications are required. 
(6)  Installation of pre-fabricated accessories such as signs or antennas where no structural building modifications are required. 
(7)  City-sponsored projects, if specifically exempted by City. 
(8)  Emergency demolition required to protect the public health and safety. 
(9)  Projects not generating C&D debris. 
(b)  An application for exemption and the grounds for an exemption are submitted to the C&D compliance official who shall determine if the exemption complies with this Section. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.780. - Construction and demolition debris diversion security deposit. 
Except as otherwise specified in this Article, each applicant who applies for a C&D permit for a covered project, shall remit a security deposit (cash, cashier's check, personal check, money order) in the amount equal to three percent of the estimated value of the project or $500.00, whichever is higher. The security deposit is remitted at the same time the permit application is filed. The City may adjust the amount of the required security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-08, § 7, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 5.06.790. - Refund of security deposit. 
(a)  The C&D compliance official may authorize the refund of any security deposit, which was erroneously paid or collected. 
(b)  The C&D compliance official may authorize the refund of any security deposit when the building permit application is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun. 
(c)  The C&D compliance official may authorize the refund of a security deposit when the applicant has satisfactorily submitted the "C&D debris recycling and disposal report summary" provided for in Section 5.06.820, and at least the minimum diversion requirements provided for in Sections 5.06.720 and 5.06.730 have been met. 
(d)  If the C&D compliance official determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this Article. The C&D compliance official may authorize a partial refund of a security deposit when less than the minimum diversion requirement is met. The partial refund shall not exceed that portion of the security deposit that is in the same ratio as the demonstrated amount of diverted waste. 
(e)  Any deposit will be returned without interest. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.800. - Forfeiture and city use of security deposit. 
(a)  If the C&D Compliance Official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this Article, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by Section 5.06.820 within 60 days from the date of the final inspection, then the deposit is forfeited to the City. 
(b)  Forfeited security deposits may be used by the City for solid waste and recycling related purposes, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Plan, implement, or promote solid waste diversion programs. 
(2)  Develop or improve the infrastructure needed to divert waste from landfilling. 
(3)  Educate generators and handlers of solid waste in the City regarding solid waste recycling and disposal alternatives. 
(4)  Review accuracy of solid waste collector's reports, waste reduction and recycling plans and other solid waste records. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-08, § 8, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 5.06.810. - Application fee. 
As a part of any application for, and prior to the issuance of, any building or demolition permit that involves the creation of C&D debris, every applicant for covered projects, unless exempt, shall pay to the City a cash fee sufficient to compensate the City for all expenses incurred in reviewing the waste reduction and recycling plan and reviewing performance of the plan. The amount of this fee is set forth in a resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.820. - Reporting. 
(a)  Within 60 days following the completion of a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to release of security deposit, submit documentation to the C&D compliance official reporting on compliance with the requirements of the waste reduction and recycling plan. The documentation consists of a final completed "C&D debris recycling and disposal report summary" showing actual data of tonnage of materials recycled and diverted, supported by original receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, contractors and/or landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether materials generated from the site have been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged, or otherwise disposed of. 
(b)  If a project involves both demolition and construction, the report and documentation for the demolition project must be submitted to, and approved by, the C&D Compliance Official before issuance of a building permit for the construction project. If the applicant has not met the diversion requirement for demolition, the C&D Compliance Official may, in addition to other remedies set forth in this Article, require a higher percentage of diversion for construction than established in this Article, provided that the higher percentage is no higher than the shortfall in diversion from demolition. In the alternative, the applicant may submit a letter stating that no designated recyclable or reusable materials were generated from the construction/demolition project. In which case, this statement shall be subject to verification by the C&D Compliance Official. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006; Ord. No. 19-01, § 4, 1-23-2019)  
Sec. 5.06.830. - Appeal—Construction and demolition debris diversion requirements. 
Upon payment of an appeal fee set forth in a resolution of the City Council, the applicant may appeal to the City Manager a decision of the C&D Compliance Official to deny an exemption or withhold all or any portion of a security deposit. Notice of appeal from the decision of the C&D Compliance Official must be filed with the City Manager's Office within ten calendar days of the date of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal sets forth in concise language that particular decision or decisions complained of and the reason why the person feels aggrieved thereby. Failure to file a notice of appeal within the time prescribed herein constitutes a waiver of any objection to the decision(s) of the C&D Compliance Official and such decision(s) shall be final; otherwise, the decision of the City Manager is final. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Sec. 5.06.840. - Construction and demolition debris ordinance enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this Article are punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.10. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties herein, if violations of the provisions of this Article exist as to a covered project requiring completion of a waste reduction and recycling plan, the City may use various administrative measures to ensure compliance. Measures available include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for that project may be withheld until all such violations have been corrected; 
(2)  Issuance of a stop work notice, until all such violations have been corrected; 
(3)  Stopping all inspections on subject project, until all such violations have been corrected; and 
(4)  Other measures recommended by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-11-2006)  
Chapter 5.07 - Tattooing Establishment and Operation Regulations[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Tattooing, body piercing and permanent cosmetics, Health and Safety Code § 119300 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5.07.010. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
Health Officer means the Orange County Health Officer or his or her deputy. 
Operator means any person, whether the proprietor or another person, administering a tattoo to any customer of a tattooing establishment. 
Proprietor means the person having general control and management over the conduct of business at a tattooing establishment, whether or not such person is the legal owner of the premises or the business. 
Tattoo means an indelible mark or figure fixed upon a body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars. 
Tattooing establishment means premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos, and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, dyes and inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use. 
(OCC § 4-12-1; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.020. - Maintenance of premises. 
(a)  All tattooing establishments shall be equipped with running hot and cold water, with adequate toilet facilities and with all such appliances, furnishings and materials as may be necessary to enable persons employed in and about such establishments to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The floors, furnishings and equipment of tattooing establishments shall be kept clean at all times during business hours. For purposes of this subsection, a floor shall not be considered clean if it has not been swept and mopped within the preceding twenty-four-hour period. 
(c)  All operating tables in tattooing establishments shall be constructed of metal with white enamel or porcelain finish, or stainless steel. 
(d)  Each tattooing establishment shall have adequate lighting and ventilation. For purposes of this subdivision, lighting or ventilation shall be considered inadequate if it fails to comply with a standard prescribed by the Health Officer. 
(e)  No tattooing establishment shall be used as a sleeping room or dormitory. 
(OCC § 4-12-2; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.030. - Source of dyes and inks. 
(a)  Proprietors of tattooing establishments, on request of the Health Officer, shall submit in writing to the Health Officer the source of all dyes or inks retained for use in tattooing operations, and thereafter shall notify the Health Officer in writing of any dyes or inks obtained for use in tattooing operations from any source other than those previously submitted. 
(b)  No dyes or inks from any sources which have been disapproved by the Health Officer shall be retained available for use in tattooing operations. 
(OCC § 4-12-3; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.040. - Maintenance of pigments, dyes, and equipment. 
No pigments, dyes, or equipment shall be retained available for use in tattooing operations unless cleaned and sterilized as provided in this section. For purposes of the section, equipment shall include needles, needle tubes, towels, blade holders, wiping cloths, paper towels and napkins, charcoal, gauze bandages (unless purchased in individual sterile packages), and all similar items. 
(1)  All equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned before being sterilized. Instruments shall be cleaned with soap or detergent by use of a brush. The interior of needle barrels shall be brushed. After cleaning, equipment shall be thoroughly rinsed under running fresh tap water. 
(2)  All equipment shall be sterilized by autoclaving. Each piece of equipment shall be individually wrapped with paper in an approved method for autoclaving. Metal foil may not be used. Tattooing needles shall be threaded through the metal tube that attaches to the tattooing vibrator and shall be placed in a glass (or autoclavable plastic test tube) with a cotton plug for autoclaving. Wiping tissues shall be sterilized in a single pack to be used for one tattoo and then be discarded. All packs shall be marked with temperature recording tape or labels. 
(3)  Dyes or inks shall be used from containers with a cap that completely covers the opening and is attached to the neck of the dye container, and shall be sterilized in an autoclave after first being filled with the dye. Dye shall be handled utilizing aseptic techniques and the dye containers filled with dye shall be autoclaved at least once a week or more often if necessary to keep the dye in a sterile condition. The dyes may be placed in Teflon squeeze bottles that will withstand autoclaving. 
(4)  Steam sterilization of the above listed equipment shall be accomplished in an autoclave with at least 15 pounds pressure per square inch at a temperature of 251 degrees Fahrenheit for at least 30 minutes. Other means of sterilization may be approved by the Health Officer. 
(5)  All sterilized dyes, pigments, and equipment shall be stored in a manner that will insure sterility at the time of use. 
(6)  Proprietors shall maintain sufficient sterilized equipment available at the beginning of each workday to allow completion of such workday without requiring resterilization of such equipment. 
(OCC § 4-12-4; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.050. - Maintenance of stencils. 
(a)  No stencil, whether new or used, shall be retained in a manner available for use in any tattooing operation unless it has been precleaned and disinfected in the following manner: 
(1)  Each stencil must be precleaned by being scrubbed with soap and brush to the extent necessary to remove all accumulations of carbon and Vaseline in the etched grooves of the stencil. 
(2)  Each stencil, after being precleaned and dried, must be disinfected by being soaked, design-cut side down, in a closed container of 70 percent alcohol for not less than 30 minutes at room temperature. 
(b)  Each stencil, after being disinfected, shall be air dried for not less than 30 minutes by being suspended in a manner exposing both sides to the air, and thereafter shall be stored for next use in a clean envelope. 
(OCC § 4-12-5; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.060. - Tattooing operations; skin condition of customers. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed on skin surface areas containing any rash, pimples, boils, or infection or otherwise manifesting any evidence of unhealthy conditions. 
(OCC § 4-12-6; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.070. - Same—Potential health risks. 
The establishment proprietor shall provide written information as required by the Health Officer about blood-borne diseases and their transmission to all tattoo operators and maintain records to verify operator receipt of this information. The tattoo operator shall inform the customer of any potential health risks involved whenever the skin is violated as required by the Health Officer. 
(OCC § 4-12-7; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.080. - Same—Health conditions of operator. 
No tattooing operations shall be performed unless the operator is free of communicable diseases and pustular skin lesions. 
(OCC § 4-12-8; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.090. - Same—Smoking. 
No operator shall smoke while performing a tattooing operation. 
(OCC § 4-12-9; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.100. - Same—Apparel of operator. 
The operator must wear a clean, light-colored, short-sleeved smock while performing the tattooing operation. 
(OCC § 4-12-10; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.110. - Same—Cleanliness of operator. 
No operator shall perform a tattooing operation with unclean hands. For purposes of this section, hands shall not be considered clean unless they have been thoroughly washed with soap from a single service dispenser and warm water vigorously rubbing all surfaces of lathered hands for at least ten seconds, followed by a thorough rinsing under a stream of water. Hands shall be dried using single service towels from a dispenser or hot air blower. If a liquid soap is used, the dispenser shall be cleaned and filled with fresh soap only when empty. Tattoo operators shall wear protective gloves while handling needles or blades, or doing any procedures that may cause bleeding. Gloves shall be discarded between each customer. 
(OCC § 4-12-11; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.120. - Same—Shaving. 
No tattooing operation involving shaving shall be performed unless the skin is washed with soap prior to the shaving and unless the blade used in shaving is previously unused and unless the blade holder has been autoclaved since its previous use. 
(OCC § 4-12-12; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.130. - Same—Skin preparation. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the skin is adequately prepared prior to the operation. For purposes of this section, skin shall be considered properly prepared if it is thoroughly washed with soap following shaving and thereafter scrubbed gently three times with 70 percent isopropyl alcohol, using a separate sterile gauze pad each such time; and no alternate method of skin preparation shall be considered adequate unless approved in writing by the Health Officer. 
(OCC § 4-12-13; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.140. - Same—Use of stencils. 
No tattooing operation involving the use of stencils shall be performed unless all of the following requirements have been complied with: 
(1)  Each stencil must be precleaned pursuant to section 5.07.100. 
(2)  Each stencil, having been precleaned, must be wiped with sterile gauze soaked in 70 percent alcohol and air dried immediately prior to its use in the tattooing operation. 
(3)  Petroleum jelly used for stencils must be obtained from a collapsible tube that has not previously been used in any tattooing operation, and must be applied to the skin with a sterile gauze that has not previously been used. 
(OCC § 4-12-14; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.150. - Same—Use of approved dyes. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed using dyes or inks of a type that has been disapproved for use by the Health Officer pursuant to Section 5.07.100. 
(OCC § 4-12-15; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.160. - Same—Use of sterile dyes. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the following requirements have been complied with: 
(1)  The dye or ink used for the tattoo must be obtained from presterilized dye or ink bottles and, prior to the tattooing operation, aseptically transferred from such bottles into sterile paper cups which have not previously been used in any tattooing operation. No refilling of the dye cup is permitted. 
(2)  No dye or ink shall be used in which needles used on another person have been dipped. 
(OCC § 4-12-16; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.170. - Same—Use of sterile equipment. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed using equipment that has not been cleaned and sterilized in the manner set forth in section 5.07.100. 
(OCC § 4-12-17; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.180. - Same—Discarding of certain equipment. 
Operators shall discard the following items immediately after use in any tattooing operation: 
(1)  Blades used in shaving. 
(2)  Tubes and gauze used in application of petroleum jelly used for stencils. 
(3)  Paper cups used for dye or ink. 
(OCC § 4-12-18; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.190. - Inspections—Health services fee schedule. 
The Health Officer shall periodically make inspections of tattooing establishments to determine if the proprietors or operators of such establishments are complying with the provisions of this chapter. The City may, by resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the tattoo establishment. Such fees to be paid directly to the Health Officer and retained by the County as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter. 
(OCC § 4-12-19; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 5.07.200. - Penalties. 
Each of the following acts or omissions shall constitute a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Any performance of a tattooing operation by an operator in violation of any requirement or prohibition imposed by this chapter. 
(2)  Any failure by a proprietor to maintain a tattooing establishment in conformity with the requirements of this division. For purposes of this subdivision, each day upon which such a failure to conform occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(OCC § 4-12-20; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 2-7-1995)  
Chapter 5.08 - Well Water Conservation 
 
Sec. 5.08.010. - Waste of water or unnecessary use; definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Beneficial use or beneficial purpose is defined to be the causing, suffering or permitting of any water pumped or flowing from any well to be used for the purpose of irrigation of lands and/or for domestic use and/or for the propagation of fish. 
(2)  Irrigation of land is defined to be the artificial application of water to lands whenever rainfall is insufficient to meet the full water requirements of crops, applied to lands in such quantities and in such manner, from time to time during the growing season of the trees or plants being irrigated, as will provide sufficient moisture to promote plant growth, having reference to the particular kind of crops grown and the particular type of soil involved. 
(3)  Propagation of fish is defined to be the breeding and/or propagating of edible or pet species of fish where such breeding and/or propagation is carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
(4)  Unnecessarily flow is defined to be the causing, suffering or permitting water flowing from an artesian well or pumped from a pumping well to be stored or used for any purpose other than a beneficial use or beneficial purpose, as defined in this section. 
(5)  Waste of water is defined to be: 
a.  The causing, suffering or permitting of any water pumped or flowing from any well to run into any river, creek or other natural watercourse or channel, or into any bay or pond or artificial reservoir, or into any street, road or highway, unless it be used thereafter for a beneficial purpose; and where such water is caused, suffered or permitted to be run into any pond or artificial reservoir, such storing of water shall be deemed a waste of water, unless it is used thereon for the beneficial purposes of domestic use and/or propagation of fish and/or thereafter removed therefrom and used for the beneficial purpose of irrigation. 
b.  The causing, suffering or permitting any water pumped or flowing from any well to run upon the land of any person, or upon the public lands of the United States or the State of California, unless it be used thereon for the beneficial purposes of irrigation thereof or for the propagation of fish. 
c.  The causing, suffering or permitting any water pumped or flowing from any well to be used for a beneficial purpose, where such beneficial use allows more than five (5) per cent of the water so pumped to escape in such a way as would define the use of such escaped water to be classified as "waste of water" under this section. 
(6)  Water well or wells shall mean an artificial hole made in the ground through which water naturally flows from subterranean sources to the surface of the ground, commonly known and designated as an artesian well, or any well from which water is obtained by means of a pump or other mechanical device, commonly known and designated as a pumping well. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, copartnership, corporation or association of individuals, either as owner, tenant, manager, agent or employee, to cause, permit or suffer any water well or wells, under the ownership, control or management of such person, firm, copartnership, corporation or association of individuals, to be operated or used in such manner as to cause, suffer or permit the water from such well or wells to unnecessarily flow or be pumped therefrom or to go to waste. 
(OCC §§ 4-5-1, 4-5-2)  
Chapter 5.09 - Water Well Construction and Abandonment 
 
Sec. 5.09.010. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to control the construction and reconstruction of wells to the end that the groundwater of this City will not be impaired in quality and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this City, and to provide for the destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances to the end that such wells will not impair the quality of groundwater or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this City. 
(OCC § 4-5-14; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned and abandonment shall apply to a well which has not been used for a period of one year, unless the owner declares in writing, to the City Council, his intention to use the well again for supplying water or other associated purpose (such as an observation well or injection well) and receives approval of such declaration from the City Council. All such declarations shall be renewed annually and at such time be resubmitted to the City Council for approval. Test holes and exploratory holes shall be considered abandoned 24 hours after construction work has been completed, unless otherwise approved by the Health Officer. 
Agricultural well shall mean a water well used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes, including so-called stock wells. 
Cathodic protection well shall mean any artificial excavation in excess of 50 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection, electrically, of metallic equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as a cathodic protection well or a deep anode. 
Community water supply well shall mean a water well used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to state regulation. 
Construct, reconstruct (construction, reconstruction) shall mean to dig, drive, bore, drill or deepen a well, or to reperforate, remove, replace or extend a well casing. 
Destruction shall mean the proper filling and sealing of a well that is no longer useful so as to assure that the groundwater is protected and to eliminate a potential physical hazard. 
Electrical grounding well shall mean any artificial excavation in excess of 50 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of establishing an electrical ground. 
Health Officer shall mean the Orange County Health Officer. 
Individual domestic well shall mean a water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence or commercial establishment. 
Industrial well shall mean a water well used to supply an industry on an individual basis. 
Observation well shall mean a well used for monitoring or sampling the conditions of a water-bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality. 
Permit shall mean a written permit issued by the Health Officer permitting the construction, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment of a well. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency. 
Public nuisance, when applied to a well, shall mean any well which threatens to impair the quality of groundwater or otherwise jeopardize the health or safety of the public. 
Saltwater (hydraulic) barrier well shall mean a well used for extracting water from or injecting water into the underground as a means of preventing the intrusion of saltwater into a fresh water-bearing aquifer. 
Test or exploratory hole shall mean an excavation used for determining the nature of underground geological or hydrological conditions, whether by seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means. 
Well shall mean any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, for providing cathodic protection or electrical grounding of equipment, for making tests or observations of underground conditions, or for any other similar purpose. Wells shall include, but shall not be limited to, community water supply wells, individual domestic wells, industrial wells, agricultural wells, cathodic protection wells, electrical grounding wells, test and exploratory holes, observation wells and saltwater (hydraulic) barrier wells, as defined herein, and other wells whose regulation is necessary to fulfill the purpose of this as determined by the City Council. Wells shall not include: 
(1)  Oil and gas wells, geothermal wells or other wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells; 
(2)  Wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during construction, or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments; or 
(3)  Other wells whose regulation is not necessary to fulfill the purpose of this as determined by the City Council. 
(OCC § 4-5-15; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.030. - Acts prohibited; permit required. 
(a)  No person shall construct or reconstruct any well unless such construction or reconstruction is carried out pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued for that purpose by the Health Officer as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Nor shall any such person abandon a well unless it has been destroyed pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued by the Health Officer. 
(c)  Nor shall any such person violate the terms of any order issued by the City Council or the Health Officer, issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(OCC § 4-5-17; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.040. - Permits. 
(a)  Applications for permits shall be made to the Health Officer containing such information as he or she shall require. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be established by the City on the basis of the cost incurred in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Fifty per cent of the fee shall be returned to the applicant should the permit be denied or if the permit is canceled within 60 days after issuance and no work has been done. A permit shall remain in effect for one year from date of issuance. 
(c)  Permits may be issued subject to any condition or requirement found by the Health Officer to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(d)  A permit may be canceled or the conditions amended by the Health Officer if he determines that to proceed with the work would result in a public nuisance or the permit holder has violated the terms of the permit or this chapter. 
(OCC § 4-5-18; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.050. - Completion of work. 
The permittee shall notify the Health Officer in writing upon completion of the work and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until such written notification has been received. A final inspection of the work shall be made by the Health Officer and no permittee shall be deemed to have complied with this or his permit until such inspection has been performed. 
(OCC § 4-5-19; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.060. - Notice; cancellation or denial of permit. 
In the event a permit is denied or canceled, the applicant or permit holder shall be given written notice by the Health Officer, which shall specify the reasons for his action and notify the applicant or permit holder of his right to request a hearing before the City Council within ten days. 
(OCC § 4-5-25; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.070. - Notice; public nuisance. 
In the event the Health Officer determines that a well constitutes a public nuisance, he shall mail a written notice to the landowner and the permit holder, if other than the landowner. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the affected property. The notice shall state the specific facts giving rise to such nuisance; the corrective measures deemed necessary; and time, date and place at which a hearing shall be held by the City Council relating thereto, which date shall be not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the date such notice is mailed. The notice shall state that, in the event the City Council determines that a public nuisance exists, a special assessment shall be imposed upon the land for any costs of abatement. 
(OCC § 4-5-26; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.080. - Immediate abatement. 
If the Health Officer finds that immediate action is necessary to prevent impairment of the groundwater or a threat to the health or safety of the public, he may abate the nuisance without giving notice. Within 24 hours after initiating such abatement, the Health Officer shall give notice of a hearing before the City Council in the manner prescribed in section 5.09.070. 
(OCC § 4-5-27; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.090. - Board hearing. 
(a)  At the time fixed for the hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence offered by the landowner and by any other interested person. In the event the City Council finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall direct the Health Officer to take any necessary action to protect the groundwater or the health and safety of the public, unless the situation is corrected by the landowner on or before a date to be specified by the City Council. The costs of such corrective work by the Health Officer shall become a special assessment upon the land pursuant to section 5.09.100. 
(b)  If the City Council finds that a permit was improperly denied or canceled, it shall order the Health Officer to issue or reinstate such permit. 
(OCC § 4-5-28; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Sec. 5.09.100. - Abatement costs a special assessment. 
Upon a finding by the City Council that a well constitutes a public nuisance, all cost of abatement carried out under the terms of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance abatement lien. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code § 38773.1. The City shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. 
(OCC § 4-5-29; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972) 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement liens, Government Code § 38773.1.  
Sec. 5.09.110. - Abatement standards. 
Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction, or abandonment of wells shall be the standards recommended in the State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, Chapter II and future amendments thereto. Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment of cathodic protection wells and electrical grounding wells shall be the standards recommended in the State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1, and future amendments thereto. Well standards may be modified by the Health Officer, with the advice and concurrence of the City Council, where required to cope with the local geological and groundwater conditions. 
(OCC § 4-5-30; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972; Ord. No. 2691, § 1, 7-17-1973)  
Sec. 5.09.120. - Abatement penalty. 
Any person who violates the terms of this chapter or any permit issued hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(OCC § 4-5-31; Ord. No. 2607, § 1, 7-18-1972)  
Chapter 5.10 - Water Quality Control[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, adopted November 10, 2010, amended Chapter 5.10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Chapter 5.10 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 04-01, § 2, adopted May 28, 2004. 
 
Sec. 5.10.010. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe regulations as mandated by the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as amended, including § 402(p)) to effectively prohibit non-stormwater discharges into the storm sewers and to reduce the discharge of pollutants. Human activities, such as agriculture, construction, and the operation and maintenance of urban infrastructure, may result in undesirable discharges of pollutants and certain sediments that may accumulate in local drainage channels and waterways and eventually may be deposited into waters of the United States. This chapter will improve water quality by controlling the pollutants that enter the network of storm drains throughout the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. This chapter also establishes legal authority to establish and enforce best management practices to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by preventing or minimizing non-stormwater discharges to the stormwater drainage system. 
(b)  The Clean Water Act mandates, in part, that municipal separate storm sewer systems, such as in Orange County, obtain permits to "effectively prohibit non-storm water discharges into the storm sewers" and "require controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable." This permitting authority has been delegated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to the State of California, which has authorized the California Water Resources Control Board and its local regulatory agencies, the Regional Water Quality Control Boards, to control non-point source discharges to California's waterways. 
(c)  The San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board has addressed the obligation to implement the Clean Water Act by issuing a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") Permit governing stormwater runoff for the County of Orange, Orange County Flood Control District, and certain of the incorporated cities of Orange County. The City of Rancho Santa Margarita is participating as a "Co-permittee" under the NPDES Permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010)  
Sec. 5.10.020. - Findings. 
(a)  The City of Rancho Santa Margarita is authorized by California Constitution Article XI, Section 7 to exercise the police power of the State to adopt regulations protecting the public health and public safety. 
(b)  The City of Rancho Santa Margarita has determined that a legitimate local purpose is present in complying with the provisions of the NPDES Permit. 
(c)  A reduction in stormwater borne pollution will promote the public health and protect the general welfare of the City by reducing the level of artificial and naturally occurring constituents, which may improve the quality of the waters in this region. 
(d)  The land use authority exercised by the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, pursuant to Government Code Section 65300 et seq., requires regional planning and the adoption of policies protecting the environment through the imposition of reasonable conditions on the use of land. 
(e)  This chapter conforms to the policies and goals of the General Plan adopted by the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, pursuant to California Planning and Zoning Law, for the protection of the portions of watersheds located within Orange County by implementing measures to control erosion, prevent the pollution of streams and other waters, and, to the maximum extent practicable, reduce the discharge of pollutants and runoff flow from urban development. 
(f)  The Subdivision Map Act, Government Code Section 66410 et seq., authorizes the City of Rancho Santa Margarita to regulate and control the design and improvement of subdivided lands and mitigate the burdens of proposed development by imposing reasonable conditions on map approval; 
(g)  California Constitution Article XI, Section 7 and Government Code Section 38660 authorize the City of Rancho Santa Margarita to establish appropriate conditions for the issuance of building permits, which require the installation of improvements reasonably related to the proposed use of property. 
(h)  Government Code Section 38771 authorizes the City of Rancho Santa Margarita to declare as public nuisances undesirable acts which may injure health or cause interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property and to provide for the abatement of the same. 
(i)  The City of Rancho Santa Margarita may commence civil actions, pursuant to 33 U.S.C. Section 1365(a), against any person, private entity, or governmental agency acting in violation of any condition of the NPDES Permit. 
(j)  All industrial dischargers subject to the provisions of the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit and Construction General Permit (referred to collectively herein as the "State general permits") must comply with the lawful requirements of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, which regulate discharges of stormwater to the storm drain system within its jurisdiction. 
(k)  All industrial dischargers subject to the provisions of the State general permits are required to maintain State-approved Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans with active Waste Discharge Identification Numbers on-site and make them available to the City of Rancho Santa Margarita for inspection. 
(l)  All dischargers subject to the provisions of the State Construction General Permit may be required by the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, with the concurrence of the San Diego Regional Water Board, to amend any Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. 
(m)  All industrial dischargers subject to the provisions of the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit are required to maintain a description of the required monitoring program on-site and make it available to the City of Rancho Santa Margarita for inspection. 
(n)  The City of Rancho Santa Margarita has jurisdiction over certain stormwater facilities and other watercourses within the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, and the water discharges into these facilities may be subject to the provisions of the State Industrial General Stormwater Permit; accordingly, the City of Rancho Santa Margarita may certify (but is not required to certify) in writing that regulated dischargers have developed and implemented effective Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans. 
(o)  The City of Rancho Santa Margarita has jurisdiction over certain stormwater facilities and other watercourses within the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, and these facilities may receive stormwater discharges from properties and activities regulated under the provisions of the State general permits, and the City of Rancho Santa Margarita may request that the regulated dischargers furnish information and records necessary to determine compliance with the State general permits and may, upon presentation of credentials and other documents required by law: 
(1)  Enter upon the discharger's premises where a regulated facility is located or where records must be kept under the conditions of the State general permits; 
(2)  Access and copy, at reasonable times, any records that must be kept under the conditions of the State general permits; 
(3)  Inspect, at reasonable times, any facility or equipment related to or impacting stormwater discharge; and 
(4)  Sample or monitor for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the State general permits. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010)  
Sec. 5.10.030. - Definitions. 
Authorized inspector shall mean the City Engineer and persons designated and under his/her instruction and supervision, who is assigned to investigate compliance with, detect violations of, and/or take actions pursuant to this chapter. 
Best management practices or BMPs , as defined in the DAMP, shall mean the best practical and economical measures to control the addition of pollutants to waters of the United States through the application of pollution control practices, technologies, processes, siting criteria, operating methods, or other alternatives. 
City shall mean the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
City Engineer shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
Co-permittee shall mean the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, and/or any one of the 11 municipalities, including the City, which are responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES Permit. 
DAMP shall mean the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, including the City's adopted Local Implementation Plan, as may be amended from time to time. 
Development project guidance shall mean DAMP Chapter VII and the Appendix thereto, entitled Model Water Quality Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Discharge shall mean any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance. 
Discharge exception shall mean the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this chapter, including only: 
(1)  Discharges composed entirely of uncontaminated stormwater. 
(2)  Discharges authorized by current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control Board issued NPDES Permits, State general permits, or other waivers, permits, or approvals granted by government agencies with jurisdiction over such discharges., 
(3)  Stormwater discharges from property for which best management practices set forth in the development project guidance and LIP are being implemented and followed. 
(4)  Discharges to the stormwater drainage system from: 
(a)  Water line flushing, not including discharges for fire suppression sprinkler system maintenance and testing discharges, and provided such discharges are in compliance with all applicable State or Regional Water Quality Control Board permits and/or other local ordinances. 
(b)  Emergency fire fighting activities. 
(c)  Diverted stream flows. 
(d)  Rising groundwater. 
(e)  Springs. 
(f)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to the stormwater drainage system (from leaks in joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance systems). 
(g)  Discharges from potable water sources, provided such discharges are in compliance with all applicable State or Regional Water Quality Control Board permits and/or other local ordinances. 
(h)  Air conditioning condensation. 
(i)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, water from crawl space pumps, foundation drains, or footing drains, provided such discharges are in compliance with any applicable State or Regional Water Quality Control Board general permit for groundwater extraction or similar discharges to surface waters. 
(j)  Individual residential vehicle washing. 
(k)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
(l)  De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges. 
(5)  Stormwater discharges for which the discharger has reduced to the maximum extent practicable the amount of pollutants in such discharge. 
(6)  Discharges authorized pursuant to federal or State laws or regulations. 
In any administrative or legal action taken to enforce this chapter, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action and claims an exception to establish that a discharge was within the scope of this discharge exception. 
Enforcing Attorney shall mean the City Attorney or special counsel, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. For purposes of criminal prosecution, only the City Attorney shall act as the Enforcing Attorney. 
Environmentally sensitive areas or ESAs shall mean the Environmentally Sensitive Areas as defined in the NPDES Permit. 
EPA shall mean the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States. 
Hearing Officer shall mean the City Manager or his or her designee who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue final decisions on the matters raised therein. 
Invoice for costs shall mean the actual costs and expenses of the City, including but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries, and other expenses recoverable under State law, incurred during any inspection conducted pursuant to Section 5.10.060 or where a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, or other enforcement option under Section 5.01.070 is utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter. 
Illicit connection shall mean any man-made conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet, or outlet through which the discharge of any pollutant to the stormwater drainage system occurs or may occur. The term shall not include "legal nonconforming connections" or connections to the stormwater drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made. 
Legal nonconforming connection shall mean connections to the stormwater drainage system existing as of the adoption of this chapter that were in compliance with all federal, State, and local rules, regulations, statutes, and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established, including but not limited to any discharge permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to the Industrial Waste Ordinance, County Ordinance No. 703. 
Local Implementation Plan or LIP shall mean the City's adopted plan implementation of the NPDES Permit. 
Minimum best management practices or minimum BMPs shall mean those minimum best management practices as determined at the discretion of the City Engineer or as required by the DAMP which are the minimum level of activities, practices, and procedures that can be identified as "good housekeeping" to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and United States' waters. Minimum best management practices may include but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from stormwater, operating and maintenance procedures, facility management practices to control runoff, spillage, or leaks of non-stormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage, erosion and sediment control practices, and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the City Engineer determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. The City Engineer may identify and may revise at any time minimum BMPs in his or her discretion. 
New development shall mean all public and private residential (whether single family, multi-unit, or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, and other non-residential construction projects, or grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit, or non-residential plumbing permit is required. 
Non-residential plumbing permit shall mean a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids other than stormwater, potable water, reclaimed water, or domestic sewage. 
NPDES Permit shall mean the currently applicable municipal discharge permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Diego Region, which permit establishes regulations applicable to stormwater runoff in the City. 
Person shall mean any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity, or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee, or representative of any of the above. 
Pollutant shall mean any liquid, solid, or semi-solid substances, or combination thereof, including and not limited to: 
(1)  Artificial materials (such as floatable plastics, wood products, or metal shavings); 
(2)  Household waste (such as trash, paper, and plastics; cleaning chemicals; yard wastes; animal fecal materials; used oil and fluids from vehicles, lawn mowers, and other common household equipment); 
(3)  Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-metals, (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, cyanide, phosphorus, and arsenic), with characteristics which cause an adverse effect on living organisms; 
(4)  Petroleum and related hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease); 
(5)  Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, and recreational facilities, including, stables, show facilities, or polo fields); 
(6)  Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.6, or unusual coloration, turbidity, or odor; 
(7)  Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining, use of sealants and glues, use of lime, use of wood preservatives and solvents, disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes, or stucco fragments, application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator, or battery fluids, construction equipment washing, concrete pouring and cleanup, use of concrete detergents, steam cleaning or sand blasting, use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents, and use of super chlorinated water for potable water line flushing); 
(8)  Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, or total organic carbon; 
(9)  Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractible organic compounds; 
(10)  Those pollutants defined in 33 U.S.C. Section 1362(6); and 
(11)  Any other constituent or material, including but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus, or eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that will interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the State. 
Prohibited discharge shall mean any discharge which contains any pollutant, from public or private property, to: 
(1)  The stormwater drainage system; 
(2)  Any upstream flow, which is tributary to the stormwater drainage system; 
(3)  Any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash, or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal slough; or 
(4)  Any coastal harbor, bay, or the Pacific Ocean. 
The term "prohibited discharge" shall not include discharges allowable under the discharge exception. 
Significant redevelopment shall mean the rehabilitation or reconstruction of public or private residential (whether single family, multi-unit, or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, or other non-residential structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit, or non-residential plumbing permit is required. 
State general permit shall mean either the Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges of Storm Water Associated With Industrial Activities Excluding Construction Activities Permit (State industrial general stormwater permit) or the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated With Construction and Land Disturbance Activities (State construction general permit) and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the EPA revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the California Water Resources Control Board, then the term State general permit shall also refer to any EPA administered stormwater control program for industrial and construction activities. 
Stormwater drainage system shall mean street gutter, channel, storm drain, constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet, or other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the County-wide stormwater runoff system and owned, operated, maintained, or controlled by the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, or any Co-permittee City, and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of stormwater. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010)  
Sec. 5.10.040. - Prohibition on illicit connections and prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Construct, maintain, operate, and/or utilize any illicit connection. 
(2)  Cause, allow, or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(3)  Act, cause, permit, or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow, or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(4)  Discharge non-stormwater, including, but not limited to, runoff from irrigation activities, to the stormwater drainage system, except in compliance with this Chapter. 
(b)  The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the date of enactment of this chapter; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following: 
(1)  For all structural improvements to property installed for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, the expiration of five years from the adoption of this chapter. 
(2)  For all nonstructural improvements to property existing for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, the expiration of six months following delivery of a notice to the owner or occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this chapter. 
(c)  A violation of Subsection (a) shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow, or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(d)  If the Authorized Inspector reasonably determines that a discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the Authorized Inspector may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the 30-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the 30-day period, any such discharge shall constitute a violation of Subsection (a). 
(e)  The owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Subsections 5.10.070(a)(6)—(10), for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the Hearing Officer upon consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters; 
(2)  The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection; and 
(3)  The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 11-28-2018)  
Sec. 5.10.050. - Control of discharges. 
(a)  New development and significant redevelopment. 
(1)  Applicable standards. All new development and significant redevelopment within the City shall be undertaken in accordance with: 
a.  The DAMP, including but not limited to the development project guidance; 
b.  Minimum BMPs and such additional BMPs determined by the City Engineer; 
c.  The NPDES Permit; and 
d.  Any conditions and requirements established by the City engineering department, which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in stormwater runoff from the project site. 
(2)  Imposition of conditions. Prior to the issuance by the City of a grading permit, building permit, or non-residential plumbing permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, the City engineering department shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions, and requirements on the project in accordance with Subsection (a)(1). If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit, or non-residential plumbing permit, the City engineering department shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions, and requirements on the project in accordance with Subsection (a)(1) prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval, or at the City's discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map. 
(3)  Single family residences. Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2), compliance with the development project guidance shall not be required for construction of a single family detached residence unless the City engineering department determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the stormwater drainage system. 
(4)  Compliance with chapter. Compliance with the conditions and requirements of the DAMP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this chapter. 
(5)  Waiver. If the City Engineer determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of stormwater runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for compliance with the provisions of the development project guidance. 
(6)  Implementation of conditions. The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions, and requirements imposed pursuant to Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) on a new development or significant redevelopment project. 
(7)  Violations. Each failure by the property owner or successors or assigns, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions, and requirements imposed pursuant to Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) on a new development or significant redevelopment project shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(8)  Recordation of conditions. The City Engineer may require that the terms, conditions, and requirements imposed pursuant to Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) be recorded with the County Recorder's office by the property owner. The signature of the property owner or any successive owner shall be sufficient for the recording of these terms, conditions, and requirements and a signature on behalf of the City shall not be required for recordation. 
(b)  All construction projects. 
(1)  Construction and grading permits. In addition to the requirements set forth in Subsection (a), prior to the issuance of any construction or grading permit, the authorized inspector may require, as a condition to such permit, the implementation of BMPs to ensure that the discharge of pollutants from the site will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards. Each construction site shall implement such BMPs to ensure that discharges of pollutants are reduced to the maximum extent practicable and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards. All construction and grading activities shall comply with applicable laws, including all applicable City ordinances and the NPDES Permit. 
(2)  BMP implementation. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day to day activities of each construction and/or grading site in the City shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the City Engineer. For those construction sites that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to receiving waters within environmentally sensitive areas, such BMPs shall include such additional controls as the City Engineer may require. Failure to implement and comply with the required minimum BMPs and additional BMPs shall be a violation of this section 5.10.050, and shall be a basis for enforcement action under Section 5.10.070. 
(3)  Inspections. Construction and grading sites, and discharges from such sites and operations, are identified under the NPDES Permit as creating increased impacts to water quality during the rainy season. The authorized inspector is authorized to inspect each high priority construction site at least once weekly during the rainy season, during normal business hours. The Authorized Inspector may further inspect each medium/low priority construction site, at least twice during the rainy season. 
(c)  Minimum BMPs for existing development. 
(1)  Authorization to determine minimum BMPs. The City Engineer is authorized to determine minimum BMPs for existing development, including but not limited to, existing industrial and commercial sites or facilities, homeowner association activities, and residential activities. 
(2)  BMP implementation. Any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property shall implement the minimum best management practices as determined by the Authorized Inspector to prevent and reduce pollutants from entering the stormwater drainage system. In addition, the owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide other reasonable protections from accidental prohibited discharges into the stormwater drainage system or watercourses. Facilities or measures to prevent accidental prohibited discharges shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. Minimum best management practices required by the City shall be on file with and can be obtained from the City by requesting the BMP fact sheets for existing industrial and commercial sites or facilities, homeowner association activities, and residential activities. Failure to implement and comply with the minimum BMPs shall be a violation of this section 5.10.050, and shall be a basis for enforcement action under Section 5.10.070. 
(d)  Cost recovery. The City shall be reimbursed by the project applicant for all costs and expenses incurred by the City in the review of new development or significant redevelopment projects for compliance with the DAMP and other applicable requirements. The City may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant. 
(e)  Litter control—Public and private property. 
(1)  No person shall discard any waste material, including but not limited to common household rubbish or garbage of any kind (whether generated or accumulated at a residence, business, or other location), upon any public or private property, whether occupied, open, or vacant, including but not limited to any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, open area, or point of entry to the stormwater drainage system. 
(2)  Every person occupying or having charge and control of property on which a prohibited disposal of waste materials occurs shall cause the proper collection and disposal of same. 
(3)  The disposal of waste materials creates a danger to public health, safety, and welfare, and otherwise threatens the environment, surface waters, and groundwater; therefore, any owner or occupant of property who fails to remove waste material within a reasonable time may be charged with creating a nuisance upon the property. 
(f)  Fact sheets. The Authorized Inspector shall prepare, circulate for public comment, disseminate, and maintain guidance documents addressing the use of pollution prevention practices and minimum BMPs that are identified by the Authorized Inspector for specific activities and facilities and that also addresses the detection and abatement of illicit connections and prohibited discharges. These guidance documents may set out additional compliance alternatives that in specified circumstances, as approved by the Authorized Inspector, can provide the same environmental protection that is afforded by the minimum BMPs designated by the Authorized Inspector. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010)  
Sec. 5.10.060. - Inspections, scope of. 
(a)  Right to inspect. Prior to commencing any inspection as herein below authorized, the Authorized Inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant. 
(b)  Entry to inspect. The Authorized Inspector may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain, or the stormwater drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(c)  Compliance assessments. The Authorized Inspector may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used, and materials stored on or contained within the property; 
(2)  Identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems, and pollutants; 
(3)  Investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems; 
(4)  Establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; 
(5)  Locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge; and 
(6)  Investigating the condition of any legal nonconforming connection. 
(d)  Portable equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the Authorized Inspector may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck, or other mobile equipment. 
(e)  Records review. The Authorized Inspector may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps, schematics, and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, State general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans, and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming connection, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. 
(f)  Sample and test. The Authorized Inspector may inspect, sample, and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. The Authorized Inspector may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection, or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The Authorized Inspector may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property. 
(g)  Monitoring. The Authorized Inspector may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the stormwater drainage system. 
(h)  Test results. The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the Authorized Inspector. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010)  
Sec. 5.10.070. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. 
(1)  Notice of noncompliance. The Authorized Inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance with Subsection (a)(5). 
a.  The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provision(s) of this chapter or the applicable permit which has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant, and/or person. 
b.  The notice of noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant, and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed 90 days unless the Authorized Inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional 90 days where good cause exists for the extension. 
(2)  Administrative compliance orders. 
a.  The Authorized Inspector may issue an administrative compliance order. The administrative compliance order shall be delivered in accordance with Subsection (a)(5). The administrative compliance order may be issued to: 
1.  The owner or occupant of any property requiring abatement of conditions on the property that cause or may cause a prohibited discharge or an illicit connection in violation of this chapter; 
2.  The property owner subject to terms, conditions, or requirements imposed on a project in accordance with Subsection 5.10.050(a)(1) to ensure adherence to those terms, conditions, and requirements. 
3.  A permittee subject to the requirements of any permit issued pursuant to Article 6 of the County of Orange Ordinance No. 3987 or the Regional Water Quality Control Board to ensure compliance with the terms, conditions, and requirements of the permit. 
4.  Any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge. 
b.  The administrative compliance order may include the following terms and requirements: 
1.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge, including but not limited to a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding, or storage area; 
2.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection; 
3.  Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff; 
4.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent the imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, State of California, or regional agency; 
5.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions, and requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto. 
(3)  Cease and desist orders. 
a.  The Authorized Inspector may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with Subsection (a)(5). A cease and desist order may direct the owner or occupant of any property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this chapter to: 
1.  Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the stormwater drainage system; 
2.  Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter; 
3.  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter; 
4.  Clean up the area affected by the violation. 
(4)  Recovery of costs. The Authorized Inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee, or any other person who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative order, an invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be delivered in accordance with Subsection (a)(5). An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the City for the actual costs incurred by the City in issuing and enforcing any notice or order. 
a.  If any owner or occupant, permittee, or any other person subject to an invoice for costs fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance with Subsection (a)(6), then the Enforcing Attorney may institute collection proceedings. 
(5)  Delivery of notice. Any notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order, or invoice of costs to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in Subsections (a)(6)—(10). 
b.  Delivery shall be deemed complete upon: 
1.  Personal service to the recipient; 
2.  Deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery; or 
3.  Facsimile service with confirmation of receipt. 
c.  Where the recipient of notice is the property owner, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property or as otherwise appears in the current City records. 
d.  Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the Authorized Inspector, a notice of noncompliance or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the property for a period of ten business days. 
(6)  Administrative hearing for notices of noncompliance, administrative compliance orders, invoices for costs, and adverse determinations. Except as set forth in Subsection (a)(8), any person receiving a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, these administrative appeal procedures shall not apply to criminal proceedings initiated to enforce this chapter. 
(7)  Request for administrative hearing. Any person appealing a notice of noncompliance, an administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs, or an adverse determination shall, within 30 days of receipt thereof, may file a written request for an administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution, with the Office of the City Clerk, with a copy of the request for administrative hearing mailed on the date of filing to the Authorized Inspector and the City Attorney. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the Hearing Officer within 45 business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the Hearing Officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted. 
(8)  Administrative hearing for cease and desist orders and emergency abatement actions. An administrative hearing on the issuance of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be held within five business days following the issuance of the order or the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement. A request for an administrative hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement action. 
(9)  Hearing proceedings. The Authorized Inspector shall appear in support of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs, or emergency abatement action, and the appealing party shall appear in support of withdrawal of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs, or in opposition to the emergency abatement action. The City shall have the burden of supporting any enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case. 
(10)  Final decision and appeal. The final decision of the Hearing Officer shall issue within ten business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. The final decision shall include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall commence within 90 days following issuance of the final decision. Notwithstanding this subsection, the final decision of the Hearing Officer in any preceding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within five business days following the conclusion of the hearing. 
(11)  City abatement. In the event the property owner, the facility operator, a permittee, or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued to such owner, operator, permittee, or person pursuant to this chapter, the Authorized Inspector may request the Enforcing Attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition, and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the City in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to Subsection (b)(4). 
(12)  In addition to the administrative remedies described in Subsections (a)(1)—(11), any person violating any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation in accordance with Chapter 1.05 of this Code. The appeal and administrative hearing provisions set forth in Chapter 1.05, rather than the appeal and administrative hearing provisions set forth in this chapter 5.10, shall apply to any administrative citation issued for a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Nuisance. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter, including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. 
(1)  Court order to enjoin or abatement. At the request of the City Manager, City Engineer, or the Authorized Inspector, the Enforcing Attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice to owner and occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the Authorized Inspector shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring. 
(3)  Emergency abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the Authorized Inspector may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance, and restore any property affected by the nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. 
a.  An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public safety or the environment. 
b.  Notwithstanding the authority of the City to conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing pursuant to Subsection (a)(8) hereinabove shall follow the abatement action. 
(4)  Reimbursement of costs. All costs incurred by the City in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses, and all other expenses recoverable under State law, shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance. 
(5)  Nuisance lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. At the discretion of the Authorized Inspector, the Enforcing Attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the County Assessor of a special assessment against the property in accordance with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5. 
(c)  Criminal sanctions. 
(1)  Prosecutor. The Enforcing Attorney may act on the request of the Authorized Inspector to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Infractions. Any person who may otherwise be charged with a misdemeanor under this chapter may be charged, at the discretion of the Enforcing Attorney, with an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 for a first violation, $200.00 for a second violation, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation occurring within one year. 
(3)  Misdemeanors. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions, and requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both. 
(d)  Consecutive violations. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, an administrative compliance order, or a cease and desist order, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith. 
(e)  Non-exclusive remedies. Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the Authorized Inspector or Enforcing Attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter. 
(f)  Citations. 
(1)  Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the Authorized Inspector shall have the authority to cause the arrest of any person committing a violation of this chapter. The person shall be released and issued a citation to appear before a magistrate in accordance with Penal Code Sections 853.5, 853.6, and 853.9, unless the person demands to be taken before a magistrate. Following issuance of any citation the Authorized Inspector shall refer the matter to the Enforcing Attorney. 
(2)  Each citation to appear shall state the name and address of the violator, the provisions of this chapter violated, and the time and place of appearance before the court, which shall be at least ten business days after the date of violation. The person cited shall sign the citation giving his or her written promise to appear as stated therein. If the person cited fails to appear, the Enforcing Attorney may request issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the person cited. 
(g)  Violations of other laws. Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the California Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the Enforcing Attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to 33 U.S.C. Section 1365(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The Enforcing Attorney may notify EPA Region IX, the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board, or any other appropriate State or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter. 
(h)  Injunctions. 
(1)  At the request of the Authorized Inspector, the Enforcing Attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction, of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Order for reimbursement. Any temporary, preliminary, or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the City of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation, and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment, and all other expenses as authorized by law. 
(i)  Other civil remedies. 
(1)  The Authorized Inspector may cause the Enforcing Attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of: (1) all costs incurred in enforcement of the chapter, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages; (2) all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health; and (3) damages for irreparable harm to the environment. 
(2)  The Enforcing Attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the stormwater drainage system from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination, or harm to the environment, public property, or the stormwater drainage system. 
(3)  The remedies available to the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not limit the right of the City to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. 
(j)  Other compensatory action. In settlement of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the Authorized Inspector or City Attorney may, at his or her discretion, impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, or other program identified by the City. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010)  
Sec. 5.10.080. - Interagency cooperation. 
(a)  The City intends to cooperate with other agencies with jurisdiction over stormwater discharges to ensure that the regulatory purposes underlying stormwater regulations promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) are met. 
(b)  The City may, to the extent authorized by law, elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits, and enforcement authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010)  
Sec. 5.10.090. - Miscellaneous. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 1, 11-10-2010)  
Chapter 5.11 - Ambulance Service 
 
Sec. 5.11.010. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to establish general operating procedures and standards for medical transportation services operating within the City in both emergency and other situations, to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible private operators to provide such services in the public interest, and to provide a means for the designation of exclusive operating areas. This chapter is modeled after Division 9, Article I of Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange (County Model Ambulance Ordinance No. 3517; OCC § 4-9-1). 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.020. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
Advanced life support service ("ALS") and basic life support service ("BLS") mean the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
Ambulance means a motor vehicle, helicopter, or similar vehicle, specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged and operated for the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical services, excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations not providing services as defined in this chapter. 
Ambulance service means the activity, business, or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose. 
Ambulance service operator means any person who operates or owns an ambulance service. 
Attendant means a trained, qualified individual who, regardless of whether he or she also serves as driver, is responsible for the care of patients. 
County means the County of Orange, State of California. 
City means the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, California. 
Department means the Emergency Medical Services Agency of the County of Orange or the Health Care Agency of the County of Orange, or as otherwise designated by the Orange County Board of Supervisors. 
Dispatcher means an individual employed by an ambulance service operator responsible for sending an ambulance to provide ambulance service to a patient. 
Driver means an attendant who drives or pilots an ambulance. 
Emergency means a sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life support services, and is a condition in which an individual has a need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency. 
Exclusive Operating Area ("EOA") means the same as defined in Section 1797.85 of the Health and Safety Code, and which is established pursuant to Section 1797.224 of the Health and Safety Code. 
Emergency service means ambulance service performed in response to an emergency. 
Fire Chief means the Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority. 
Health Officer means the Orange County Health Officer or other official designated by the Board of Supervisors of Orange County to perform the Health Officer's functions under this chapter. 
Licensee means an ambulance service operator which has been granted a license under this chapter to provide ambulance service. 
Medical services means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
Paramedic means the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
Patient means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise incapacitated person. 
Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Physician means a medical doctor or osteopath holding the appropriate license or certificate to practice as such within the State of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code. 
Public safety agency means any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the County. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 2, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.030. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator, or to act in such a capacity either directly or indirectly, within the City without possession of a license issued pursuant to this chapter. A license may specify the specific geographical area within the City in which it is valid; provided, however, with respect to EOA's, reference to the EOA by a specific number or similar identification shall be sufficient description of geographic limitation. A license shall be valid for not more than one calendar year or the expiration of the calendar year in which it was issued, whichever is shorter. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any "state of war emergency," "state of emergency," or "local emergency," as defined in the Government Code. 
(2)  Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of the City regardless of destination. 
(3)  Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed-wing airplane. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 3, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.040. - Transfer and term of license. 
(a)  No license issued pursuant to this chapter can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this section: 
(1)  Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to: 
a.  A sole proprietorship; 
b.  A partnership, including any change in the partners; and 
c.  A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise. 
(2)  Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver. 
(3)  A sale or transfer of over ten percent of the assets of a licensee. 
(b)  A licensee may apply to the Health Officer for an amendment to the terms of the license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, licenses may be suspended, revoked, or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 4, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.050. - Applications. 
(a)  Each application for a license shall be accompanied by an application fee, if any, set by the Orange County Board of Supervisors, and be made upon forms prescribed by the Health Officer. 
(b)  Each applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the applicant(s) and the owner(s) of the ambulance(s) and the business and any interest therein; 
(2)  The applicant's training and experience in the transportation and care of patients; 
(3)  The names under which the applicant has engaged, does engage, and proposes to engage in ambulance service; 
(4)  A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicle, a description of the company's program for maintenance of the vehicle, and a description of the vehicle's radio(s); 
(5)  Proof that the applicant has obtained all licenses and permits required by State or local law or regulation for the type of ambulance service proposed, excluding only a license to provide the service for which application is made; 
(6)  The names and qualifications of each attendant, driver, or dispatcher employed, or to be employed, in providing ambulance service; 
(7)  Proof that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application; 
(8)  A description of the applicant company's training and orientation programs for attendants, drivers, and dispatchers; 
(9)  Evidence of such financial responsibility and insurance coverage as may be required by the Health Officer pursuant to regulations adopted in accordance with this chapter; 
(10)  Identification of the geographical area to be served by the applicant, if required by the Department; 
(11)  As to new applications or transfers as specified in this chapter, a fingerprint receipt for each principal of the applicant, issued by the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner, indicating each principal of the applicant has undergone a complete criminal history check, followed by a report from the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner showing no conviction of crimes that would be violations of the provisions of Section 5.11.070(d)(2)-(7); 
(12)  A list of all substations or offices where equipment and personnel are or will be based, including hours of operation; and 
(13)  A description of whether the service proposed by the applicant will include basic life support services or advanced life support service, and, if so: 
a.  The number of basic life support service or advanced life support service units to be deployed on each shift; 
b.  The emergency response area(s) to receive basic life support service or advanced life support service; and 
c.  The provisions, if any, for continuing education of attendants. 
(14)  Such other information as the Health Officer may require in regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials as original applications, except the requirement of subsection (b)(11) above. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 5, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.060. - Investigations. 
Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the Health Officer shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as the Health Officer deems necessary to determine if: 
(1)  The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate, or engage in the provision of ambulance services; 
(2)  The applicant meets the requirements of this chapter and of other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 6, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.070. - Issuance or denial of license. 
(a)  The Health Officer shall issue a license to an applicant if the Health Officer, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this chapter, determines all requirements of this chapter have been met and the license fee, if any, set by the Orange County Board of Supervisors, has been paid. 
(b)  In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed by the Health Officer in writing of the reasons therefor. 
(c)  The licensee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of a license comprehensive automobile liability insurance and professional liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of California, acceptable to the Health Officer, insuring the owner against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from negligent operation or defective construction of such ambulance, or from violation of this chapter or any other law of the State of California, or the United States. Said comprehensive automobile liability policy shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 for combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage. Said professional liability insurance shall be in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00 per person and $1,000,000.00 annual aggregate. Workers' compensation insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the license holder. Before the Health Officer shall issue a license, copies of the policies, or certificates evidencing such policies, shall be filed with the Health Officer. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a 30 day notice to be given to the Department prior to cancellation, modification, or reduction in limits. The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be subject to review and adjustment by the Health Officer pursuant to regulations adopted under this chapter. In the use of helicopters, the equivalent insurance requirements shall apply. 
(d)  Grounds for denial of a license application shall be: 
(1)  Failure to meet the requirements of any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Violation by any principal of an applicant of Penal Code Section 290; 
(3)  Use of narcotics or other controlled substances; 
(4)  Conviction during the preceding seven years of any crime relating to the use, sale, possession, or transportation of narcotics, or other controlled substances; 
(5)  Habitual or excessive use of intoxicating beverages; 
(6)  Conviction during the preceding seven years of any crime punishable as a felony in the State of California; 
(7)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, fraud or intentional dishonesty for personal gain. 
(e)  In determining the effect of any criminal acts on the issuance or denial of a license, the Health Officer shall consider whether the criminal acts are related to the activities of an ambulance service and shall evaluate the rehabilitation of the person(s) involved. The Health Officer shall not consider crimes of which the applicant is, or was, accused but not convicted. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 7, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.080. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Health Officer may suspend or revoke a license for failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard, or requirement of State law or regulation or this chapter, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder. Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license. 
(b)  Before issuing a suspension or revocation, the Health Officer shall give written notice to the licensee. Said notice shall: 
(1)  Specify the reason(s) for which the proposed action is to be taken; 
(2)  Set a hearing for not more than 15 days nor less than seven days after the date of the notice; 
(3)  Specify the date, time, and place of the hearing; and 
(4)  Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for service of such notices, if any. 
(c)  If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the Health Officer may rescind the suspension or revocation at any time. 
(d)  At the hearing, the Health Officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the licensee. 
(e)  The Health Officer may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than 24 hours when the Health Officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceedings, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may request an additional hearing at which the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five days of the licensee's request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order. 
(f)  Hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the Department. At the conclusion of said hearing, the hearing officer shall expeditiously prepare a written summary of the evidence and proposed findings and conclusions for consideration by the Health Care Agency Director. 
(g)  The Health Care Agency Director shall issue a written decision within 30 days after receiving the Hearing Officer's findings and conclusions. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 8, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.090. - Appeal to Orange County Board of Supervisors. 
In the event of denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to request a hearing before the Orange County Board of Supervisors, which shall be requested and conducted in the manner specified in Section 5-2-19 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 9, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.100. - Notification. 
The licensee shall notify the Health Officer within 24 hours after any change in ownership or management of the licensee, or any interruption of service of more than 24 hours duration, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. For purposes of this section, the term "substantial change" shall be as defined by regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 10, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.110. - Personnel standards. 
(a)  A licensee shall only employ personnel to perform the tasks described in this chapter who comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Attendants shall be at least 18 years of age, trained and competent in the proper use of all equipment, and shall hold current Emergency Medical Technician-1A ("EMT-1A"), or State educational equivalent certification in compliance with all State laws, rules, and regulations. Additionally, each attendant shall hold a license from the Health Officer indicating compliance with this section. Applications for such licenses shall be in a form required by the Health Officer and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, established therefore. All applicants for licenses as an attendant shall be subject to the same criminal history review as required for principals of ambulance companies pursuant to this chapter no less than once every four years. Certificates may be denied, suspended, or revoked in the same form and manner as that specified for ambulance service licensees in this chapter. Licenses shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance or certification as an Emergency Medical Technician-1A, whichever is less. Renewal of a license shall be in the same manner as issuance of a new license. 
(c)  Each licensee shall have at least one dispatcher. Emergency ambulance service licensees shall have a dispatcher on a 24 hour-per-day basis and shall adequately train the dispatcher to radio operation and protocols and to the emergency response area(s) served before said dispatcher begins dispatching emergency calls. For purposes of this section, "adequate" training of a dispatcher shall be that which meets State standards, if any, or County requirements. 
(d)  Ambulance drivers shall, in addition to the requirements of this chapter for attendants, maintain an appropriate license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and, if applicable, the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 11, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.120. - Rates. 
No licensee shall charge more than the maximum BLS rates approved by the Orange County Board of Supervisors. No licensee shall charge more than the maximum ALS rates approved by the Orange County Board of Supervisors or the Orange County Fire Authority. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 12, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.130. - Selection of ambulance service licensees for exclusive operating areas. 
(a)  The Orange County Fire Authority shall administer the competitive process, on behalf of the local EMS agency, for the award of EOA contracts within the City. The Orange County Fire Authority shall select and shall enter into contracts with licensees for the provision of ambulance service in response to emergencies in each EOA, unless the City has provided written notification to the Orange County Fire Authority of its intention to retain licensee selection and contracting authority for itself. Such contracts shall provide for one primary contractor per EOA, with such other backup service by other emergency ambulance service providers as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief. In awarding these contracts, the Orange County Fire Authority, or City if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority, shall consider the comparative value of competing proposals in the same fashion as would be the case were the County evaluating proposals from prospective service providers for other governmental activities, including consideration of: 
(1)  The quality of service to be provided; 
(2)  The level of service to be provided; 
(3)  The rates charged for services to be provided; and 
(4)  The cost, if any, to the awarding agency. 
(b)  The Fire Chief shall administer the contracts for ambulance service awarded by the Orange County Fire Authority, or by the City, if applicable, under this section. The Fire chief shall also prepare and keep current EOA lists specifying contract providers for each EOA. The Fire Chief shall include on the list for each EOA the provider that has entered into an ambulance service agreement with the Orange County Fire Authority, or the City, if applicable, as the primary contractor as well as the emergency ambulance service provider(s) who will provide back-up emergency ambulance service for that area. 
(c)  In the event no proposals acceptable to the Orange County Fire Authority, or to the City if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority under the provisions of this section, are received for one or more EOA's, the Orange County Fire Authority, or the City if applicable, shall designate one or more licensees to provide emergency ambulance services for the EOA. From the date of such designation until a regular emergency ambulance service agreement is signed for the affected area(s), provision of emergency ambulance service shall be an express condition of the license, and unreasonable or unjustified refusal of such calls shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  No person shall provide ambulance service in response to, or as a result of, an emergency, unless that person is a licensee specified in each instance by a physician or public safety agency. A licensee thus specified by a physician need not be a contractor selected pursuant to this section. Any ambulance service operator receiving a request for emergency ambulance service from other than a public safety agency shall immediately, by telephone, notify a public safety agency designated by regulation of the request. 
(e)  No licensee responding to an emergency shall transport a patient unless: 
(1)  A paramedic is present at the location of the patient; or 
(2)  A physician is present at the location of the patient and directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic; or 
(3)  A safety qualified employee of the Orange County Fire Authority, or an appropriate employee of a public safety agency designated by regulation, directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic. 
(f)  Unless otherwise directed by a physician present at the location of the patient, a licensee shall transport a patient pursuant to regulations adopted under section 5.11.140. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 13, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.140. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  As to all sections of this chapter except 5.11.130, the Health Officer shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, proposed rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County Emergency Medical Care Committee for comment. 
(b)  As to section 5.11.130, the Fire Chief shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, the Fire Chief's rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County Emergency Medical Care Committee for comment. 
(c)  The Health Officer, the Fire Chief, or their respective designee(s) may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment, and method of operating of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the Health Officer, at least annually. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 14, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.150. - Complaints. 
The Department, the City, any user, subscriber, public safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that an individual has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services, or services provided were not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, may file a written complaint with the Department and the Fire Chief setting forth such allegations. The Department and Fire Chief shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notification. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 15, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.160. - Variance. 
As to all but Section 5.11.130, the Health Officer may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. As to Section 5.11.130, the Fire Chief may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. As to the Health Officer, such variances may include the issuance of a temporary license. No temporary license shall exceed 180 days in duration. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 16, 6-9-2004)  
Sec. 5.11.170. - Violations; penalty. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter by an ambulance service operator shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 17, 6-9-2004)  
Chapter 5.12 - Animal Control, Welfare and License Requirements[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, adopted Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 5.12, §§ 5.12.005—5.12.070, 5.12.200—5.12.290, 5.12.300—5.12.360, 5.12.400, 5.12.410, 5.12.500—5.12.540, 5.12.600, 5.12.610, 5.12.700, 5.12.800—5.12.840, 5.12.900, 5.12.1000—5.12.1090, 5.12.1100—5.12.1140, 5.12.1200—5.12.1240, 5.12.1300—5.12.1370, and enacted a new Ch. 5.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 06-05, § 1, adopted June 14, 2006; Ord. No. 07-02, §§ 1—4, adopted Feb. 28, 2007. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5.12.005. - Application of Chapter. 
Except as may otherwise be provided in Title 9 (Planning and Zoning) of this Code, the provisions of this Chapter 5.12 shall apply and control. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.010. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any animal including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fishes, reptiles and nonhuman mammals. 
Animal event means any commercial property or facility where one or more animals are kept or maintained. 
Animal exhibition means any property where one or more animals are exposed to public view for entertainment, instruction or advertisement for which public admission is charged. Activities conducted primarily for instruction or entertainment of the participants, for which no public admission is charged, are excluded. Animal exhibitions include, but are not limited to, carnivals, tent shows or shows in the open air, or in a hall or building not specifically constructed for theatrical purposes, wherein the carnivals, circuses, dog or pony shows, dramatic, musical or theatrical performances are given to audiences, where at the total attendance does not exceed 2,500 persons. 
Animal facility means any commercial property or facility where animals are kept or maintained for any purpose. 
Animal rental establishment means a place or facility where animals, other than dogs, cats or equines, are kept or maintained for hire. 
Approved rabies vaccine means a vaccine which is approved for use in the animal concerned by the State Department of Health. 
Approved research institution means a college, hospital, university or research laboratory conducting animal research, where the Director has first found and certified in writing that said research is conducted under humane conditions. 
Animal services department means the animal services department for the City of Mission Viejo, authorized and delegated to perform the services and functions described in this Chapter pursuant to contract. 
Cat means traditionally domesticated members of the species felis catus; it excludes other non-traditionally domesticated members of the family felidae. 
City means the City of Rancho Santa Margarita by and through its elected and appointed officers and officials, employees, agents and consultants. 
Commercial means operated or carried on primarily for financial gain or by any non-governmental firm, person or business/entity. 
Commercial stable means any property where equines are sheltered or fed on a commercial basis. 
Dangerous animal means any animal which presents a threat to the safety, well-being or condition of persons or property, as determined by the Director. 
Director means the City of Mission Viejo Animal Services Manager or designee. 
Dog means traditionally domesticated members of the species canis familiaris; it excludes other non-traditionally domesticated members of the family canidae. 
Foster animal means any animal that is temporarily being cared for and housed by a person on any property within the City. 
Garbage means any waste resulting from the care, feeding or disposal of animal(s). This includes and consists in whole or in any part of animal wastes or remains, resulting from any cause, including the handling, preparing, cooking and consuming of food, including the offal from animal carcasses or parts thereof. At all times garbage shall be treated and managed in a safe and sanitary manner. 
Grooming facility means any premises where animals are groomed, brushed, clipped or bathed or otherwise conditioned, as pets and/or for show, on a commercial basis. 
Guard (sentry) dog means any dog utilized, on a commercial basis, to guard any property within the City, for any lawful purpose. 
Guide dog or service dog means a properly trained dog certified by a licensed guide (seeing eye) dog agency and actually being used by a disabled person, including a "guide dog," "signal dog," or "service dog" as those terms are defined in California Civil Code Section 54.1. 
Immediate slaughter means livestock shipped to a public stockyard and released therefrom for slaughter, and also livestock shipped to the premises of a firm regularly engaged in the slaughter of animals under approved inspection. 
Impounded means received into the custody of any animal shelter, or into the custody of the Director or his or her authorized agent or deputy. 
Infectious disease means any infectious, contagious or communicable disease sufficiently dangerous to the public health or to the health of animals within the City to warrant putting into effect the provisions of this Chapter and any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Kennel means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon or wherein five or more cats or dogs, over four months of age, are kept or maintained for any purpose, including places where cats or dogs are boarded, kept for sale or adoption, or kept for hire. Excluded from this definition are veterinary clinics and pet hospitals when animals are being housed for medical care, and animals kept on any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises licensed by the Director to contain additional animals pursuant to Article XI of this Chapter. 
Livestock means any domesticated animal, including but not limited to, poultry, cattle, goats, swine, sheep and equines which are kept in captivity or under the control or ownership of any person for any purpose. 
Neutered or spayed means rendered incapable of reproduction by physical (surgical alteration or the implantation of a device) or other means. To be acceptable, the neutering must be certified to by a licensed veterinarian. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, society, or association, and every officer, agent or employee thereof. 
Pet shop means any place of business where dogs under four months of age or any other animals to be used as pets, are kept for sale. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any of the following: 
(1)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury whether the person and the dog are on or off the property of the owner and/or custodian of the dog. 
(2)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing any injury less severe than a severe injury. 
(3)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal, horse, or livestock. 
(4)  Provocation, or the lack thereof, shall be determined by, and in the sole discretion of the Director. 
Quarantine means the strict confinement of an animal upon the premises of the owner or elsewhere as approved by the Director, and subject to the conditions or requirements of the Director relating to the impoundment. 
Severe injury means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
Stockyard means any stockyard, corral or premises wherein public trading in livestock is carried on, or where yarding, feeding and watering facilities are provided and where federal, state or county inspection is maintained for the inspection of livestock for infectious diseases. 
Tuberculin test means any test approved by the United States Department of Agriculture for the detection of tuberculosis in animals. 
Vicious dog means any dog that, as determined by the Director: 
(1)  Has attacked or bitten a person causing death or physical injury; 
(2)  Has killed or inflicted substantial physical injury to an animal, without provocation, while off the owner's or custodian's property; 
(3)  Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or is a dog trained for dog fighting; or 
(4)  Has twice, within a one-year period, done any of the following, as evidence by credible testimony, oral or written: 
a.  Bitten, attacked or attempted to bite a person; or 
b.  Chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in an apparent attitude of attack. 
Provided, no dog may be determined to be a vicious dog if any such bite, threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner and/or custodian of the dog, was committing or attempting to commit a crime upon the premises occupied by the owner and/or custodian of the dog, was threatening the owner, owner's family, custodian or third person, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or who has, in the past, teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog. 
This definition does not apply to dogs used in military, security or police work while they are actually performing in that capacity. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.015. - Responsibility for administration. 
The City of Mission Viejo, pursuant to contract, by and through the Director, is charged with the administration of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.020. - Rules and regulations. 
The City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita may, by resolution, promulgate any necessary rules and regulations for the administration of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.025. - Enforcement. 
The Director, or his or her duly authorized deputies and agents, are hereby empowered and it shall be their duty to enforce this Chapter and any statute relating to animal control, unless otherwise provided by law. Pursuant to California Civil Code Section 607(g) each of the aforementioned individuals shall have the power to issue notices to appear in court for violations of the aforementioned provisions pursuant to California Penal Code Section 853.6 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.030. - Interference. 
No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of this Chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of his or her official duties. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.035. - Firearms authorized. 
Supervisory and senior animal control officers of the City of Mission Viejo who have successfully completed California Penal Code Section 832 firearms training or other relevant training intended to authorize firearm utilization, are authorized to carry in the City loaded rifles, shotguns and tranquilizer equipment, issued by the City of Mission Viejo, while acting in the course and scope of their employment. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.040. - Disposal of dead animals. 
The owner of any animal which dies shall dispose of the carcass of such animal in a sanitary manner as prescribed by the Director within 24 hours after the owner has knowledge of the animal's death. The Director shall be responsible for the disposal of all dead animals whose ownership cannot be established. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.045. - Violations; infraction; misdemeanor. 
(a)  A violation of this Chapter or any portion or Section thereof shall, in the sole discretion of the City by and through the City Attorney or other authorized personnel, be prosecuted in any manner provided for by law, including, but not limited to, the administrative, civil or the misdemeanor criminal prosecution of the offender (subject to the City's sole and absolute discretion to reduce the same to an infraction, administrative or civil complaint) and as provided for in Title 1 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of Sections 5.12.280 or 5.12.610 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.050. - Inspections. 
The Director, or his or her duly authorized deputies and agents, are authorized to inspect any building or other property for the purpose of enforcing this Chapter or any City, County or State statute relating to animal control. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.055. - Complaints. 
Upon receiving a complaint from any person alleging a violation of this Chapter and upon receiving the name and address of the owner and/or custodian of the animal, if known, an investigation to determine whether a violation exists may be made. If the investigation discloses a violation of this Chapter, prosecution may be initiated against the owner and/or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.060. - Animal care requirements. 
Every person within the City who owns any animal, who has custody for an animal or who owns, conducts, manages or operates any animal establishment for which a license is required by this Chapter, shall comply with each of the following conditions: 
(a)  Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from injury, to contain the animals, and to restrict the entrance of other animals. 
(b)  All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require. 
(c)  All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures wherein animals are housed or maintained shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(d)  No animals shall be without attention for more than 12 consecutive hours. Whenever an animal is left unattended at an animal facility, the telephone number of the animal services department, or the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the care of the animal with a right of access to the facility, shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property. 
(e)  Every reasonable precaution shall be used to ensure that animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any person or means. 
(f)  No condition shall be maintained or permitted that is or could be injurious to the animals. 
(g)  Buildings and enclosures wherein animals are housed or maintained shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent escape of animals. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and the animals from the public. 
(h)  Every animal establishment shall isolate sick animals sufficiently so as not to endanger the health of other animals. Sick animals shall at all times be isolated from the other animals. 
(i)  Every building or enclosure wherein animals are housed or maintained shall be constructed of material easily cleaned and shall be kept in a sanitary condition. The building or enclosure shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required, according to the physical need of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of animals and sanitation. 
(j)  Such person shall take any animal to a licensed veterinarian for examination or treatment, if the Director finds this is necessary in order to maintain the health of the animal and orders the owner and/or custodian to do so. 
(k)  All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations for the animals kept therein. Animals shall have sufficient height and sufficient floor space to stand up, sit down and turn around freely using normal body movements without the head touching the top of the primary enclosure; have the ability to lie down with limbs outstretched and exercise normal postural movement, and move freely as appropriate for the species, age, size, and condition of the animal. However, when freedom of movement would endanger the animal due to a medical condition that has been documented by a licensed veterinarian, temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the animal in a humane manner is permitted. 
(l)  Every violation of an applicable regulation shall be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the Director. 
(m)  Such person shall provide proper shelter and protection from the weather at all times. 
(n)  Such person shall not give an animal any alcoholic beverage, unless prescribed by a licensed veterinarian. 
(o)  Such person shall not allow animals which are natural enemies, temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible, to be quartered together, or so near each other as to cause injury, fear or torment. If two or more animals are so trained that they can be placed together and do not attack each other or perform or attempt any hostile act to the others, such animals shall be deemed not to be natural enemies. 
(p)  Such person shall not allow the use of any tack, equipment, device, substance or material that is, or could be, injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty to any animal. 
(q)  Such person shall give working animals proper rest periods. Confined or restrained animals shall be given exercise proper for the individual animal under the particular conditions. 
(r)  Such person shall not work, use or rent any animal which is overheated, weakened, exhausted, sick, injured, diseased, lame or otherwise unfit. 
(s)  Such person shall not display animals bearing evidence of malnutrition, ill health, unhealed injury or having been kept in an unsanitary condition. 
(t)  Such person shall not display any animal whose appearance is or may be offensive or contrary to public decency. 
(u)  Such person shall not allow any animal to constitute or cause a hazard, or be a menace to the health, peace or safety of the community. 
(v)  Such person shall not violate any condition imposed by the Director on any license issued by the animal services department. 
(w)  No dog or cat under the age of eight weeks shall be brought or shipped into the City for the purpose of adoption, and no such dog or cat shall be offered for adoption. 
(x)  Every dog or cat offered for adoption must be examined by a licensed veterinarian and be certified free of congenital defects, distemper, worms, skin disease, skin and ear mites, and other diseases or conditions which would be injurious to the animal or a potential owner. 
(y)  Every dog or cat offered for adoption shall have been vaccinated against distemper and parvo. A vaccination record providing the date of vaccination, lot number, and manufacturer must be provided to the person adopting the puppy or kitten at the time of adoption. 
(z)  Every dog four months of age or older shall have been vaccinated for rabies. A vaccination record providing the date of vaccination, lot number, and manufacturer must be provided to the person adopting the dog at the time of adoption. 
(aa)  Clean, potable water shall be available to all animals in conformance with the principles of good animal husbandry, unless restricted by a licensed veterinarian. Proof of such veterinarian restrictions shall be presented to the animal services officer upon request. Water receptacles, containers or dispensers shall be kept in a clean and sanitary state at all times. 
(bb)  Food receptacles shall be accessible to all animals unless restricted by a licensed veterinarian and shall be located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. 
Proof of any licensed veterinarian restrictions shall be presented to the animal services officer upon request. Food contaminated by urine shall be discarded and replaced with fresh uncontaminated food. Disposable receptacles may be used but must be discarded after each feeding. Self-feeders may be used for the feeding of dry food, and they shall be kept clean and free of mold, deterioration and the caking of food. 
(cc)  Any other applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.065. - Sale of animals. 
No person shall solicit, peddle, conduct or consummate the sale, exchange, or giveaway of any living animal or animals, and no person shall convey as part of any commercial transaction any living animal or animals in the City except that such activities shall be permitted in a) pet shops and kennels that are duly licensed pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code, and b) at the residence of the conveyor of the animal. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit animal adoption activities at other sites, subject to and provided that all necessary permits and approvals for the location of such animal adoption activity have been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.070. - Prohibiting the feeding of wildlife. 
No person shall feed or in any manner provide food for wild mammalian predator or vector animals including, but not limited to, coyotes, bobcats, mountain lions or rodents. In further amplification, this Section also includes a prohibition on the feeding of animals, including, but not limited to, wild raccoons, foxes, skunks, opossums, rodents, rabbits or hares. This Section does not apply to the feeding of animals under the care of a licensed veterinarian, or rehabilitator, or those kept 1) in the City of Mission Viejo Animal Services Center, 2) by a private, charitable, nonprofit humane society or animal rescue organization, or 3) by an individual who has been authorized by permit or license obtained from the animal services department to care for and feed such animals. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE II. - CONTROL AND LICENSING OF DOGS, CATS, LIVESTOCK, AND OTHER DOMESTIC AND NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS—GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5.12.200. - Restraint of dogs. 
(a)  No person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any dog shall cause or permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, the dog to be upon any private property unless such dog is contained or restrained thereon by a fence, wall, substantial chain, leash not exceeding six feet in length, other appropriate physical restraint, or is under the charge of a person competent to exercise care, custody, and control over such dog. 
(b)  No person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any dog shall cause or permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, the dog to be upon any public property unless such dog be restrained by a substantial chain, or leash not exceeding six feet in length, and is under the charge of a person competent to exercise care, custody, and control over such dog, unless the owner or operator of such public property grants written permission for such dog to be on such property without such chain or leash. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.210. - Dogs on public school property. 
No person having the charge of any dog, except a disabled person with a guide or service dog, shall permit the dog, under any circumstances to be on or within the public school property. This Section, however, does not prohibit the use of dogs on school property for teaching or other school uses, when approved by the school officials. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.220. - Female cats and dogs in season to be confined. 
Every person owning or having charge of any female cat or dog shall strictly confine such animal during its breeding season (i.e., while it is in heat) in a building or other enclosure adequate to keep such cat or dog confined. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.230. - Public nuisance. 
(a) No person shall allow, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by such person, any animal to cause a public nuisance. This includes, but is not limited to, disruptive sound created by barking, howling, crying, neighing, braying or making other sounds that unreasonably disturb other persons in the comfortable enjoyment of their life or property. Such activity is hereby deemed a public nuisance. 
(b)  A dog shall not be deemed a public nuisance if, at any time the dog is making noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property where the dog is situated, or when the dog is being teased or provoked or protecting person(s) or property. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.240. - Public nuisance complaint administrative procedures. 
Upon receiving a complaint alleging a public nuisance as defined in Section 5.12.230, the animal services department shall adhere to the following procedures: 
(a)  Upon receipt by the animal services department of a first complaint, animal services staff will send a letter informing the responsible person about the complaint. 
(b)  For purposes of this Article a "responsible person" is any of the following: 
(1)  A person who allows a violation of or alleged violation of Section 5.12.230 to exist, whether through willful action, failure to act, or failure to exercise proper control over an animal; 
(2)  A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor allows a violation to exist, whether through willful action, failure to act, or failure to exercise proper control over an animal; 
(3)  A person who is the owner of, or a lessee or sub lessee with the current right of possession of and/or control over the, real property in or upon which an alleged violation occurs; or 
(4)  A person includes a natural person or legal entity, including the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, or general partners of a legal entity. 
(5)  There may be more than one responsible person for a violation(s). 
(c)  Upon receipt by the animal services department of a second complaint regarding an animal for which a first notice has been sent, provided at least ten days but no more than 30 days have elapsed from the date of the first letter sent by animal services staff pursuant to subsection (a) above, an animal services officer will be dispatched to issue a notice to comply and to advise the responsible person about possible solutions to rectify the public nuisance. 
(d)  Upon receipt by the animal services department of a third complaint between ten and 30 days after the date of a second complaint pursuant to subsection (b) above, animal services staff will ask the complaining person to obtain, complete and return to the department within ten days of the request a formal witness statement form signed under penalty of perjury attesting to the public nuisance violation. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a formal witness statement form, if the Director finds the responsible person to be in violation of Section 5.12.230, the animal services department will issue an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.05 of this Code in an amount set forth in subsection (g) of Section 5.12.270. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.250. - Private property. 
No person owning or having care, custody, or control of any animal shall permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise proper control, such animal to trespass or be upon any private property of another person without the consent of such person. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.260. - Dogs to be curbed. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge, custody or control of any dog to permit such dog to defecate and to allow the feces to thereafter remain on any public sidewalk, public park or on any other public property or on any private property owned by someone other than the owner or person who has custody or control of the dog. 
(b)  No person having the care, custody, charge or control of any dog shall permit or allow that dog on any public sidewalk, public park or on any other public property, or on any private property owned by someone other than the owner or person who has custody or control of the dog, unless that person has, in his or her possession, a spade, scoop device, plastic bag, or similar implement or container capable of removing any feces deposited by the dog. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, no person will be in violation of this subsection while within 50 feet of a dispenser of bags or similar implements or containers capable of removing any feces deposited by a dog, provided such dispenser is immediately accessible to the person. 
(c)  The owner or person having charge, custody or control of any dog shall ensure that any feces collected or removed pursuant to this Section is deposited or placed into an appropriate waste receptacle or container. 
(d)  The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to: 
(1)  Any dog enrolled and participating in obedience classes or in any show for which the City has issued a special event permit; and 
(2)  Any guide or service dog. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.270. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the administrative citation appeal process set forth in Chapter 1.05 of this Code, any person who receives an administrative citation for a violation of this Chapter may contest it by calling the animal services department within ten days of the issuance date located on the citation and requesting an administrative hearing. The animal owner and/or custodian may contest the citation by denying that a violation occurred. 
(b)  If the administrative citation fine is not paid prior to the assigned date and time of the administrative hearing, the animal owner and/or custodian must personally attend the administrative hearing on the date, time and place scheduled. Failure to personally appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute an abandonment of any defense the animal owner and/or custodian may have to the citation. 
(c)  Hearings shall be conducted by the animal services department on the date assigned by the department. The animal owner and/or custodian and the complainant will be notified of the assigned hearing date, time and location by the department staff. The City of Mission Viejo will provide the parties the hearing procedures and protocols prior to the hearing. 
(d)  The animal owner and/or custodian and the complainant shall each be given the opportunity to present testimony and evidence relevant to the citation. If the animal owner and/or custodian is a juvenile, under 18 years of age, he or she must be accompanied by an adult or legal guardian to the hearing or the administrative hearing will be deemed abandoned by the animal owner and/or custodian. Such abandonment shall also constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies concerning the violation set forth in the administrative citation. 
(e)  The citation itself and accompanying complainant's formal witness statement signed under penalty of perjury attesting to the public nuisance violation provided to the animal services department shall be accepted by the animal services department as prima facie evidence of the violation and the facts stated in such documents. 
(f)  Failure of the animal owner and/or custodian to appear at the hearing, unless the hearing was continued by the animal services department prior to the hearing date, shall constitute abandonment and will require the citation fine to be paid. Failure of the complainant to appear at the hearing, unless the hearing was continued by the animal services department, shall constitute abandonment of the complaint and shall be grounds for dismissal of the public nuisance violation and citation. The complainant's failure to appear shall be noted and mailed to the animal owner and/or custodian and the complainant. 
(g)  Fines for violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fine for first animal nuisance citation issued (per citation) ..... $300.00. 
(2)  Fine for second animal nuisance citation within the same 12-month period ..... 350.00. 
(3)  Fine for third animal nuisance citation within the same 12-month period ..... 400.00. 
(4)  Fine for fourth animal nuisance citation within the same 12-month period ..... 450.00. 
(5)  Fine for fifth animal nuisance citation within the same 12-month period ..... 500.00. 
(6)  Fine for sixth and subsequent animal nuisance citation issued within the same 12-month period ..... 550.00. 
(h)  A late penalty in the same amount of the underlying fine amount due pursuant to subsection (g) of this Section shall accrue and be charged for any fine not paid within 15 days of due date, such that the total amount due is double the unpaid fine amount. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.280. - Public protection from dogs. 
(a)  Dog owners and custodians of dogs shall, at all times, take all reasonable precautions to prevent their dogs from biting, attacking or attempting to bite any person or from interfering with the lawful use of public or private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this subsection (a). 
(b)  Any person owning or having custody or control of a vicious dog commits a violation of this Chapter if, as a result of that person's failure to exercise ordinary care, the dog bites, attacks, wounds or otherwise injures or kills a human being and the owner and/or custodian knew or should have known of the vicious or dangerous nature of the dog. 
(c)  Nothing in this Section shall authorize the bringing of a criminal action pursuant to a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this Section if the bite, attack, attempted bite, injury or threat was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner and/or custodian of the dog; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime upon the premises occupied by the owner and/or custodian of the dog; or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or who has, in the past, teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.290. - Abatement of public nuisances through legal action. 
Nothing in this Article shall prevent the City Attorney from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to the procedures set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE III. - DOG LICENSING 
 
Sec. 5.12.300. - Required. 
(a)  Every person owning or having custody of any dog four months of age or older shall procure for the dog a City dog license from the animal services department. Such license shall be procured within 15 days after the date on which it becomes due. The following are exceptions to the requirement to license: 
(1)  A dog brought into the City for show or other purposes and which leaves the City within 30 days; and 
(2)  A dog maintained in an approved research institution or licensed kennel, provided such dog is owned by the owner or operator of such research institution or kennel. 
Guard (sentry) dogs and dogs that are foster animals are not exempt from this Section. Each such dog must be individually licensed and must wear its City license tag securely fastened to a collar or harness whether or not the dog is kenneled in the City. 
(b)  No dog shall be licensed without proof of a current, approved rabies vaccination. No license term will expire later than the expiration date of the rabies vaccination. An owner may purchase a license for six or 12 months, depending upon the date and kind of vaccine used as per the City of Mission Viejo's policy, upon payment of the fee established by the City of Mission Viejo. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.310. - Wearing of tag required. 
(a)  Each dog required to be licensed pursuant to this Article shall, at all times, wear the current license tag assigned to that dog, except: 
(1)  When the dog is physically confined within the premises of the owner or other person authorized to have custody; 
(2)  When the dog is confined in a vehicle or cage; 
(3)  When the dog is participating in any animal exhibition, field trial or competition; or 
(4)  When the dog is confined in a licensed kennel or veterinary hospital, in which case the license tag number shall be recorded and placed nearby so that it is readily identifiable with the dog to which it belongs; or if not licensed, that fact shall be clearly indicated on the facility's records. 
(b)  A license tag shall not be removed from any dog without the consent of the owner or other person authorized to have custody thereof. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.320. - Renewal. 
Dog licenses not purchased or renewed within 15 days after expiration, or the date on which they become due pursuant to Section 5.12.300, shall be considered delinquent and a late fee as determined by the City of Mission Viejo shall be added to the cost of the new license. The Director may waive the above late fee if he or she determines the applicant made a reasonable effort to comply with the above deadline. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.330. - Dog license; transfer of ownership. 
Upon the transfer of ownership of any licensed dog, the license may be transferred to the new owner provided that the Director is notified within 15 days, in writing, of such transfer of ownership, and the name and address of the new owner is provided. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.340. - False or stolen documents illegal. 
No person shall make use of or have in his or her possession or under his or her control a stolen, counterfeit or forged dog license receipt, dog license tag, rabies vaccination certificate, anti-rabies-inoculation-deferment form, or other form issued in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.350. - Display of certificates required upon demand. 
Every person shall, upon demand by the Director, produce for inspection any current rabies vaccination certificate or dog license tag issued pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.360. - Number of dogs permitted. 
Every person owning or having custody of five or more dogs, over the age of four months, for the purpose as described in Section 5.12.1100, must obtain an additional animal license as required under Article XI of this Chapter 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE IV. - CAT LICENSING 
 
Sec. 5.12.400. - Generally. 
The owner of any cat may, upon submission of proof of rabies vaccination, certified to by a licensed veterinarian, and upon payment of the fee established by the City of Mission Viejo, be issued a license certificate and tag. No person shall remove a registration tag from a cat without the consent of the owner. Licensing shall be valid for the period of the rabies vaccination. The obtaining of such a license shall be optional on the part of the owner, except as provided in Section 5.12.360. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.410. - Number of cats permitted. 
Every person owning or having custody of five or more cats, over the age of four months, for the purpose as described in Section 5.12.1100, must obtain an additional animal license as required under Article XI of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL 
 
Sec. 5.12.500. - Dog vaccination required. 
Every person owning or harboring a dog four months of age or older, for 15 days or more, shall, if not currently vaccinated, have such dog vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian with a vaccine approved by the State Department of Health. Upon approval of the Director, dogs that are ill may be given temporary deferment from the rabies vaccination requirements of this Section if given an anti-rabies deferment from a licensed veterinarian; old age of the dog, however, shall not be a basis for such deferment. Such a deferred dog shall be vaccinated within ten days of the conclusion of the deferment period. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.510. - Quarantine. 
(a)  The State Director of Health has declared the City a rabies area. The Director is authorized under state law to quarantine suspected rabid animals. The Director or his or her authorized deputies or agents are hereby empowered to enter upon any private property, including the home or residence where the animal is kept or has strayed, to inspect and, if necessary, to seize and impound any animal suspected of being rabid for a period of 14 days (ten days for dogs and cats). The impounding officer shall make reasonable effort to immediately notify the owner and/or custodian of the animal before it has been impounded and the address of the facility to which it will be taken. If the owner and/or custodian is not present at the time of impounding, the above notice shall be posted on the property of such owner and/or custodian, if known. In lieu of impounding the animal, the Director may, by serving a written notice upon the owner and/or custodian, require the owner and/or custodian to quarantine the animal for such period. 
(b)  No person shall disobey any quarantine order issued by the Director or remove from its place of confinement any animal under quarantine without the written permission of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.520. - Duty to report. 
Any person having knowledge of the location of an animal suspected of having rabies, or of any person having been bitten or scratched by any warm-blooded mammal, or of any signs of disease or unusual behavior in any animal under quarantine, shall immediately report such facts to the Director. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.530. - Proof of vaccination. 
No person who owns or harbors any dog shall fail or refuse to produce for inspection his or her copy of the rabies vaccination form, anti-rabies inoculation deferment form, or health certificate upon demand by any person charged with the enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.540. - Duty of person performing vaccination. 
Each duly licensed veterinarian shall complete and sign a rabies certificate in triplicate after vaccinating any dog. The veterinarian shall keep one copy and shall give one copy to the owner of the vaccinated dog, which the owner shall retain in his or her possession. The veterinarian shall file the other copy with the Director within the calendar month in which the vaccination occurred. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 5.12.600. - Wild, exotic, dangerous and nondomestic animals. 
(a)  No person shall have, keep, or maintain any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal without first applying to and receiving a license from the Director. The Director shall by regulation determine those animals to be covered by this Section. The keeping or maintenance of such animals shall also conform to Title 9 of this Code. 
(b)  The Director shall issue a license to any person for the keeping or maintaining of any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal upon receipt of the fee established by the City of Mission Viejo and when, in the Director's opinion, such animal may be kept or maintained without endangering its safety and comfort and the safety and comfort of any person or property; provided, however, that the Director may require any such animal to be properly caged or tethered and may make such additional rules and regulations that may be necessary and proper under the circumstances. The Director may revoke any such license for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or of any of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or when it is reasonably determined by the Director that the safety or comfort of such animal or any person or property is endangered by the keeping of any such animal. The provisions of Section 5.12.1080 shall govern appeals from the denial or revocation of a license under this Section. 
(c)  The owner and/or custodian of such animal shall give written notice to the Director prior to the transfer, trade or barter of the animal or its progeny. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.610. - Declaration and possession of vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  If the Director has cause to believe that a dog is a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of Section 5.12.110, the Director may tentatively find and declare such dog a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(2)  Upon tentatively finding and declaring that a dog is a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog, the Director shall notify the owner and/or custodian in writing of the Director's tentative finding and declaration. 
(3)  The notice shall inform the owner and/or custodian of such dog that he or she may request a hearing in writing before the Director within five working days of receipt of such notice to contest the tentative finding and declaration. Any such hearing shall be requested and conducted as provided in subsection (d) of this Section. 
(4)  Failure of the owner and/or custodian to request a hearing pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this Section shall result in the declaration becoming final. 
(5)  The possession or maintenance of a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog, or the allowing of any such dog to be in contravention of this Chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The Director is hereby authorized and empowered to impound and/or abate any vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog independently of any criminal prosecution or the results thereof by any means reasonably necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public, including, but not limited to, the destruction of the dog or by the imposition upon the owner and/or custodian of specific reasonable restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the dog. The restrictions and conditions may include but are not limited to: 
a.  Obtaining and maintaining liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 against bodily injury or death or damage to property and furnishing a certificate or proof of insurance by which the Director shall be notified at least ten days prior to cancellation or nonrenewal or, at the owner's or custodian's option, the filing with the Director of proof of a bond in the amount of $1,000,000.00, to be able to respond in damages. 
b.  Requirements as to size, construction and design of the dog's enclosure. 
c.  Location of the dog's residence. 
d.  Requirements as to type and method of restraints and/or muzzling of the dog. 
e.  Photo identification or permanent marking of the dog for purposes of identification. 
f.  Requirements as to the posting of a warning notice or notices conspicuous to the public warning persons of the presence of a vicious dog. 
g.  Payment of a fee or fees as established by the City of Mission Viejo to recover the costs of enforcing the provisions of this Article as applied to the regulation of vicious dogs. 
(b)  Notification of right to hearing. At least five working days prior to impoundment and/or abatement of a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog, the Director shall provide written notification to the owner and/or custodian of his or her right to request a hearing in writing to determine whether grounds exist for such impoundment and/or abatement. If a hearing is requested, the impoundment and/or abatement hearing may be held in conjunction with the hearing provided for in subsection (a) of this Section. If the owner and/or custodian requests a hearing prior to impoundment and/or abatement, no impoundment and/or abatement shall take place pending a decision by the Director following a hearing, except as provided in subsection (c) of this Section. Pending such impoundment and/or abatement hearing and decision by the Director, the Director may order the owner and/or custodian to keep the dog within a substantial enclosure or securely attached to a chain or other type of control which the Director may deem necessary under the circumstances. The Director may also order the owner and/or custodian to post and keep posted upon the premises where such dog is kept under restraint, a warning notice pending such impoundment and/or abatement hearing and decision by the Director. The form, content and display of such notice shall be specified by the Director. Any hearing under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with subsection (d) of this Section. 
(c)  Immediate impoundment. When in the opinion of the Director immediate impoundment is necessary for the preservation of animal or public health, safety or welfare, or if the dog has been impounded under other provisions of this Code or pursuant to state law, the pre-impoundment hearing shall not be required; however, the owner and/or custodian shall be given written notice allowing five working days from receipt of such notice to request in writing an abatement hearing. If requested, a hearing shall be held within five working days of receipt of the request by the Director and the dog shall not be disposed of prior to the decision of the Director following such hearing. A hearing under this subsection (c) shall be conducted in accordance with subsection (d) of this Section except as otherwise indicated. If, after five working days following receipt of such notice, no written request for a hearing is received from the owner and/or custodian, the dog in question shall be disposed of under applicable provisions of law. 
(d)  Request for and conduct of hearings. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this Section, the Director shall conduct a hearing within 15 days following receipt of a written request from the owner and/or custodian requesting a hearing under this Section, and notice of the time, date and place thereof shall be mailed to the person requesting the hearing at the address given in the hearing request, at least ten days prior to the hearing. The Director may appoint a hearing officer to take evidence, summarize the evidence presented and report his findings and recommendations based on such evidence to the Director, or the Director may personally conduct the hearing. 
(2)  At the hearing each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses, impeach any witness, and to rebut the evidence against him. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions, and irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(3)  Within 15 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the Director shall determine, on all the evidence presented to the Director, or on the summary of evidence and findings of fact and recommendations of the person holding the hearing, whether any designation, impoundment and/or abatement under this Section should be rescinded or amended. Within five working days following such decision, the Director shall notify in writing the person requesting the hearing of his determination as to any issue as to which the hearing was requested. 
(e)  Change of circumstances. In the event of changed circumstances, the Director may amend or rescind any abatement and/or impoundment imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(5) of this Section. Any such revision to the abatement and/or impoundment due to changed circumstances shall be subject to the same notice, hearing and other procedural requirements as required for imposing an initial abatement and/or impoundment set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this Section. 
(f)  Change of ownership, custody and/or residence. Owners of a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog who sell or otherwise transfer the ownership, custody or residence of the dog shall at least ten days prior to the sale or transfer, inform the Director in writing of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner, custodian and/or residence and the name and description of the dog. The owner shall, in addition, notify the new owner and/or custodian in writing of the details of the dog's record, terms and conditions of maintenance and provide the Director with a copy thereof containing an acknowledgement by the new owner and/or custodian of his or her receipt of the original. The Director shall notify the new owner and/or custodian in writing of any different or additional restrictions or conditions imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(5) of this Section as a result of the change of ownership, custody or residence. The imposition of any such different or additional restrictions or conditions shall be subject to the same notice, hearing and other procedural requirements as required for imposing an initial abatement and/or impoundment set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this Section. 
(g)  Possession unlawful. It is unlawful to have custody of, own or possess a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog unless the dog is restrained, confined or muzzled so that it cannot bite, attack or cause injury to any person or property. 
(h)  Declared vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or custodian of a dog declared vicious or potentially dangerous pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section to fail to comply with any requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(5) of this Section. If a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog escapes, the owner and/or custodian shall immediately notify the Director and make every reasonable effort to recapture it, including assisting the Director, animal services officers, and City in all recapture efforts. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE VII. - ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 5.12.700. - Impoundment by Director. 
(a)  The Director and his or her duly authorized deputies and agents may take into custody: 
(1)  Any animal kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Code, any regulation adopted thereunder, or any state statute. 
(2)  Animals running at large contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or any state statute. 
(3)  Sick, injured, stray, unwanted animals, for which the owner and/or custodian cannot be found or is unable or unwilling to provide proper care. 
(4)  Animals quarantined for which no other place of quarantine is acceptable to the Director. 
(5)  Animals delivered or requested to be impounded by a peace officer, or public officer or employee as defined in Penal Code § 836.5. 
(6)  Any wild animal found to be at large upon any public property, or upon request of the owner or tenant, found to be at large upon private property. 
(7)  Any other animal authorized to be impounded under this Chapter. 
(b)  The Director may place animals which are taken into custody in the City of Mission Viejo Animal Services Center or other facility designated by the Director, except that animals impounded pursuant to subsection (a)(6) above may be summarily destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.710. - Retention without owner's consent. 
No person shall, without the consent of the owner, hold or retain possession of any animal for more than 24 hours without first reporting the possession of such animal to the Director, giving their name and address and a true description of the animal, and then surrendering such animal to the Director upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.720. - Removal of animals from animal shelter prohibited. 
No person shall remove any animal from the custody of the Director or from the City of Mission Viejo Animal Services Center without permission from the Director to do so. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.730. - Redemption of animals from animal shelter. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by state law or this Chapter, when any animal, other than an animal abandoned by its owner, is impounded pursuant to this Article, the Director shall, within 12 working hours after impounding such animal, notify the owner, if known, of the location of such animal. The notification shall be by mail with postage fully prepaid thereon, together with any other reasonable means. 
(b)  Any impounded animal may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the fees established by the City of Mission Viejo. The owner must also demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that they are the owner of the animal, and that they can keep such animal in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(c)  If a licensed animal is not redeemed within ten days of impoundment, excluding City of Mission Viejo holidays and the day of impoundment, it shall be deemed abandoned and the Director may sell, release, or destroy such animal pursuant to the regulations established in this in this Article. If an unlicensed animal is not redeemed within five days of impoundment, excluding City of Mission Viejo holidays and the day of impoundment, it shall be deemed abandoned and the Director may sell, release, or destroy such animal pursuant to the guidelines established in this in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.740. - Sale of unredeemed animals. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by state law or by this Chapter any unredeemed animal shall be deemed to have escheated to the City of Mission Viejo and thereafter may be sold by the Director upon payment of the fees established by the City of Mission Viejo. 
(b)  An unredeemed dog or cat which has not been spayed or neutered shall not be sold or given away, unless the deposit specified in Section 5.12.760 has been received. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.750. - Disposition by euthanasia. 
Any impounded animal which has not been redeemed or adopted may be disposed of by euthanasia. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.760. - Animal shelter. 
No humane shelter or shelter operated by a society for the prevention of cruelty to animals shall adopt or give away any dog or cat that has not been spayed or neutered, unless a spay/neuter deposit is made at the time of adoption or give away. The deposit will be refunded to the person adopting or receiving the dog or cat when a notice is received by the shelter from a licensed veterinarian that the spay or neuter has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.770. - Sale, give away, acceptance and/or barter of animals on animal shelter property. 
No person shall sell, barter or give away, nor shall any person buy, accept or take possession of any animal on premises upon which a municipally owned or operated animal shelter is located, including adjacent parking areas, without the written permission of the Director. The Director may define the premises covered by this Section and cause those areas to be posted so as to advise persons of the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE VIII. - ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE 
 
Sec. 5.12.800. - Animal defined. 
"Animal", as used in this Article only, shall not include a cat or dog, but shall include livestock. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.810. - Staking or grazing. 
No person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any animal shall cause or permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such animal to be placed, staked or to graze or be upon the land of another without the written consent of the owner or other authorized person, or upon public lands or highways or to allow any such animal to run at large. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.820. - Impounding livestock. 
The Director may seize and impound any animal found on any premises in violation of Section 5.12.810 and shall have a lien upon such animal sufficient to secure payment of all expenses incurred by reason of the Director's seizing, keeping and caring for such animal. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.830. - Sale of unclaimed animals. 
If no person appears and claims the animal impounded under this Article within five days, or if a person does appear to claim the animal impounded within such time but fails to pay the Director the expenses as provided in Section 5.12.820, the Director shall proceed to sell or cause to be sold such animal, except a bovine, at public sale in accordance with the general procedure provided in the law concerning the sale or execution of personal property. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.840. - Animals valued at less than $20.00. 
If the animal impounded under this Article is of a value less than $20.00 and has not been claimed, the Director may, after the expiration of three days from the date of seizure, sell such animal, except a bovine, at private sale without notice. In the alternative, the Director may dispose of the animal, except a bovine, in any humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE IX. - KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 5.12.900. - Livestock fences. 
Every owner, keeper, custodian or harborer of livestock shall erect and/or maintain a fence as herein described to contain and confine, consistent with zoning requirements, all livestock kept or maintained on his or her premises. Such fence shall be sufficiently good, strong and substantial as to prevent the ingress and egress of livestock. No wire fence may be considered a good and substantial fence within the meaning of this Section unless it has three tightly stretched barbed wires securely fastened to posts of reasonable strength, firmly set into the ground not more than one rod apart, one of which wires shall be at least four feet above the surface of the ground. Any kind of wire or other fence of height, strength and capacity equal to or greater than the wire fence herein described is a good and substantial fence within the meaning of this Section. Cattle guards of such width, depth, rail spacing and construction as will effectively turn livestock are also a good and substantial fence. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL LICENSING PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 5.12.1000. - Applications for licenses. 
The Director shall develop and manage an animal facility licensing process and receive all applications for animal licenses. The Director thereafter shall provide such application forms as are necessary for the convenience of the City, public and the economic and efficient administration of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1010. - License fees. 
The City of Mission Viejo shall establish the amount of fees to be charged for the application and/or issuance of an animal facility license. Such fees shall be payable in full and shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1020. - Duration of license. 
Each animal facility license shall be in effect for one year from the date on which it was issued, unless otherwise provided by the City of Mission Viejo. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1030. - Reasons for denial. 
The Director shall deny the application for an animal facility license if it is found that: 
(a)  The applicant does not fulfill the specific requirements for such license as set forth in this Chapter. 
(b)  The applicant has made any false, misleading, or otherwise deceptive statement in the application. 
(c)  The applicant is not a fit person to carry on the licensed animal facility business, as determined by specific and definite evidence in the record. 
(d)  The issuance of an animal facility license to the applicant, or at the location desired, would be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1040. - Form of license. 
The animal facility license and each duplicate thereof shall contain the date of issuance, the date of expiration, the location(s) of the licensed activity, the signature of the Director, and such other matters as are specified in this Chapter and as the Director deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1050. - Display of license. 
Each animal facility licensee shall display his or her license or duplicate license in a prominent location in each licensed establishment; or if there is none in the City, shall carry his or her license on the licensee's person at all times when conducting the licensed animal facility or animal-related business; or, if a vehicle is licensed, in such vehicle; and each licensee shall display his or her license to any peace officer so requesting to see it. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1060. - Revocation of license. 
When the Director has issued an animal facility license under the terms of this Article, the same may be revoked at any time thereafter by the Director if the Director becomes satisfied that the conduct of the licensee's animal facility does not or will not comport with the public welfare for any reason or that the same has been conducted in an illegal, improper or disorderly manner, or in a manner substantially different than that described in the licensee's application, or for any other reason for which the application could have been denied. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1070. - Licenses not transferable. 
No animal facility license issued under the terms of this Article shall be transferable or used in conjunction with any activity other than the licensed animal establishment business, and no such license shall be displayed by any person other than the licensee or his or her employee, nor at any location other than that indicated in the license or application. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1080. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person whose application for an animal facility license is denied, or whose license is revoked, under the terms of this Article, by the Director, may appeal to the City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. The appeal shall be made by verified, written declaration to the City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, received by the City Clerk within 30 days of the action appealed from. The City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita shall hold a hearing on such appeal, and notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the licensee or applicant at the address given in the license application at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. For the purpose of the hearing, the City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita may appoint any qualified hearing officer to take evidence offered by the applicant and the Director concerning the denial or revocation and summarize the evidence presented and report his findings and recommendations based on such evidence to the Council, or the Council may itself take such evidence. 
(b)  The following rules of procedure shall apply: 
(1)  Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(2)  Each party shall have these rights: to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses covered in the direct examination, to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him or her to testify, and to rebut the evidence against him or her. If the respondent does not testify in his own behalf, he may be called and examined as if under cross-examination. 
(3)  The hearing will be informal and not be conducted according to judicial rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(c)  The Mayor of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita shall, at the request of the issuing officer or the applicant, or their attorneys, issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum to compel the attendance of witnesses at the hearing. 
(d)  The City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita shall determine, on all the evidence presented to it, or on the summary of evidence and findings of fact and recommendations of the person holding the hearing, whether the license or permit should be issued, or whether such revoked license should be reinstated and shall direct the issuing officer to act accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1090. - Licenses required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to maintain additional or unusual animals, as specified in Article XI, or to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on any of the following animal events, facilities, businesses, practices, professions, or occupations within the City without first having obtained a license therefor in accordance with this Chapter: 
(a)  Animal exhibition; 
(b)  Animal rental establishment; 
(c)  Additional animal, per Section 5.12.360 and 5.12.410; 
(d)  Commercial stable; 
(e)  Grooming facility; 
(f)  Kennel; 
(g)  Pet shop; 
(h)  Animal event. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE XI. - ADDITIONAL OR UNUSUAL ANIMAL LICENSE 
 
Sec. 5.12.1100. - Purpose. 
The additional or unusual animal license is established to permit the keeping or maintaining as a pet or for the personal utilization by members of the family residing on the premises the following: 
(a)  Wild or domestic animals not specifically classified which will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare, subject to any land use limitations, restrictions, or requirements imposed by Title 9 of this Code; and 
(b)  Domestic or wild animals exceeding the number of animals specified in Section 5.12.360 and 5.12.410, and except as may otherwise be restricted by Title 9 of this Code, which will not be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of such site. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1110. - Application—Filing. 
Any person desiring an additional or unusual animal license may file an application, together with any fees established by the City of Mission Viejo, with the Director, except that no application shall be filed or accepted if final action has been taken within one year prior thereto by the Director on an application requesting the same, or substantially the same license. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1120. - Issuance of license. 
The Director shall grant an additional or unusual animal license when the following criteria are met: 
(a)  That the requested animal or animals at the location proposed will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare; 
(b)  That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the animal or animals requested without material detriment to the use, enjoyment or valuation of the property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site; and 
(c)  That the owner and/or custodian has complied with, and the maintenance of animals at the location proposed will comply with, any other applicable laws, including without limitation Title 9 of this Code. 
The Director shall deny the application where the information submitted by the applicant fails to substantiate these criteria to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1130. - Conditions. 
The Director, in approving an application for an additional or unusual animal license, may impose such reasonable conditions as are deemed necessary to ensure that such animals will be kept or maintained in accordance with the findings required by Section 5.12.1120 or the requirements of Section 5.12.060. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1140. - Limitations on and duration of license. 
(a)  Each individual additional or unusual animal must be licensed under this Article. An additional or unusual animal license shall specify the number and types of animals authorized to be kept on the parcel, and shall contain any conditions deemed necessary by the Director. 
(b)  The additional or unusual animal license is non-transferable and must be renewed annually. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the requirements set forth in this Chapter, regulations promulgated by the City of Mission Viejo, or conditions imposed by the Director shall constitute cause for denial or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE XII. - LICENSING OF ANIMAL FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 5.12.1200. - Regulations. 
All animal facilities must comply with the requirements of Section 5.12.060. In addition, the City of Mission Viejo may establish regulations governing the construction and maintenance of animal facilities licensed under this Chapter, including animal exhibitions, animal rental establishments, kennels, grooming facilities and pet shops. Failure to comply with such regulations shall constitute cause for denial or revocation of such license. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1210. - Dog kennel. 
In addition to complying with Section 5.12.210, holders of a dog kennel license must comply with the following additional requirements: 
(a)  Dog kennel runs may be of concrete, provided with adequate draining for proper sanitation, or, if sand or pea gravel is used, droppings must be picked up and disposed of and the runs treated periodically with an effective disinfectant. 
(b)  All dogs under the custody or control of a dog kennel must be vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.12.500. Upon the sale of any dog for which a kennel has obtained a vaccination pursuant to this Section, the owner of such kennel or pet shop shall provide the purchaser of such dog with the certificate of vaccination. 
(c)  An individual license shall be obtained for each dog, in addition to a kennel license, when such dog is not kept exclusively in a kennel run or cage. No individual license shall be required for any dog in transit, or when attending a dog show in the care of a kennel representative. 
(d)  The holder of a dog kennel license shall keep available for inspection, on the premises, a record that shall show: 
(1)  The name, current address and telephone number of the owner of each animal kept at the kennel; 
(2)  The date such animal entered the kennel; 
(3)  The reason for such animal being at the kennel, such as for boarding, sale, breeding or grooming; 
(4)  The description of the animal, including its age, breed, sex and color; and 
(5)  Vaccination for the prevention of distemper and parvo, date of vaccination, lot number, and manufacturer. 
As a part of such record, a current, valid rabies certificate shall be maintained for every dog over four months of age so long as such dog is kept at the kennel. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1220. - Cat kennel. 
In addition to complying with Section 5.12.060, holders of a cat kennel license must comply with the following additional requirements: 
(a)  The cat kennel operator shall keep all cats therein under proper confinement on the premises and shall not cause, permit or allow such cats to be or to run at large. 
(b)  An individual license shall be obtained for each cat, in addition to a kennel license, when such cat is not kept exclusively in a kennel run or cage. No individual license shall be required for any cat in transit, or when attending a cat show in the care of a kennel representative. 
(c)  Each cat must have been vaccinated with a FVRCP vaccine to prevent feline distemper/panleukopenia. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1230. - Pet shop. 
In addition to complying with the requirements of Section 5.12.060, the holder of a pet shop license shall obtain a rabies vaccination for each dog within its custody or control in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.12.500. Upon the sale of any dog for which a kennel or pet shop has obtained a vaccination pursuant to this Section, the owner of such kennel or pet shop shall provide the purchaser of such dog with the certificate of vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1240. - Veterinary hospitals and clinics. 
Veterinary hospitals and veterinary clinics shall be exempt from the provisions of this Title with regard to those activities conducted pursuant to any license or permit issued by the state. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
ARTICLE XIII. - ANIMAL EXHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 5.12.1300. - Scope. 
All animal exhibitions and animal events shall comply with Section 5.12.060 and the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1310. - Food service. 
All food handling and food preparation at any animal exhibition shall meet the requirements of the California Restaurant Act, Health and Safety Code § 28520 et seq., and applicable county health ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1320. - Toilet facilities. 
Toilets at any animal exhibition shall be either water-flush or the chemical-type. The chemical-type toilets shall be serviced by a licensed vacuum truck. An adequate number of toilets for each sex shall be provided according to the following table: 
	Number of persons in attendance 
Number of 
toilets required 	Male 	Female 
1 	1—100 	1—100 
2 	101—200 	101—200 
3 	201—400 	201—400 
	Over 400, add 1 toilet for each 
additional 500 males and 1 for each 
additional 300 females. 
 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1330. - Animal safekeeping. 
All livestock, such as ponies, dogs, monkeys or other animals, are to be kept tied or in cages, so as not to endanger human life or destroy growing crops or other property adjoining the exhibition or event. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1340. - Water supply. 
All water supplied for domestic use at an animal exhibition or animal event shall be from an approved source of potable water. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1350. - Fly control. 
Fly breeding shall be controlled by removing all organic waste daily from the premises of an animal exhibition or animal event. This includes cleaning of the vehicles, upon arrival, that transport the animals. Insecticides, both residual and quick knockdown sprays, shall be available and used as directed by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1360. - Final cleanup. 
All manure, garbage, trash or other types of refuse shall be removed from the premises immediately after the last showing of any event at an animal exhibition or animal event. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Sec. 5.12.1370. - Safety. 
All electrical wiring, machinery, lighting and other electrical devices, tents, grandstands, amusement rides, compressed gas containers, inflammable liquids and any and all other structural, mechanical, electrical and chemical materials, devices, structures or installations at an animal exhibition shall conform in all respects to the building and safety standards of the City's Building and Fire Codes. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 1-11-2017)  
Title 6 - Public Safety and Welfare  
Chapter 6.01 - Miscellaneous 
 
Sec. 6.01.010. - Urination and human waste. 
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on private property in any area exposed to the public view, or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public place, except in a public or private restroom. 
(Ord. No. 00-24, § 1(4.10.050), 9-7-2000)  
Sec. 6.01.020. - False reports or writings. 
Whoever, in any manner within the jurisdiction of any office or department or agency of the City, knowingly falsifies, conceals, withholds or suppresses by any trick, scheme, verbal statement, writing or device, any fact, or makes any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation, or makes or uses or causes to be made or used any false writing or document when he or she knows the same to contain any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(OCC § 3-7-28) 
State Law reference— False instruments, Penal Code § 115.  
Sec. 6.01.030. - Business and commercial activities on City property. 
(a)  No person shall in any manner while on City owned or leased property sell any product or service or engage in any other business or commercial activity without obtaining the prior written approval of the City Manager; provided, however, that this section does not apply to any concession operated under authority granted by the City Council, nor to any other activity specifically authorized, regulated, or exempted by order or resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be an infraction. 
(OCC § 2-7-32; Ord. No. 3885, § 1, 4-6-1993)  
Chapter 6.02 - Alcoholic Beverage Consumption in Public Places 
 
Sec. 6.02.010. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public prohibited. 
The drinking of any intoxicating liquor or any fermented malt beverage, unless specifically permitted by the prior written approval of the City, shall be prohibited: 
(1)  On any street, roadway, boulevard, alley, parking lot, sidewalk, public way, or public place in the City; 
(2)  In the public parking, loading, and access areas of any commercial shopping center; 
(3)  On any grounds owned by or under the control of a public school district or public park district within the City, or within a distance of 300 feet from any exterior boundary of such grounds, except on private residential property or within a properly licensed commercial establishment; 
(4)  Within any public park, public place, recreation and park district, regional park, open-space district, recreation facility, or recreational area owned and/or operated by the City, county, or any public agency. This section shall not apply where the possession is within premises located in a park or other public place for which a license has been issued pursuant to Business and Professions Code Div. 9, § 23000 et seq.); and 
(Ord. No. 00-24, § 1(4.10.010), 9-7-2000)  
Sec. 6.02.020. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages on homeowner association properties prohibited. 
No person shall drink any intoxicating liquor, or any fermented malt beverage, upon greenbelt areas, common walkways, common driveways, and common streets owned or controlled by a homeowner's association where: 
(1)  The homeowner's association has requested in writing that the City extend its drinking prohibition upon the homeowner's association's property; and 
(2)  The homeowner's association has posted on the property a notice in substantially the following form: 
"Drinking of liquors, beers, or other fermented beverages on this property, specifically greenbelt areas, common walkways, common driveways, and common streets is prohibited and subject to criminal prosecution and a fine." 
(Ord. No. 00-24, § 1(4.10.020), 9-7-2000)  
Sec. 6.02.030. - Posting of premises and parking lot adjacent to retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee. 
(a)  All retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees licensed pursuant to Business and Professions Code Div. 9, § 23000 et seq.) shall post on the premises, including an adjacent parking lot, a notice in substantially the following form: 
"Possession of unsealed or open containers of ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES in this parking area or any public street or sidewalk is prohibited, and is subject to criminal prosecution and a fine." 
(b)  Posting of such notice must be clearly visible to the patrons of the licensee and parking lot and to persons on the public sidewalk. The posting shall consist of a wall sign that does not exceed two square feet in size and contains substantially the language set forth above. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-24, § 1(4.10.030), 9-7-2000)  
Sec. 6.02.040. - Possession of open container of alcoholic beverage on posted premises of retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee. 
(a)  No person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage that has been opened or whose seal has been broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be on, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Business and Professions Code Div. 9, § 23000, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. 
(b)  The provisions of this section do not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-24, § 1(4.10.040), 9-7-2000)  
Chapter 6.03 - Charitable and Commercial Solicitations 
 
Sec. 6.03.010. - Declaration of purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public peace, health and safety by imposing content-neutral reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on door-to-door charitable and commercial solicitation in residential areas of the City. The City Council finds that such regulations are needed to protect residents in their homes from undue annoyance, such as intimidating and abusive solicitors and intrusions upon the hours of rest, and to prevent crime by discouraging potential or convicted criminals from posing as solicitors. 
(Ord. No. 00-27, § 1(4.30.010), 11-16-2000)  
Sec. 6.03.020. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings as set forth below. 
Charitable purpose means for the purpose of any nonprofit organization, including patriotic, philanthropic, social services, welfare, benevolent, educational, religious, civil, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
Commercial purpose means for the purpose of any person, as identified in this section, organized or devoted to selling goods, services, real property, or information for a profit. 
Contribution means the giving of anything of value, including money, information (through canvassing and polling), property, or any type of financial assistance, or the pledging of anything of value, including money, property or other type of financial assistance, or the purchasing or offering to purchase anything of value, including, but not limited to goods, services, books, real property, pamphlets, tickets, or subscriptions to publications. 
Solicit and solicitation means the request for any contribution for a charitable or commercial purpose, as defined in this section, or the request for a signature, conducted door-to-door at residences. A "solicitation" shall be complete when the request is made, whether or not the person making the request receives any contribution or signature. 
(Ord. No. 00-27, § 1(4.30.020), 11-16-2000)  
Sec. 6.03.030. - Compliance with State Law, City Code. 
Prior to and while engaging in any solicitation, every person shall fully comply with all applicable State Law, including the provisions for the California Charitable Disclosure Law as set forth in California Business and Professions Code at Section 17510 et seq., as amended from time to time and shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code, including Title 4. Prior to and while engaging in any solicitation, every person shall fully comply with all applicable sections. 
(Ord. No. 00-27, § 1(4.30.030), 11-16-2000)  
Sec. 6.03.040. - Manner of solicitation; prohibitions. 
No person shall solicit: 
(1)  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except by prior appointment; 
(2)  At any business, house, apartment, or other dwelling to which is affixed a sign indicating "NO SOLICITORS" or similar indication that no solicitation contact is desired by the occupants thereof; 
(3)  At any house, apartment or other dwelling within a homeowners' association that maintains private streets, where: 
a.  The homeowners' association has posted on each entryway to the subdivision a notice in substantially the following form: 
Solicitation or peddling at any house, apartment or dwelling unit within the area on the below map is prohibited and subject to criminal prosecution and a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for up to six months. 
b.  A map depicting the area within the homeowners' association is attached to the notice; and 
c.  The homeowners' association has requested in writing that the City extend the provisions of this chapter upon the homeowners' association's property; 
(4)  By using profane or abusive language or making verbal threats, either during the solicitation or following the refusal to make a contribution or provide a signature; 
(5)  By stepping onto or over the threshold of a doorway, unless invited to do so by the occupant; 
(6)  By placing hands, legs, or any portion of the solicitor's body in the doorway so that it reasonably appears that the door may not be closed, unless allowed to do so by the occupant; 
(7)  By refusing to leave the premises when asked to do so by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 00-27, § 1(4.30.040), 11-16-2000)  
Sec. 6.03.050. - Receipts. 
Any person receiving money, pledge or order from any contributor by means of a solicitation shall, upon request, give such contributor a written receipt showing the name and address of the solicitor, the date, and the amount received. 
(Ord. No. 00-27, § 1(4.30.050), 11-16-2000)  
Chapter 6.04 - Curfew for Children 
 
Sec. 6.04.010. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means the period from 11:00 p.m. any evening of the week until 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means either a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with which a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age who is not on active duty in the armed forces of the United States nor otherwise emancipated pursuant to the law. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including but not limited to streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
Remain means to linger, stay, or be present, or to fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
Responsible adult means a person at least 18 years of age authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, § 1(3-6-1), 4-21-1998)  
Sec. 6.04.020. - Curfew restrictions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or responsible adult of a minor knowingly to permit or, by insufficient control, to allow the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 6.04.020 that the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, or a responsible adult, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a public entity, a civic organization, or another similar entity or organization that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a public entity, a civic organization, or another similar entity or organization that takes responsibility for the minor; or 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution. 
(d)  Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, § 1(3-6-2), 4-21-1998)  
Sec. 6.04.030. - Enforcement of Section 6.04.020. 
(a)  Every law enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to demand from any person whom he or she has reasonable cause to believe is a minor who is violating Section 6.04.020 and is not exempted under subsection (c) of section 6.04.020 that such person give his or her name, address, and the name of his or her parent(s), guardian(s) or other responsible adult(s), if any, who has or have the care and custody of such person, and furnish proof of his or her age and that he or she meets any of the provisions of section 6.04.020(c). 
(b)  If, after demanding the information described in subsection (a) above, the officer still has reasonable cause the believe the person is a minor violating Section 6.04.020 without meeting any of the provisions of Section 6.04.020(c), the officer is hereby authorized and empowered to take any or more than one of the following actions: 
(1)  To issue a warning to such person and his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) about the consequences of violation of Section 6.04.020; 
(2)  To take such person into custody and transport him or her to his or her residence or to another place where he or she will be supervised by a responsible adult; 
(3)  To communicate with the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such person and demand from any of them the information described in subsection (a) of this section; 
(4)  To communicate with the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such person and demand of any of them that he or she take the person to the person's residence or to any place where the person will be supervised by a responsible adult; 
(5)  To issue to such person a notice to appear before the juvenile court, a juvenile court referee, or a juvenile traffic hearing officer, as appropriate; 
(6)  To take such person into temporary custody in accordance with Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625, as limited by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 207; 
(7)  To take such other action or actions as are permitted by the laws of the State of California and are deemed necessary by the officer to safeguard the well being of such person. 
(c)  A law enforcement officer shall not take any of the enforcement actions described in subsection (b) of this section unless the officer reasonably believes that the person with respect to whom the action(s) is taken is violating Section 6.04.020 and, based upon any responses and other circumstances, has no defense under Section 6.04.020(c). 
(Ord. No. 98-5, § 1(3-6-3), 4-21-1998)  
Sec. 6.04.040. - Failure of parent or guardian to take minor to safe place during curfew hours. 
It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to fail to take a minor to his or her residence or to a place where he or she will be supervised by a responsible adult when so demanded by any law enforcement officer in accordance with Section 6.04.030. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, § 1(3-6-4), 4-21-1998)  
Sec. 6.04.050. - Supervision of young minors. 
It is unlawful for a parent or guardian to leave a minor under the age of 14 years at the minor's residence or at any other place without the supervision of a competent and responsible person between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, § 1(3-6-5), 4-21-1998)  
Sec. 6.04.060. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of Sections 6.04.020, 6.04.040 or 6.04.050 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 98-5, § 1(3-6-7), 4-21-1998) 
State Law reference— Arnold-Kennick Juvenile Court Law, Welfare and Institutions Code § 200 et seq.)  
Chapter 6.05 - Emergency Management and Continuity of Government[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— California Emergency Services Act, Government Code § 8550 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6.05.010. - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of the City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 2, 9-04-2003)  
Sec. 6.05.020. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities for the City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 3, 9-04-2003)  
Sec. 6.05.030. - Disaster council membership. 
The City of Rancho Santa Margarita Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be Chairman. 
(2)  The assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be Vice Chairman. 
(3)  Such chiefs of emergency services are as provided for in a current emergency plan of the City adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 4, 9-04-2003) 
State Law reference— Disaster councils, Government Code § 8610.  
Sec. 6.05.040. - Disaster council powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairman or upon call of the Vice Chairman (in the absence of the Chairman). 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 5, 9-04-2003) 
State Law reference— Disaster councils, Government Code § 8610.  
Sec. 6.05.050. - Director and assistant director of emergency services. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services. 
(b)  There is hereby created the Office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 6, 9-04-2003)  
Sec. 6.05.060. - Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services. 
(a)  The Director is hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
(2)  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
(3)  Control and direct the effort of the City's emergency organization for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter. 
(4)  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the City's emergency organization; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
(5)  Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein. 
(6)  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency,": 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency, provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council; 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, to bind the City for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
c.  To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the County of Orange or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as deemed necessary in the execution of duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State Law for registered disaster services workers; 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of the City's departments or agencies; and 
e.  To execute all ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, and all powers conferred by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, or by any other lawful authority 
(b)  The Director shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council. 
(c)  The assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the City, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 7, 9-04-2003) 
State Law reference— Chief executive may request Governor to proclaim state of emergency, Government Code § 8625; authority to provide for a chief executive with special powers during emergencies. Government Code § 38791.  
Sec. 6.05.070. - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of the City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 6.05.060 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 8, 9-04-2003)  
Sec. 6.05.080. - Emergency plan. 
The City of Rancho Santa Margarita Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City's Emergency Plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 9, 9-04-2003)  
Sec. 6.05.090. - Line of succession for council members. 
The line of succession for the position of Mayor during a state of emergency, war emergency, local emergency, or other condition of disaster, unless otherwise ordered by the City Council, shall be the Mayor Pro Tempore followed by the remaining City Council members in the order of their seniority, unless standby successors have been appointed pursuant to Section 8638 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-10, § 1(2.10.100), 11-1-2001) 
State Law reference— Preservation of local government, Government Code § 8635 et seq.  
Sec. 6.05.100. - Expenditures. 
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 10, 9-04-2003) 
State Law reference— Emergency expenditures, Government Code § 8653.  
Sec. 6.05.110. - Punishment of violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, during an emergency, to: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State or the City. 
(Ord. No. 03-04, § 11, 9-04-2003)  
Chapter 6.06 - Gambling[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Gambling, Penal Code §§ 330 et seq., 11225 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6.06.010. - Illegal card and dice games. 
(a)  Every person who, for profit, anything of value, or commercial purposes of any nature, keeps, operates, conducts, or maintains, either directly or indirectly, any house, room, apartment, dwelling place, or other place where any game, gambling, or gaming not mentioned or included in Penal Code § 330 or 330a, is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on, whether with cards, dice or any other device of whatsoever nature, for money, checks, credit, merchandise, or other representative of value, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Every person, either as owner, lessor, lessee, principal, agent, employee or participant or otherwise who maintains or keeps or operates or conducts directly or indirectly in whole or in part, or who directly or indirectly is in possession in whole or in part of any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place upon or in which any gambling, games or gaming prohibited in this section are played, conducted, dealt or carried on, and who imposes or collects a fee or anything of value for the privilege of participating in any way whatsoever in any such games, gambling or gaming, or who directly or indirectly gains or receives anything of value or any financial profit from playing, conducting, or dealing of any such games, gambling, or gaming, shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be keeping, conducting, operating, and maintaining the same for profit or commercial purposes. 
(c)  Every person who knowingly permits any of the games, gambling or gaming that, by this section, are prohibited from being played, maintained, operated, conducted, or dealt in any house, room, apartment, dwelling place, or other place owned or rented by such person in whole or in part, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Every person who visits, frequents, participates in or knowingly permits any games, gambling or gaming that by this section are made unlawful to be played, operated, maintained, conducted or dealt in any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Every person who shall place or bet at or against any of the games, gambling or gaming prohibited by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(OCC §§ 3-5-1—3-5-4)  
Sec. 6.06.020. - Illegal games of chance. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association, either as owner, lessee, manager, employee, agent, or servant, to conduct, manage, carry on, maintain, operate, open, deal or deal in, or cause or permit to be conducted, managed, carried on, maintained, operated, opened, dealt or dealt in, any game, operation, or transaction wherein any prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award, payment or gratuity, consisting of any money, check, token, credit, goods, wares, merchandise, property, or thing of value is or is to be given, awarded, or delivered, either directly or indirectly, and wherein chance is the determining factor or is any determining factor of the result of such game, operation, or transaction, which is conducted, carried on, maintained, operated or played by the throwing, tossing, dropping, depositing or placing of any ball, marker, object, thing or substance into any perforation, hole or indentation, in or upon any surface, receptacle, container, object or thing having been marked, designated or identified thereon by or with any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark of any kind, or by the selecting, designating, turning, indicating, choosing or projecting of any such figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark by means of any device, apparatus or equipment, or by any means or in any manner or by the drawing, selecting, choosing or removing from any receptacle or container of any ball, disk, object, substance or material marked, designated or identified by or with any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark, any such figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark hereinabove referred to corresponding to, duplicating, referring to or relating to, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark upon any card, paper, board, fabric, surface, object, substance or thing held, used, operated or maintained by any player or participant therein or by any person, where, by any predetermination or prearrangement, or by any rule, method, scheme, design or procedure, any person is found, declared or determined to be, or is or is to be, the winner, donatee, recipient or taker of such prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award, payment or gratuity, in the event that any such player or participant pays, deposits, expends, gives or pledges, either directly or indirectly, or agrees, promises or intends to pay, deposit, expend, give or pledge, either directly or indirectly, any money, check, credit, property or thing of value, or makes or agrees to make any purchase for the privilege of playing or participating therein or of gaining admission to the place or premises where such game, operation or transaction is or is to be played, conducted, carried on, maintained or operated, or to any other place or premises; provided, however, that no provision of this article shall be deemed or construed as prohibiting any act made unlawful by the provisions of Penal Code § 320, or of Penal Code § 330, or of Penal Code § 330a, or of any other Code section or general law of the State of California, it being the intent of the City Council to prohibit by this article all games, operations or transactions herein described, not prohibited by the provisions of any general law of this State, including all games, operations or transactions for profit, commonly known as keno, tango, movie tango, beano, skill ball, fortune, quintan, fascination or inspiration, and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to participate in, play, play in or engage in, either directly or indirectly, any game, operation or transaction prohibited by the provisions of this section. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association, owning, leasing, managing, controlling or having any interest in any property or premises lying within the City to cause or permit the maintenance or operation in or on such property or premises, having knowledge, or after reasonable notice of the existence thereof, of any game, operation or transaction declared by the provisions of this section to be unlawful. 
(d)  Bingo games are permitted as set forth in, and subject to the requirements and conditions of, this Code. 
(OCC §§ 3-4-15—3-5-18; Ord. No. 2935, § 4, 9-21-76; Ord. No. 98-15, § 27, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 6.06.030. - Bingo games. 
(a)  Bingo games are hereby permitted in the City, provided such games are conducted only by organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g), 23701(k), 23701(l) and 23701(w) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and by mobile home park associations, senior citizens organizations, and charitable organizations affiliated with a school district; and provided that the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes, and provided a license is obtained therefore pursuant to Section 6.06.035 of this chapter. Bingo games conducted pursuant to this section must be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and as provided herein. 
(b)  Only those bingo games which have all of the characteristics of "ordinary bingo" or "pull tab bingo" set forth in this section are permitted. Pull tab bingo is permitted only in conjunction with ordinary bingo games. No cards nor prizes for pull tab bingo shall be distributed at any time other than during an ordinary bingo game. No bingo game featuring pull tab bingo exclusively is permitted. 
(c)  The total value of prizes available to be awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed $500.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(d)  "Ordinary bingo" means a game with all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  The participants use bingo cards that are divided into 25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space; 
(2)  The participants mark or cover the spaces on the bingo cards that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a bingo game operator; 
(3)  A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance, either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards; 
(4)  The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and number as described in Subsection (d)(3) of this section, that a predetermined and preannounced pattern of spaces has been marked or covered on a bingo card being used by the participant; 
(5)  A prize is awarded to the winner or winners of the bingo game; and 
(6)  All or any of the participants have paid, or promised to pay, any valuable consideration for the right to participate in the bingo game, or where none of the participants have paid, or promised to pay, any valuable consideration for the right to participate in the bingo game, the total value of the prize awarded in such game exceeds $25.00. 
(e)  "Pull tab bingo" means a game with all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  The participants use cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in manner providing for distribution of prizes; 
(2)  The winning cards are not known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game; 
(3)  The number or symbol or configuration of numbers or symbols on a card which will constitute a winning card, and the amount in prize money which will be awarded for each winning number, symbol or configuration of numbers or symbols, are determined before any cards in a particular game are distributed; 
(4)  All the preprinted cards bear the legend, "For sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance"; and are printed with information describing the number or symbol or configuration of numbers or symbols which will constitute a winning card and the amount in prize money which will be awarded for each winning number, symbol or configuration of numbers or symbols; and are stamped with the date of distribution; 
(5)  The winner of the bingo game is determined by the participants' removing the material concealing the preprinted numbers or symbols on the cards; 
(6)  The winner of the bingo game is any participant on whose card is printed the number or symbol or the configuration of numbers or symbols predetermined to be a winning number or symbol or configuration; 
(7)  The prize is awarded to the winner or winners of the bingo game; 
(8)  The prize or prizes for each game of pull tab bingo are awarded during the same ordinary bingo game in which the cards for such pull tab bingo game are distributed; and 
(9)  All or any of the participants have paid, or promised to pay, any valuable consideration for the right to participate in the bingo game, or where none of the participants have paid, or promised to pay, any valuable consideration for the right to participate in the bingo game, the total value of the prize awarded in such game exceeds $25.00. 
(f)  An application for a license shall not be filed unless the applicant is a qualified organization which has owned or leased property within the City that was used by the applicant for the performance of the purposes for which it is organized, for at least 12 months immediately preceding the filing of such application, and the property upon which any bingo game is to be conducted is property so owned or leased by the applicant. Licensee shall inform the issuing officer of any revocation of its tax exempt status. 
(g)  Any organization whose bingo license has been denied or revoked may not apply for a license to conduct any bingo games for a period of one year from the date notice of such denial or revocation was served on it, or, if affirmed on appeal to the City Council, from the date of such affirmation; provided, however, if the reason for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g), 23701(k), 23701(l) and 23701(w) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a bingo license upon proof of reinstatement of such exemption. 
(h)  Each licensee shall have written policies incorporated in its constitution, articles, bylaws or other regulations setting forth the manner in which a person may become a member of the organization. Absent any such written policies, it shall be presumed that the organization has no members who may operate or staff bingo games within the meaning of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. 
(i)  Every member of the organization who operates or staffs bingo games or distributes cards or prizes for bingo games shall wear a distinctive identification badge bearing the name of the member and the name of the organization. Each licensee shall keep a list of members of the organization who are authorized to staff the operation of the bingo games or distribute cards or prizes for bingo games, which list shall be made available to any peace officer requesting same. Members staffing bingo games or distributing cards or prizes for bingo games shall not be paid a wage, salary or profit for such duties. 
(j)  The licensee shall have the bingo license, lists of approved staff and accounting documents relating to all monies collected, disbursed and distributed available to the issuing officer for inspection at all times during any bingo game and during licensee's normal business hours. The licensee shall keep full and complete accounting records supported by properly executed contracts, leases, receipts and other related documents which pertain to all monies, and other forms of income, collected in connection with the conduct of any of its bingo games, disbursed for expenditures in connection therewith and remaining or distributed for charitable purposes. Such records shall be clearly identified and readily accessible. Officials of the City shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time, and the licensee shall fully cooperate with such officials by making such records available. 
(k)  The Chief of Police Services may prescribe such regulations with respect to the conduct of the games and the equipment and cards used by the licensee as he or she deems necessary to ensure the health and safety of persons and property, the fairness and integrity of the games, and the accountability of the funds collected. 
(l)  Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.03 of this Code or as otherwise provided by law, including but not limited to Penal Code Section 326.5. Any violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued for the operation of bingo games. 
(m)  The "issuing officer" shall be the City Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 8-11-2010)  
Sec. 6.06.035. - Bingo licenses. 
(a)  The form of applications shall specify the name of the organization, frequency with which bingo games will be held, the location in which bingo games will be held, the name of the person or persons who will be responsible for the conduct of the games, the name of the person responsible for keeping the financial records of such activity, and provide for proof that the organization is exempt from the payment of bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g), 23701(k), 23701(l) or 23701(l)[(w)] of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or that the organization is a mobile home park association, a senior citizens organization or a charitable organization affiliated with a school district. The City Council may, by resolution, establish an application fee for bingo licenses. 
(b)  The proof of exempt status in Subsection (a) of this section must consist of a copy of the application for exempt status sent to the State Franchise Tax Board, and a certified copy of the letter from the State Franchise Board granting such exempt status. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1, 8-11-2010)  
Chapter 6.07 - Public Safety and Order 
 
Sec. 6.07.010. - Discharge of firearms. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer acting in the official line of duty, to shoot, fire, or discharge, or for any person to cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, or firearm, except when it may be necessary so to do to protect life or property, or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal. 
(OCC § 3-2-1)  
Sec. 6.07.020. - Obstructing sidewalks and highways. 
Every person who willfully and maliciously obstructs the free movement of any person on any street, sidewalk, other public place, or on or in any place open to the public is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(OCC § 3-4-14; Ord. No. 98-15, § 26, 12-8-1998) 
State Law reference— Obstruction of public place, Penal Code § 647c.  
Sec. 6.07.030. - Disturbance of peace by vehicle. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle in such a manner as is reasonably likely to disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or person by reason of noise, dust, smoke or fumes. 
(OCC § 3-8-48)  
Sec. 6.07.040. - Capping or covering wells. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms as used in this section shall, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the respective meanings herein set forth: 
Abandoned oil or water well shall include any such well not actually and continuously used and any well, whether being used or not, the mouth or entrance of which is left open. 
Cistern means an artificial reservoir or tank or wells for storing water. 
(b)  Responsibility for capping or covering well. A person who digs, drills, excavates, constructs, owns, or controls any water well, oil well, or cistern and abandons such well or cistern, and any person who owns, possesses or controls any premises on which an abandoned water well, oil well, or cistern exists, shall cap or otherwise securely cover the mouth or entrance to the well or cistern. The capping or covering shall be so constructed and installed as will prevent any human being from falling into the well or cistern or from suffering any bodily injury, through accident or inadvertence, by reason of the existence of the well or cistern. 
State Law reference— Protection of excavations, wells, open pits, etc., Health and Safety Code § 115700 et seq. 
(OCC § 3-9-34; Ord. No. 3646, § 3, 7-21-1987)  
Sec. 6.07.050. - Public nudity. 
(a)  The City Council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  It is the policy of the City that the public beaches, parks and places hereof shall be available for the use and enjoyment of the public to the maximum extent possible. 
(2)  It is further the policy of the City that members of the public are entitled to use the public beaches, parks and places hereof without being subjected to offensive conduct by other members of the public. 
(3)  The presence of persons who are nude and exposed to public view in or on public rights-of-way, public parks, public beaches, or any other public land, or in or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public beach, public park, or other public land, tends to discourage the use and enjoyment of the public beaches, parks, and places of the City, creates a nuisance, and is offensive to members of the public who wish to use and enjoy said public beaches, parks, and places, and who are unwillingly exposed to such persons. 
(4)  The prohibition of nude persons from public places, places open to the public, and places open to public view, is necessary to preserve and maintain the public order and the general welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(5)  It is the intent of this Council to prohibit nudity in public places, places open to the public, and places open to public view even when such nudity is not sexually motivated or otherwise lewd. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nude shall mean devoid of an opaque covering over any one of the following parts of the human anatomy: genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region, pubic hair region, or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola. 
Public right-of-way shall mean any place of any nature that is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, including but not limited to a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, crossing, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, square, and any other similar public way or place. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person over the age of ten years to be nude and exposed to public view in or on any public right-of-way, public park, public beach or waters adjacent thereto, other public land, or in or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public beach, public park, or other public land. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any acts which take place wholly within a fully enclosed building or any portion thereof; and nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit any act or acts which are expressly authorized or not prohibited by the Penal Code. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. 
(OCC §§ 3-12-1—3-12-3, 3-12-14; Ord. No. 2842, § 1, 5-27-1975)  
Chapter 6.08 - Trespass and Property Damage 
 
Sec. 6.08.010. - Trespass upon fenced, cultivated land. 
It is unlawful for any person to enter upon or go upon the lands of another under cultivation or enclosed by a fence, for any purpose whatsoever, without the consent in writing of the owner of said premises or of the person or persons entitled to the use and occupancy thereof, except in the lawful performance of an official duty. 
(OCC § 3-8-24; Ord. No. 98-15, § 28, 12-8-1998) 
State Law reference— Trespass, Penal Code § 602.  
Sec. 6.08.020. - Damaging land of another. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner or lessee of the hereinafter designated land or lands, to cut, hack, injure, destroy, move, or remove any cane, reeds, sticks, grass, bamboo, trees, lumber, brush, weeds or vegetation of any kind or nature or printed, painted or written signs, or to dig, move or remove any sand, gravel, rocks, dirt, soil, debris, or other material or substance, or to start, build or maintain fires of any nature whatsoever in or on creeks, canals, channels or rivers or the banks, beds, levees, dikes or embankments of said creeks, canals, channels or rivers or other land or lands of another located without the written consent of the owner or lessee of said creeks, canals, channels or rivers, or the banks, beds, levees, dikes or embankments of said creeks, canals, channels or rivers or other land or lands, or except in the lawful performance of an official duty. This section shall not prevent the abatement of nuisances or unsightly or unhealthful conditions by the City or persons acting under contract to the City or by homeowners associations pursuant to rules, covenants and regulations. 
(OCC § 3-8-25) 
State Law reference— Trespass, Penal Code § 602.  
Chapter 6.09 - Skateboarding, Roller Skating, Scootering, and Bicycling[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-06, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 28, 2006, repealed and reenacted Chapter 6.09 to read as herein set out. Formerly, Chapter 6.09 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, adopted July 27, 2005. 
 
Sec. 6.09.010. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a means of regulating the operation of skateboards, roller skates, scooters and bicycles on private and public property to ensure public safety. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.020. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Chapter, words, phrases and terms used herein shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise indicated as follows: 
Business district shall be defined as designated in Section 235 of the California Vehicle Code. 
Grinding shall be defined as the act of sliding on any monument, sign, building, roof railing, fence, gate, table, bench, planter, curb, bleachers, stairway, rail, handrail, fountain, or any other angled object or structure with defined edges by a person utilizing or riding upon any nonrolling part of a skateboard, roller skates, scooter bicycle, or similar devices. 
Major arterial shall be defined as any public roadway in the City listed in the master plan of arterial highways. 
Private property shall be defined as any property held by private interests, including property held by common interest development associations, which is used primarily for business, commercial, office space, business park, religious, education, multi-family or recreational purposes. This shall also include the parking facilities for these "private property" areas. 
Public property shall mean any property owned or maintained by the City, Saddleback Valley Unified School District, Capistrano Unified School District, County of Orange, or any public utility within the geographical boundaries of the City. 
Roller skates shall be defined as any shoe, boot or other footwear to which one or more wheels are attached. 
Skateboard shall be defined as any platform of any composition or size to which two or more wheels are attached, and which is intended to be ridden or propelled by one or more persons standing or kneeling upon it, and to which there is not affixed any seat or any other device or mechanism to turn and control the wheels. 
Scooter shall be defined as a conveyance consisting of an oblong board with small wheels and handlebars, propelled with or without mechanical power, which can be ridden by one or more persons at a time. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.030. - Skateboarding, roller skating, scootering, and bicycling prohibited in certain designated areas. 
(a)  No person shall utilize or ride upon any skateboard, roller skates, scooter, or bicycle to ride or move about in or on any public or private property when the same property has been designated by the City Manager and posted as a no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering, or bicycling area. 
(b)  No person shall use a skateboard, roller skates, scooter, or bicycle outside of a designated no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering, or bicycling area in a manner which creates a nuisance. For the purpose of this Chapter, "nuisance" is defined as any activity which: 
(1)  Threatens injury to persons or property; or 
(2)  Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free and unrestricted use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.040. - Skateboards, roller skates, and scooters on major arterials. 
No person shall ride a skateboard, roller skates, or scooter propelled by human power, or cause or permit same to roll or coast on the roadway of any major arterial in the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.050. - Grinding prohibited. 
No person shall ride upon a skateboard, roller skates, scooter, bicycle or similar devices that are propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical energy, to engage in grinding upon public property. Such prohibition shall not apply to the public skate park facility. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.060. - Designation of private property as no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering or bicycling area. 
The City Manager may designate any private property within a business district, or which is primarily used for commercial, recreational or educational purposes, as a no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering or bicycling area. The City Manager may so designate this private property subject to the following: 
(1)  Any property owner may submit a written application requesting such designation for his or her own property, regardless of whether it is owner-occupied or occupied by tenants. 
(2)  A tenant of a property may submit a written application requesting such designation, with the written consent of the property owner and a majority of the tenants. 
(3)  The City Manager may approve or deny the application for designation of the no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering, or bicycling area. If approved, the City Manager shall designate such area and order the posting of appropriate signage in accordance with Section 6.09.080. 
(4)  The City Manager shall consider the application and cause notice his or her decision to be mailed to the property owner and, if applicable, all tenants in the subject private property. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.070. - Designation of public property as no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering or bicycling area. 
The City Manager may designate any public roadway, sidewalk, parking lot, or other public property as a no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering, or bicycling area. The City Manager shall designate such area and the times when such activity would be prohibited and order the posting of appropriate signage in accordance with Section 6.09.080. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.080. - Posting of signs required; content. 
(a)  Prior to the enforcement of the no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering, or bicycling area, the area so designated shall be posted with signs which provide substantially as follows: 
For vehicular entrances: 
"Skateboarding [and/or roller skating, scootering, and bicycling] is prohibited by RSMMC Chapter 6.09. Violations are punishable as provided by RSMMC Chapter 1.03. Orange County Sheriff's Department 949-770-6011." 
For other posted locations: 
"Skateboarding [and/or roller skating, scootering, and bicycling] is prohibited. RSMMC Chapter 6.09." 
(b)  Such prohibition shall apply to the property or area so designated once the property or area has been posted with signs in plain view at all vehicular entrances to the property or area and at other pedestrian locations designed to give notice to affected persons. All posted signs shall conform to the City's standard sign criteria for private property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or tenant(s) to obtain, post and maintain all signs. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.090. - Fees set by resolution. 
The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees for the receipt and processing of any applications for no skateboarding, roller skating, scootering, and bicycling areas. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Sec. 6.09.100. - Exemption from the provisions of this Chapter. 
Any device designated, intended and used solely for the transportation of infants, the handicapped, or incapacitated persons, or devices designed, intended and used for the transportation of merchandise to and from the place of purchase and other wheeled devices, when being used for either of these purposes shall be exempt from this Chapter. Furthermore, the City Manager may suspend the enforcement provisions of this Chapter to accommodate special events when so requested by the event organizer. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 2, 6-28-2006)  
Chapter 6.10 - Adult Businesses 
 
Sec. 6.10.010. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate Adult Businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult entertainment materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sex-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sex-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.020. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter the words and phrases shall have the same meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Adult business means any one of the following: 
(1)  Adult arcade means a business establishment to which the public is permitted or invited, and image-producing devices, such as still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices, whether operated by mechanical, electronic or electrical means, are maintained to display images on a regular or substantial basis, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(2)  Adult bookstore means an establishment that has, as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult cabaret means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: 
a.  Regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude; and/or 
c.  Shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions a regular and substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult hotel/motel means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which: 
a.  Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions a regular and substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and 
b.  Rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater means a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, a regular and substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(7)  Modeling studio means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio" does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. "Modeling studio" further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available "specified sexual activities." 
Adult business operator (hereinafter "operator") means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof. 
Applicant means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this Chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or another operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult business. 
Church or religious institution means a structure, which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal.App.3d 151 (1981). 
Regular and substantial portion, or regular and substantial conduct Where one or more of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The area(s) devoted to the display of sex-oriented merchandise and/or sex-oriented material exceeds 15 percent of the total display area of the business; or 
(2)  The business presents any type of live entertainment characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts, or performers, models or employees appearing in public in lingerie on any four or more separate days within any 30-day period; or 
(3)  At least 25 percent of the gross receipts of the business are derived from the sale, trade, display or presentation of services, products, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
Figure model means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola. 
Operate an adult business means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult business or activities within an adult business. 
Permittee means the person to whom an adult business regulatory permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
Police Chief means the Chief of Police Services of the City. 
Regularly features means a regular and substantial course of conduct. 
School means any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high or intermediate school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. 
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Specified anatomical areas means Any of the following which are less than completely and opaquely covered human parts: 
(1)  Genitals or pubic region; 
(2)  Buttocks; and 
(3)  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections (1) through (3) above. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.030. - Adult business regulatory permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City, the operation of an adult business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a regulatory permit from the City as herein required. 
(b)  Every person who proposes to establish, maintain, operate or conduct an adult business in the City shall file an application with the Police Chief upon a form provided by the City and shall pay a non-refundable filing fee, as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  Adult business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with Section 6.10.070. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.040. - Application for adult business regulatory permit. 
(a)  All applications for an adult business regulatory permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, applicant's legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, the partnership's complete name, address, names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation's complete name, date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered agent for service of process. 
(b)  If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application. 
(c)  If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name. 
(d)  A description of the type of adult business for which the regulatory permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site. 
(e)  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed. 
(f)  The names of all employees, independent contractors, agents, partners, directors, officers, shareholders, managers, and persons who will perform at the adult business, pursuant to Section 6.10.090. 
(g)  A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(h)  A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult business, and: 
(1)  The property line of any other adult business within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult business for which a regulatory permit is requested; 
(2)  The property lines of any church, school, park, public facility zone or use within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult business; and 
(3)  The property lines of any residential zone or use within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult business. 
(i)  A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult business showing the location of the lighting system required by Section 6.10.100. 
(j)  If the Police Chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, or otherwise deems the application to be incomplete, the Police Chief shall, within ten days of receipt of the original application, notify the applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten days or less to submit a complete application. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten days, of the time for the Police Chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a regulatory permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
(k)  The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business regulatory permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.050. - Investigation and action on application for adult business regulatory permit. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and regulatory permit fees, the Police Chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult business regulatory permit. 
(b)  Within 35 calendar days of receipt of the completed application, the Police Chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this Section, and so notify the applicant as follows: 
(1)  The Police Chief shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
(2)  If the application is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
(3)  If the application is granted, the Police Chief shall attach to the application an adult business regulatory permit. 
(4)  The application as granted or denied and the regulatory permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application. 
(c)  The Police Chief shall grant the application and issue the adult business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business meets the minimum proximity requirements of Subsection 7-9-146.2(c) of the city-adopted County of Orange Zoning Code, and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 6.10.100, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 6.10.060. The permittee shall post the regulatory permit conspicuously in the adult business premises. 
(d)  If the Police Chief neither grants nor denies the application within 35 calendar days after it is stamped as received, except as provided in Subsection 6.10.040(j), the applicant is deemed to be granted and the applicant may begin operating the adult business for which the regulatory permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 6.10.100. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.060. - Permit denial. 
The Police Chief shall deny the application for an adult business regulatory Permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult business regulatory permit is required does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the City and the State, or with the locational or development and performance standards and requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business regulatory permit. 
(3)  An applicant is under the age of 18. 
(4)  The required application fee has not been paid. 
(5)  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has been convicted of any of the offenses set forth in Section 313, 315, 316, 266(a), 266(b), 266(c), 266(e), 266(f), 266(h), 266(l), 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or remunerated, for which any of the following are true: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of the conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within a 24-month period. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.070. - Expiration and renewal of adult business regulatory permit. 
Each adult business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the regulatory permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 45 calendar days before the expiration date of the Regulatory Permit. When made less than 45 calendar days before the expiration date, the expiration of the regulatory permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided Section 6.10.050. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.080. - Transfer of ownership or control of adult business. 
(a)  A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult business or transfer an adult business regulatory permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the regulatory permit from the Police Chief stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the Police Chief in accordance with Sections 6.10.050, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, and the Police Chief determines that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original regulatory permit. 
(b)  No regulatory permit may be transferred when the Police Chief has notified the permittee that the regulatory permit has been or may be suspended or revoked. 
(c)  Any attempt to transfer a regulatory permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the regulatory permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.090. - Registration of adult business employees and performers. 
(a)  As a further condition of approval of every adult business regulatory permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, every owner or operator shall register every employee and, where the adult business provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, the owner and operator shall register persons so performing with the Police Chief within five business days of the commencement of the employment or performance at the adult business. 
(b)  Each employee and performer shall be required to provide two recent color passport-quality photographs and, at the discretion of the Police Chief, shall allow himself or herself to be fingerprinted by the police department for purposes of identification. In addition, each new employee and performer shall provide the following information on a form provided by the Police Chief. 
(1)  Name, current resident address, telephone number. 
(2)  Date of birth. 
(3)  Social Security number. 
(4)  Height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
(5)  Stage name (if applicable) and other aliases used within the previous two years. 
(c)  The information provided for purposes of this Section shall be maintained by the Police Department as confidential information, and shall not be disclosed as public records unless pursuant to a court order. 
(d)  Each owner or operator of an adult business shall maintain a current register of the names of all employees and performers currently employed by or working at the adult business. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer of the City. 
(e)  Failure to register each new employee and performer within five days of the commencement of employment or work, or to maintain a current register of the names of all employees and performers shall be deemed a violation of the conditions of the regulatory permit and may be considered grounds for suspension or revocation of the regulatory permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.100. - Adult business development and performance standards. 
(a)  A permittee shall not operate an adult business under the authority of an adult business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult business stated in the permit application. 
(b)  Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the Orange County Fire Authority and building regulations and standards adopted by the city. 
(c)  No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public right-of-way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. 
(d)  All off-street parking area and premise entries of the adult business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the Adult Business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises. 
(e)  An adult business shall be open for business only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(f)  The premises within which the adult business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. 
(g)  The building entrance to an adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating those persons under the age of 18 are prohibited from entering the premises. Said notice shall consist of letters no less than one inch in height. 
(h)  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted within the premises at any time. 
(i)  All interior areas of the Adult Business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times. 
(j)  Any adult business which is also an "adult arcade," shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(2)  The view area specified in Subsection (1) shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
(4)  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms. 
(5)  Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or remain in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, if not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths. 
(6)  The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions justify suspension or revocation of the adult business regulatory permit. 
(k)  All interior areas of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level: 
Area 	Foot Candles 
Bookstores and other retail establishments 	20 
Theaters and cabarets 	5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot candles.) 
Arcades 	10 
Motels/Hotels 	20 (in public areas) 
Modelling studios 	20 
 
(l)  The adult business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for males and females. Males shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and females shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an adult business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
(m)  The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(1)  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor and which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an performer. "Performer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult business. 
(2)  The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for performers, which are exclusively dedicated to the performers' use. 
(3)  The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit for performers, which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
(4)  The adult business shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms, which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers. 
(5)  No performer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer before, during or after performances by such performer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult business. 
(6)  Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this subsection. 
(7)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(8)  No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult business to engage in any of the following: 
a.  A live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage; 
b.  A live showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the areola; 
c.  A live showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered. 
(n)  At all times that the adult business is open to the public, there must be present and available on the premises a person who is the on-duty manager or on-duty acting manager of the business responsible for operation of the business, who shall be so identified by a badge bearing the word "MANAGER" in block capital letters not less than ¼-inch in height, worn in a conspicuous and clearly visible location on the chest. 
(o)  Adult businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
(1)  Adult businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. 
(2)  Security guards for other adult businesses may be required if it is determined by the Police Chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct prohibited by this Chapter from occurring on the premises. 
(3)  Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this Chapter. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
(p)  The foregoing requirements of this Section shall be deemed conditions of adult business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the regulatory permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.110. - Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of 18. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires a regulatory permit, to any person who is under the age of 18. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult business, any person who is under the age of 18. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.120. - Inspection. 
(a)  Every adult business shall display at all times during business hours the regulatory permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for such adult business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult business. 
(b)  An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Authority, Planning Division, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this Section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.130. - Suspension or revocation of adult business regulatory permit. 
An adult business regulatory permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with this Section. 
(1)  A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his permit, or be subject to other appropriate remedial action, including the imposition of additional conditions, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, performer, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult business: 
a.  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City. 
b.  The permittee, employee, performer, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult business: 
1.  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation. 
2.  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur. 
3.  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense, which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code. 
4.  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318 or Subdivision b of Section 647 of the California Penal Code. 
5.  Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4. 
6.  Any conduct prohibited by this Chapter. 
c.  Failure to operate in compliance with the development and performance standards and other regulations set forth in this Chapter. 
d.  Failure to abide by any action previously imposed by the City. 
(2)  On determining that grounds for revocation exist, the Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the Permittee personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City, but at a minimum shall include the following: 
a.  All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; and may be represented by counsel. 
b.  Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
c.  Any hearing under this Section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. 
d.  The Police Chief's decision may be appealed in accordance with Section 6.10.140. 
(3)  After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this Section, if the Police Chief finds and determines that there are grounds for action, the Police Chief shall impose one of the following: 
a.  A warning; 
b.  Suspension of the regulatory permit for a specified period not to exceed six months; 
c.  Revocation of the regulatory permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.140. - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation of the adult business regulatory permit. 
(a)  After denial of an application for an adult business regulatory permit, or after denial of renewal of a regulatory permit, or suspension or revocation of a regulatory permit, the applicant or permittee may seek review of such administrative action by the City Council. An administrative appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within ten calendar days of a denial, suspension or revocation of a regulatory permit. The hearing before the City Council shall be held no fewer than five business days from the date of the filing of the appeal or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. The City Council shall issue its decision within ten calendar days of the hearing. The decision of the City Council shall be final. If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on appeal, the applicant or permittee may seek expedited judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. The petitioner shall be responsible for reimbursing the City for its actual costs for transcribing, copying or otherwise preparing the administrative record. 
(b)  There shall be an automatic stay of enforcement of a regulatory permit suspension or revocation throughout the administrative and/or judicial appeal process. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Sec. 6.10.150. - Public nuisance. 
In addition to the remedies set forth in this Chapter and this Code, any adult business that is operating in violation of Chapter is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 3, 6-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, § 7, 8-9-2006)  
Chapter 6.11 - Cybercafes[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, adopted September 27, 2006, enacted provisions intended for use as Chapter 6.09. At the direction of the City, said provisions have been redesignated as Chapter 6.11. 
 
Sec. 6.11.010. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a means of regulating the operation of cybercafes to ensure the safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 9-27-2006)  
Sec. 6.11.020. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Chapter, words, phrases and terms used herein shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise indicated as follows: 
Cybercafe shall be defined as an establishment whose primary business is entertainment, that provides to the public for compensation four or more computers and/or other electronic devices, for any or all of the following activities: 
(1)  Access to that system commonly referred to as the "internet"; 
(2)  Access to e-mail; 
(3)  Playing video games over the internet; 
(4)  Access to other computer software programs. Cybercafe is also synonymous with PC cafe, internet cafe, and cyber center. Cybercafe shall not include any of the following establishments: schools and other educational institutions, or public agency facilities. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 9-27-2006)  
Sec. 6.11.030. - General regulations. 
(a)  Curfew for minors. Minors may not enter or remain in a cybercafe establishment on any day after 10:00 p.m.; or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. during those weekdays when any public school system within the City is open and classes are being conducted. Cybercafe operators shall post a notice at the entrance of the business in lettering of at least two inches in size advising patrons of the time restrictions applying to minors. This time restriction shall not apply when a minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, with the guardian being able to authenticate guardianship. 
(b)  Hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(c)  Employees. There shall be a minimum of one employee over the age of 18 on the premises during all hours of operation. There shall be an additional employee over the age of 18 years on the premises if the business has more than 20 computers; however, this requirement shall not apply during the school hours of 8:00 a.m. through 3:00 p.m. described in Subsection (a). 
(d)  Occupancy. Occupancy shall not exceed that required under the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code, and the maximum occupancy load shall be posted at the main entrance. 
(e)  Adult businesses. Adult business uses as defined in this Chapter are prohibited in conjunction with cybercafes unless specifically authorized under the zoning requirements for such uses. 
(f)  Fire exit plan. The owner or operator shall submit and receive approval of an exit plan from the Orange County Fire Authority. The plan shall address all exiting requirements of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code. This includes, but is not limited to, providing a plan showing equipment locations, aisle locations and dimensional widths and having approved exit doors and panic hardware. 
(g)  Lighting and visibility. 
(1)  Interior lighting shall be maintained at a minimum of 30 footcandles of light. 
(2)  Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way, excepting during daylight hours when blinds or other equivalent window coverings may be used. 
(h)  Camera/video surveillance system. There shall be a camera and/or video surveillance system capable of delineating on playback of the system the activity and physical features of persons or areas within the premises. The system shall cover all entrances and exit points and all interior spaces, excepting bathroom and private office areas not open to the public. The system shall be subject to inspection by the City during regular business hours of the premises. The system and recording medium shall be maintained in good working order at all times. The recording medium shall be maintained for a minimum period of ten days. 
(i)  Pool tables/amusement devices. Pool tables or other amusement devices not directly related to internet computer devices are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 9-27-2006)  
Sec. 6.11.040. - Regulations as applied to use permits. 
Any use permit issued to a cybercafe business shall contain specific conditions tailored to the operation of the business. In the event that a use permit is issued containing conditions different from the regulations established under this Chapter, or are in addition thereto, the more stringent conditions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 9-27-2006)  
Chapter 6.12 - Motion Picture, Television and Still Photo Productions on Public and Private Property 
 
Sec. 6.12.010. - Title and purpose. 
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Motion Picture, Television and Still Photo Production on Public and Private Property Ordinance." It is the policy of the City to encourage the production of motion pictures and television within its boundaries. This ordinance provides rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits for filming, videotaping, still photography and/or related activity on public and private property within the City to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Sec. 6.12.020. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates otherwise: 
Affected property means all lots that directly abut or are directly across any right-of-way from or are otherwise negatively impacted by film activities on the subject property. 
Applicant means an individual, corporation, company association, firm, partnership, and/or limited liability company wishing to engage in film activities in the City. 
Director means the Community Development Director or his/her designee. 
Film activity means and includes all activity relating to staging or shooting commercial or non-profit: motion pictures, television shows or programs, student films, music videos, public access programs, still photos, public service advertisements, educational, religious or infomercial productions or programs, and broadcast or internet commercials. 
Individual use means film activity by any individual when such activity is for his or her personal use or entertainment and in which the individual does not encroach into the public right-of-way; does not impair pedestrian or vehicular access; and does not direct an assemblage of persons on public or private property 
Major production means film activity including one or more of the following criteria: pre-production construction; production filming of more than two days in total; road or walkway closures in excess of 30 minutes per day cumulative; and/or post-production demolition or restoration. 
Minor production means film activity not containing any of the criteria listed in the definition of major production. 
News media means film activity for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or investigative reporting, or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen. 
Non-profit organization means an organization that qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization from which no person or organization, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes, or photos. 
Subject property means the property where the film activity is located or occurs. 
Student films means film activity by students enrolled in a recognized and accredited educational institution. The educational institution must indicate, on that institution's letterhead, that they will either retain the rights to the project or verify that the project will not be used for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Sec. 6.12.030. - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no person or entity shall use any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of conducting film activity without first applying for and receiving a film permit from the Director. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Sec. 6.12.040. - Rules and regulations. 
The Director shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the form, time and location of any film activity within the City. The Director shall also provide for the issuance of permits. The rules and regulations shall be based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The health and safety of all persons; 
(2)  Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected area; 
(3)  The safety of property within the City; and 
(4)  Avoidance of traffic congestion within the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Sec. 6.12.050. - Issuing authority. 
The Director shall issue a film permit upon a finding that the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The proposed film activity will be located and conducted in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Chapter; 
(2)  Approval of the application will not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety or general welfare; and 
(3)  No film permits shall be issued for any property upon which there are outstanding and uncorrected Code violations. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Sec. 6.12.060. - Application. 
The following and any other information as deemed appropriate by the Director, shall be included in the application: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the subject property; 
(2)  The specific location or locations for filming activity; 
(3)  The exact dates and times the film activity will take place, including set up and clean up activities. Film activity is allowed from Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., unless otherwise approved by the Director; 
(4)  A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity; 
(5)  A statement of potential impacts to City right-of-way, private property and public realm (e.g. traffic, public safety, noise) and how the applicant proposes to mitigate those impacts; 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such filming activity. The contact person should be available on a 24-hour basis; 
(7)  The exact number and type of personnel to be involved; 
(8)  A parking plan for all vehicles used in the filming session; 
(9)  A traffic control plan and, as deemed necessary by the City, an encroachment permit application; 
(10)  Use of any animals, pyrotechnics and/or firearms; 
(11)  Written permission from subject property and affected property owners and tenants; 
(12)  Proof of liability insurance and workers compensation insurance; and 
(13)  Permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Sec. 6.12.070. - Permit exemptions. 
Notwithstanding Section 6.12.030, no permit shall be required for the following film activity: 
(1)  Film activity for individual use; 
(2)  Film activity by the news media; 
(3)  Film activity for nonprofit public access films; or 
(4)  Student films. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Sec. 6.12.080. - Fees and deposits. 
Before a permit is issued, a fee sufficient to cover the cost of processing and administering the permit, as established by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid by the applicant. An additional fee shall be required in the event that the applicant requests or the Director deems necessary the use of City personnel and/or equipment. In addition, a deposit or faithful performance bond shall, at the discretion of the Director, be required to ensure clean up and restoration of the site. The amount of such deposit or bond shall be determined by the Director based upon the Director's estimate of the reasonable cost of clean up. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the City any unused monies in the deposit or bond shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Sec. 6.12.090. - Liability provisions. 
(a)  Liability insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount of not less $1,000,000.00 ($5,000,000.00 if gunfire, aircraft, or pyrotechnic is involved) naming the City, its employees, officers and agents, as additional insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage. 
(b)  Worker's compensation insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker's compensation insurance for all persons operating under the permit. 
(c)  Hold harmless agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the City prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 1-24-2007)  
Title 7 - Recreation, Parks and Facilities  
Chapter 7.02 - Commercial Marketing—Promotion and Advertising 
 
Sec. 7.02.010. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to provide for the following commercial use of local recreational facilities and other City property, consistent with the approved City marketing plan (Defined in section 7.02.080): 
(1)  The licensing, for a fee or other consideration, of the private commercial use of the City name, logo, or other intellectual property, or the depiction of City property. 
(2)  The donation of facilities or informational brochures, messages, or broadcasts which publicize acknowledgment of a sponsor's financial assistance. 
(OCC § 2-5-120; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.020. - Requirements for agreements; public hearing. 
Agreements to confer any of the rights enumerated in this chapter and acknowledgment of donated moneys, goods, or services, may be made in the manner and under terms and conditions approved by the City Council. Any agreement the City seeks to enter into pursuant to this chapter shall be approved by the City Council. 
(OCC § 2-5-121; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.030. - Restriction against impersonation. 
No commercial arrangement may be entered into under which the logo of the City or any of its departments can be reproduced and distributed in a manner to enable impersonation of a City official or a safety employee. 
(OCC § 2-5-122; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.040. - Interpretation of chapter. 
This chapter shall be interpreted to enable the City to market its assets, identified in the chapter, to the greatest extent possible, subject only to the limitation imposed by the laws and regulations of the State of California and of the City. 
(OCC § 2-5-123; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.050. - Authorization and payment. 
(a)  As provided in section 7.02.010, the City Council is authorized to license the following commercial uses on local recreational facilities and other City property consistent with the City marketing plan: 
(1)  The licensing, for a fee or other consideration of the private commercial use of the City name, logo or other intellectual property, or the depiction of City property. 
(2)  The donation of facilities or informational brochures, messages or broadcasts which publicize acknowledgment of a sponsor's financial assistance. 
(b)  In determining the adequacy of the consideration to be paid by the purchaser, the City Council may accept payment of cash, equipment, materials, supplies, or other goods and services furnished to a City department or combination thereof as payment. 
(OCC § 2-5-124; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.060. - Limitations. 
(a)  The license to advertise that may be conferred under this chapter shall not include the right to place an advertising display on an "advertising structure," as the term is defined in the Outdoor Advertising Act (Business and Professions Code § 5200 et seq.) or any legislative amendments or re-enactments of the definition in the act. 
(b)  The type, location, size, content and duration of the advertising display that may be placed by the licensee under the right conferred, shall be specified by the City Council in a written agreement. 
(c)  No advertising for products which promote alcohol or tobacco consumption shall be permitted. Non-profit foundations that are established by and/or receive financial support from companies that manufacture or sell alcohol or tobacco products and that do not advocate or promote consumption of said products may enter into marketing agreements supporting the educational, environmental, and public service goals of the City. 
(d)  All approved licensees under this chapter shall observe and abide by the terms and conditions of any license or other agreement with the City, the regulations of the Outdoor Advertising Act (Business and Professions Code § 5200 et seq.), or any legislative amendments or re-enactments of the regulations provided in the Act and the provisions of this chapter and this Code. 
(OCC § 2-5-125; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.070. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertise or advertising display means the presentation on a sign of a name, word, statement message, drawing, picture, painting, mark, motto, symbol, or figure for the purpose of calling attention to a business engaged in commerce or trade, and/or inducing, directly or indirectly, the purchase or use of any specific item of commerce or trade. 
Bulletin or special event sign means a changeable copy sign on which bulletins, notices, messages or displays are placed. 
Director means the Planning Director. 
Directional and/or informational sign means a sign which indicates the route to, direction of, or location of a given goal, or which provides regulatory service information. 
Free standing sign means a sign that is placed on the ground and has as its primary structural support one or more columns, poles, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground. 
Sign means any card, cloth, paper, metal, painted, or wooden sign of any character, other than an advertising structure as defined in the Outdoor Advertising Act (Business and Professions Code § 5200 et seq.), placed for advertising purposes on or to the ground on any wall, fence, building or structure or any item of goods, wares, or merchandise. 
To place and any of its variants, as applied to advertising displays, includes the maintaining and the erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, sewing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise affixing or making visible any advertising display. 
(1)  An advertising display secured to a wall, fence, building, or structure shall be installed on the same lane as the surface to which it is attached, shall not project more than 16 inches from the surface, and shall not extend or be mounted above the top of the wall or fence or the higher or the parapet or eaves of the building or structure. 
(2)  The location of an advertising display on an interior wall of a building shall be approved by the Director prior to its placement. 
(3)  An advertising display may only be placed on a free standing sign that serves the primary purpose of providing a public service, such as a bulletin or special event or a directional and/or informational sign. 
(4)  An advertising display may be placed on the uniform prescribed by the Director to be worn by personnel of the department, so long as it does not obstruct any City badge or emblem affixed to the uniform. No advertising display shall be permitted on park ranger or other peace officer uniforms. 
(5)  An advertising display may be placed on freestanding assets such as lifeguard towers, picnic shelters, gazebos, mechanical pay parking fixtures, and trash cans with approval by the Director or designee prior to placement. 
(OCC § 2-5-126; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.080. - Marketing plan—annual review. 
(a)  Prior to the sale of any rights under this chapter, the Director shall develop a marketing plan for consideration by the City Council, and the City Council shall thereafter adopt a marketing plan or an alternative marketing plan by resolution. 
(b)  The Director shall annually review the approved marketing plan and the performance of contracts issued under this chapter. The Director shall draft written findings of the annual review, which shall be adopted by the City Council with or without modification. 
(OCC § 2-5-127; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.090. - Supervision. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the Director shall have authority to review and make recommendations to the City regarding advertising proposals, agreements, contracts and the like, authorized by this chapter. The Director shall also review all proposed displays for compliance with the contract approved by the City Council, and may specify the exact location of the display. The Director may adopt and publish standards, rules and regulations relating to the size, format, content and placement of commercial advertising displays on City-owned or controlled property. 
(OCC § 2-5-128; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.100. - Displays on uniforms. 
An advertising display placed on the uniform required to be worn by the personnel of a City department shall not obstruct any City badge or emblem affixed to a uniform. No advertising display shall be permitted on park ranger or other peace officer uniforms. 
(OCC § 2-5-129; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Sec. 7.02.110. - No City endorsement. 
Any licensee of advertising authorized under this chapter shall not allow an advertising display or use of the City's intellectual property to give the appearance or impression that any commercial product or service is endorsed or recommended by the City or any of its agencies, departments, officers, or employees. 
(OCC § 2-5-130; Ord. No. 3969, § 1, 8-27-1996)  
Chapter 7.03 - Public Skate Park Facilities 
 
Sec. 7.03.010. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of rules and regulations for the use of public Skate Parks Facilities in the City. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.010), 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 7.03.020. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, words, phrases and terms used herein shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise indicated as follows: 
Supervisor shall be defined as the Supervisor of the Community Services Department; 
Public skate park facility or facilities shall be defined as any facility, structure or area in which skateboarding, in-line skating, or roller skating, or any combination thereof, is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which is owned, operated and maintained by the City, and which has been designated as a "public skate park facility" by resolution of the City Council; 
Roller skates or in-line skates, including roller blades, shall be defined as any shoe, boot or other footwear to which one or more wheels are attached; 
Skateboard shall be defined as any platform of any composition or size to which two or more wheels are attached and which is intended to be ridden or propelled by one or more persons standing or kneeling upon it and to which there is not affixed any seat or any other device or mechanism to turn and control the wheels; 
Skate activity shall be defined as the use of a skateboard, roller skates or in-line skates, including roller blades; 
Skater shall be defined as any person participating in Skate Activity. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.020), 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 7.03.030. - Hours of operation. 
Public skate park facilities shall be opened from dawn until dusk, or as otherwise posted by the Supervisor. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or remain in such facilities in violation of this section without written consent of the Supervisor. Public skate park facilities shall close in the event of rain, rainy conditions, or otherwise wet areas. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.030), 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 7.03.040. - Prohibited conduct. 
While in or on public skate park facilities: 
(1)  No person shall ride or use any non-motorized personal transportation other than roller skates, in-line skates or skateboards, including but not limited to, bicycles, scooters, unicycles, go-carts and wagons, within the skating surface of any public skate park facility, or to cause non-motorized personal transportation to be ridden or used within the skating surface of any public skate park facility; 
(2)  No person shall possess any can, bottle or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)  No person shall allow or cause graffiti or tagging in, on or around any part of the public skate park facility; 
(4)  No person shall ride or use any roller skates, in-line skates, or skateboards at a public skate park facility in a reckless manner or with willful disregard for the safety of persons or property, or to cause anyone using roller skates, in-line skates or skateboards to be ridden or used in such a reckless manner; 
(5)  No person shall deposit or leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, waste or refuse of any kind in a location other than a receptacle provided for such purpose, or cause such items to be deposited or left in such a manner. If no receptacle is provided, each person shall be responsible for removing and disposing of such items from the public skate park facility; 
(6)  No person shall allow or cause any animal of any kind to be brought into a public skate park facility; 
(7)  No person shall allow or cause glass containers of any kind to be brought into any public skate park facility; 
(8)  No person, other than a skater, is permitted within the skating surface of a public skate park facility, except that spectators may sit or stand in areas designed for that purpose; 
(9)  No person shall place or utilize obstacles or other materials within a public skate park facility, including but not limited to ramps, railings or jumps that are not affixed to a public skate park facility by the City; 
(10)  No person shall use a public skate park facility while under the influence of alcohol or drugs; 
(11)  No person shall conduct organized activities, events or competitions without prior written permission from the Supervisor; 
(12)  No skate activity is permitted on the walls or other boundary structures or seating areas immediately surrounding or adjoining a public skate park facility; 
(13)  No person shall use or engage in profanity, reckless and boisterous behavior (including, but not limited to, tandem riding, pushing, horseplay and bullying), or any other activity which could endanger the safety of others at a public skate park facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.040), 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 7.03.050. - City immunity from liability. 
All skate activity within any public skate park facility is deemed a hazardous recreational activity within the meaning of Section 831.7 of the Government Code, and the City will not be held liable for injuries sustained or incurred by persons who participate in any such hazardous recreational activity. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.050), 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 7.03.060. - Protective gear requirement. 
All skaters must wear a safety helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads while participating in skate activity within a public skate park facility. All such protective gear must be functional and protective, and properly sized and designed for their intended use at the public skate park facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.060), 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 7.03.070. - Other regulations. 
The Supervisor may set forth any other rules and regulations for the use of a public skate park facility that he or she deems appropriate, provided that signs describing such rules and regulations are placed and posted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.070), 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 7.03.080. - Signage and posting requirements. 
In order to provide reasonable notice to the public, the Supervisor shall place and post signs in one or more conspicuous and visible area(s) of a public skate park facility designating the facility, structure, or area as a public skate park facility, specifying the rules and regulations established pursuant to this chapter, prohibiting the activities described herein, notifying skaters they must wear a safety helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads, and notifying them that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.080), 3-23-2005)  
Sec. 7.03.090. - Additional enforcement. 
In addition to other penalties as provided in this Code, the Supervisor, or a law enforcement officer, shall have the authority to eject and expel from the public skate park facility any person or group of persons who is or are in violation of any provision of this chapter. Any such ejection or expulsion shall be effective through the remainder of the day that the public skate park facility is open. The Supervisor, or a law enforcement officer, shall have the authority to confiscate the skateboard or roller skates used in violation of this chapter, and hold the same as evidence pending adjudication of a judicial proceeding, or to hold such until claimed by the parent of a juvenile, to ensure the proper identification of violators. The Supervisor shall establish a written procedure pursuant to which any confiscated skateboard or roller skates shall be returned to its adult owner, or to a parent or legal guardian of its juvenile owner, upon request, when the skateboard or roller skates are no longer needed for evidentiary or identification purposes. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1(3.40.095), 3-23-2005)  
Chapter 7.04. - Tree City USA Designation 
 
Sec. 7.04.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage and support the development and continuance of a tree maintenance program by the community associations within the City; to promote thoughtful and planned urban forestation of parks and public rights of way and other areas which may be appropriate for urban forestation; to support the designation of the City as an official Tree City USA; and to further the mission of Tree City USA. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-23-2008)  
Sec. 7.04.020. - Definitions. 
Association Tree Policy shall be defined as a document prepared by each participating association regulating the planting, maintenance, protection, and removal of trees and shrubs on property located within its association property. 
Participating association shall be defined as any homeowner association or commercial maintenance association that participates as an active member of the Community Associations of Rancho. 
Tree City USA shall be defined as the community improvement project sponsored by the National Arbor Day Foundation. 
Work plan shall be defined as an annual community forestry plan that outlines all resources used to implement the Association Tree Policy. The work plan should demonstrate a participating association's ability to meet the requirements of Tree City USA. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-23-2008)  
Sec. 7.04.030. - Tree Board. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Tree Board for the City. The Tree Board shall consist of one representative from each participating association in the City, as appointed by each participating association, to be ratified by the City Council. 
(b)  The Tree Board is formed for the primary purpose of obtaining and maintaining the Tree City USA designation. The Tree Board shall continue in existence for so long as the Tree City designation exists. The Tree Board shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Developing a work plan. 
(2)  Preparing and submitting all materials required for certification and recertification of the Tree City USA designation. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-23-2008)  
Sec. 7.04.040. - Tree maintenance. 
Each participating association shall develop and adopt policies, guidelines and procedures for planting, maintaining and removing trees within its respective jurisdiction as defined in its governing documents, so long as said policies, guidelines and procedures are not any less restrictive than the provisions contained within this chapter, which policies, guidelines and procedures shall also be referred to as the Association Tree Policy. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 1-23-2008; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 1-28-2009)  
Sec. 7.04.050. - Tree protection. 
No tree owned and maintained by the City shall be removed from public rights-of-way, parks and/or other public places without cause, except in cases where the tree is diseased or the City determines that it is an issue of public safety, health or general welfare of the community. Any such tree shall be replaced with another tree of similar type. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 1-28-2009)  
Title 8 - Public Nuisances, Code Enforcement, and Abatement[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2017, amended Tit. 8, Ch. 8.01, § 8.01.010, Ch. 8.02, §§ 8.02.010—8.02.160, Ch. 8.03, §§ 8.03.010—8.03.100, in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Tit. 8 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from OCC §§ 3-14-1—3-14-11, 3-14-13—3-14-18; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 1986; Ord. No. 02-05, § 2, adopted July 23, 2002; Ord. No. 07-05, § 2, adopted April 25, 2007. 
State Law reference— Public nuisances, Civil Code § 3490 et seq. 
 
Chapter 8.01 - General Provisions[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Title 8 pertaining to the replacement of this Chapter. 
 
Sec. 8.01.010. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this Title is to provide for the administrative abatement of nuisance related activities or conditions which affect the social and economic stability of neighborhoods, impact property values, and which are injurious or detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens and businesses of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.01.020. - Additional enforcement remedies. 
The procedure for abatement set forth in this Title is an alternative procedure to any other procedure permitted by state or local law and shall neither prohibit the use of any other lawful abatement procedure nor be deemed to prevent the City Council from ordering the commencement of any civil action to abate a nuisance as an alternative to, or in conjunction with, the proceedings set forth in this Chapter. In addition thereto, any nuisance that is defined as a misdemeanor or infraction by any provision of this Code, or by any of the provisions of any code, building standard, regulation or other standard adopted and incorporated by reference by this Code, may be abated by criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.01.030. - City manager; enforcement officer. 
As used in this Title, "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, or the City Manager's designee; "Enforcement Officer" shall mean any authorized person or persons designated by the City Manager as being an Enforcement Officer, or the Enforcement Officer's designee. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.01.040. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent that the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abate or abatement shall mean action to terminate, remove, stop, cease, repair, replace or otherwise remedy a nuisance related activity or condition by such means and in such manner as is necessary to protect and promote the interests of the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
Person , responsible person and/or party shall have the same meaning as the term "responsible person" as defined by Section 1.05.020 of this Code. In addition, these terms shall include any individual, business or entity who is responsible for causing, maintaining or permitting a nuisance activity or condition. The terms "person," "responsible person" or "responsible party" include, but are not limited to, a property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in real property or person in possession or occupying real property, the president or other officer of a corporation, and/or a business owner or manager of a business. Further, any act of negligent or willful conduct of a minor which results in the creation or maintenance of a condition or activity which constitutes a nuisance within the meaning of this Title shall be imputed to the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes, including the duty to abate the nuisance(s) and the imposition of administrative penalties and costs as provided for herein or elsewhere in this Code or state law. The parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any and all penalties or costs imposed pursuant to this Title. 
Premises shall mean any location, building, structure, residence, garage, room, shed, shop, store, dwelling, lot, parcel, land, property, or portion thereof, whether improved or unimproved, within the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.01.050. - Service of notice. 
(a)  Unless otherwise stated herein, whenever any notice, amended notice, supplemental notice, order, statement or other document is required to be served upon any person, by the provisions of this Title, such service shall be made in the following manner: 
(1)  Personal service. The Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person if the person is within the City's jurisdiction. If the responsible person is an entity, the Enforcement Officer may personally serve an employee over the age of 18, manager, principal, partner, director, officer or representative of the entity on behalf of said entity. The failure or refusal of a person to accept said notice shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceeding. The date of service of a notice served in this manner shall be the date personal service was accomplished. 
(2)  Mailed service. If the responsible person is outside the jurisdiction of the City or cannot be located, the notice shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, with a copy of the notice simultaneously sent by first class mail. The date indicated on the receipt, or, if returned unsigned, the date of mailing via first class mail shall constitute the date service of the notice was accomplished. 
(3)  Posted service. If service cannot be accomplished by personal service or mailed service, the Enforcement Officer shall post the notice on any real property in the City in which the responsible person is known to have a legal and/or possessory interest. The date of posting shall constitute the date of service of the notice. 
(b)  The failure of a responsible person to receive any notice required by this Title shall not invalidate the notice if service was given in a manner authorized in this Section. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.01.060. - Abatement of nuisance related activities or condition. 
Any activity, condition or premises maintained as described herein is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by cessation of the activity, rehabilitation, demolition, removal, repair or other appropriate remedy pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Title. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Chapter 8.02 - Nuisance Defined[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Title 8 pertaining to the replacement of this Chapter. 
 
Sec. 8.02.010. - Nuisance defined. 
It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person or party to cause, permit, abet or otherwise allow any premises in this City to be used in such a manner that any one or more of the activities or conditions described in the following Subsections are found to occur thereon: 
(a)  Any condition or activity which is a "nuisance" or a "public nuisance" as defined in Sections 3479 and 3480 of the Civil Code of the State of California or which is specifically declared to constitute a nuisance or public nuisance by any statute of the State of California or by any ordinance of the City. 
(b)  The violation of any provisions of Title 10 (Buildings and Construction) of this Code, or of any of the provisions of any code, building standard, regulation or other standard adopted and incorporated by reference by Title 10 of this Code, and as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  The violation of any provision of Title 9 (Planning and Zoning) of this Code. 
(d)  The operation or maintenance of any business, trade or profession in violation of Title 4 (Business Regulations) of this Code. 
(e)  The violation of any permit, license, approval or entitlement issued pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code or any code adopted by reference by this Code. 
(f)  The occurrence of any activity at or condition on any premises which creates an immediate threat to the life, health, safety, or general welfare of the residents of the premises, neighbors, or the public. 
(g)  Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed or left for an unreasonable period of time in a state of partial construction. 
(h)  Habitable buildings or structures which, for any reason(s), constitute a "substandard building" as set forth in California Health & Safety Code § 17920.3, as may be amended from time to time. 
(i)  Overgrown vegetation causing detriment to neighboring properties or property values or which is likely to attract rodents, vermin or other pests, or which causes a hazardous condition to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. 
(j)  Premises, including, but not limited to, building exteriors, which are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes diminution of the property values of surrounding property or is materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping and disposing of, or the scattering over the property or premises, of any of the following: (1) lumber, junk, trash or debris; (2) abandoned or discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers; (3) stagnant water or excavation(s); or (4) any device, decoration, design, fence, structure, clothesline or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its condition or inappropriate location. 
(k)  The use of any premises for the purpose of any criminal activity as proscribed by federal or state law or this Code whether or not such activity results in the filing of criminal charges. 
(l)  The maintenance or use of any premises in such a manner as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of adjacent properties. 
(m)  The maintenance or use of any premises, or activity conducted on any premises, in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance as otherwise defined by any provision state law or this Code. 
(n)  The maintenance of any premises in violation of Section 8.04.060 of this Title related to graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Chapter 8.03 - Administrative Public Nuisance Abatement Procedures, Appeals and Cost Recovery[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Title 8 pertaining to the replacement of this Chapter. 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement, Government Code § 38771 et seq.; abatement of nuisances by public agencies, Civil Code § 3494.; civil actions to abate nuisances, Code of Civil Procedure § 731. 
 
Sec. 8.03.010. - Right of entry. 
(a)  An Enforcement Officer may use all lawful means to enter upon any premises in the City for purposes of inspecting the premises for a public nuisance and/or for the removal of a public nuisance from the premises. 
(b)  If the owner or any occupant of a premises refuses to allow the Enforcement Officer to enter onto the premises for inspection or abatement of a public nuisance, or otherwise fails to respond to a request from the Enforcement Officer for consent to enter onto the premises for purposes of nuisance inspection and/or abatement, the Enforcement Officer shall apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for a warrant authorizing entry onto such premises for purposes of performing an inspection or abatement of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.03.020. - Notification of nuisance and abatement thereof. 
(a)  Whenever an Enforcement Officer declares or finds that any nuisance activity or condition is being maintained or carried on at any premises in the City in violation of the provisions of this Title, the Enforcement Officer shall give written "notice of abatement" to any and all responsible persons or parties setting forth a brief description of the activity or condition constituting the nuisance as well as the section(s) of this Title, or other relevant federal, state, or local law, that are being violated. 
(b)  The notice shall set forth a reasonable time limit not to exceed 30 days for correcting or abating the nuisance and may also set forth: 
(1)  Suggested methods of correction or abatement and the fact that the City will take steps to abate the nuisance if the person fails to do so; and 
(2)  That administrative penalties and/or administrative costs will be assessed against the responsible person in the event the nuisance activity or condition is not corrected or abated within the time frame established by the notice for correcting or abating the nuisance. 
(c)  An Enforcement Officer may grant a reasonable extension of time to abate a nuisance if, in his or her opinion, good cause for an extension exists. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.03.030. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person who receives a notice of abatement, or any person with a legal or equitable interest in a premises that is the subject of a notice of abatement, shall have the right to appeal the notice of abatement. Appeals of any notice of abatement shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Section. 
(a)  Any request for an appeal of a notice of abatement must be made, in writing, to the City Manager within ten calendar days of the date of service of the notice of abatement, and may request a hearing on the question(s) of: (1) whether a nuisance activity or condition in fact exists; (2) whether the person to whom the notice was directed is responsible for the creation or maintenance of such nuisance; and/or (3) whether the Enforcement Officer has provided sufficient time to correct or abate the nuisance condition or activity. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a timely written request for an appeal, the City Manager shall establish the date, time and place of the hearing and shall so notify the applicant in writing. The hearing shall be set for a date not more than 60 calendar days from the date of receipt of the written request for an appeal. Any order of abatement contained within a notice of abatement shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for any public nuisance condition or activity that is expressly identified by the notice of abatement as constituting an immediate danger to life, limb, or property, the abatement order shall not be stayed pending the outcome of appeal and must be abated immediately or as otherwise stated in the notice of abatement. 
(c)  The appellant shall be entitled to a copy of any documents or evidence upon which the Enforcement Officer's decision to issue a notice of abatement was based. 
(d)  Written notice of the date, time and location scheduled for the appeal as set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section, and the documentation and evidence provided for in Subsection (c) of this Section, shall be mailed at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, by U.S. Mail, with proof of service attached, addressed to the address listed on the Notice of Abatement, or the address given in the request for appeal, as the case may be. 
(e)  Failure to submit a timely written request for an appeal as provided for in this Section shall constitute a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies, and shall be deemed a conclusive admission that: (1) the nuisance activity or condition described in the notice of abatement does or did exist, (2) that the person(s) to whom the notice was directed is, in fact, the person(s) responsible for creating or maintaining the nuisance condition or activity, and (3) that the time specified in the notice for the correction or abatement of the nuisance is, in fact, reasonable under the circumstances. 
(f)  The hearing provided for in this Section shall be conducted by a City-appointed Administrative Hearing Officer. At the time stated in the notice of hearing, the Hearing Officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, testimony from the appellant, owners, City personnel, neighbors, witnesses or other interested parties, and may consider staff reports or other written materials relative to the matter. The hearing may be continued from time to time as appropriate. Proof of the existence of a nuisance condition or activity must be by a preponderance of the evidence, and the burden of proof on this issue is upon the City. 
(g)  The following rules of evidence shall apply to administrative hearings conducted pursuant to this Chapter: 
(1)  The notice of abatement shall be received by the hearing officer and shall be made a part of the record on appeal. The notice of abatement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the nuisance condition and of the facts stated in the notice of abatement. 
(2)  Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or affirmation. The Hearing Officer shall have authority to administer oaths, and to receive and rule on admissibility of evidence. 
(3)  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who have testified under direct examination. The Hearing Officer may call and examine any witness. 
(4)  Technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply to administrative hearings provided for in this Chapter. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay testimony may be admissible and used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any evidence given in direct examination, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless such testimony would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, undue, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded. 
(h)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer may do any of the following: (1) uphold the notice of abatement as issued by the Enforcement Officer, (2) deem the notice of abatement as invalid on the grounds that the evidence presented did not establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the nuisance condition or activity described in the notice of abatement does or did exist, and/or that the person(s) to whom the notice to abate was directed was responsible for the nuisance activity or condition, or (3) extend the time for compliance with the notice of abatement. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. Written notice of the Hearing Officer's findings and decision shall be given within ten calendar days of the conclusion of the appeal hearing, and said notice shall state clearly and concisely the basis for the Hearing Officer's findings with respect to the existence of the nuisance activity or condition. The notice of decision shall further state that unless the responsible person or party shall cause the abatement of the nuisance activity or condition, pursuant to the orders contained in the notice of abatement or as amended by the decision of the Hearing Officer, the nuisance shall be abated, if appropriate, by the City at the expense of the owner or responsible person(s), and that administrative penalties and/or costs will be assessed against the person(s) for noncompliance with the order as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.03.040. - Failure to abate nuisance. 
Upon the failure of any person to abate any nuisance as required by this Title, the Enforcement Officer may, subject to the requirements of Section 8.03.010, enter onto the premises upon which the nuisance exists for purposes of abating the nuisance, which abatement may be performed by City forces or by private contractor retained by the City. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.03.050. - Costs of abatement; record; hearing. 
(a)  Whenever the Enforcement Officer is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this Title, payment of the cost of abatement shall be assessed to the responsible party and shall reflect the actual costs incurred by the City in effecting the abatement. 
(b)  The Enforcement Officer shall keep an itemized account of any cost incurred by the City in abating a nuisance, including but not limited to cost incurred to perform any abatement work, costs to the City for preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, costs of inspection of the abatement work, costs of printing and mailing as required under this Title, and the costs of any attorney's fees incurred by the City associated with the public nuisance activity. 
(c)  Within 180 calendar days of the abatement of the nuisance, the Enforcement Officer shall cause to be prepared an itemized statement of costs which shall be provided to the responsible party or parties and, if different from the responsible party or parties, to the owner of the premises (as identified in the most recent county assessor or county recorder's records), together with a notice of the time and place when a hearing will be held by the City Council to determine the appropriateness of the costs assessed. The notice described in this Subsection shall be sent via certified mail and first class mail. 
(d)  At the time fixed for the hearing concerning the appropriateness of the abatement costs assessed, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, testimony from the person assessed, City personnel or other interested parties, and may consider staff reports or other written materials relevant to the matter. Proof of the appropriateness of the costs or penalties assessed must be by a preponderance of the evidence and the City shall have the burden of proof on this issue. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall confirm, correct, or modify the amount of the costs assessed as deemed appropriate by the City Council after consideration of the evidence, and shall adopt a resolution making its findings and determinations with respect to the amounts to be assessed. The amounts so approved by the City Council shall be a special assessment on the property upon which the nuisance activity or condition existed. 
(e)  Within five calendar days of the adoption of the City Council's resolution regarding the assessment of costs, the Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice to the responsible party or parties of the abatement costs assessed as confirmed, corrected, or modified by the City Council, and shall demand that said costs be paid within ten calendar days of the date of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.03.060. - Assessment of costs against the property. 
If any costs assessed pursuant to Section 8.03.050 are not paid within ten calendar days of the notice required by Section 8.03.050(e), the costs shall constitute a special assessment against the parcel of land to which it relates. 
(a)  Recordation of notice. A notice of the special assessment shall be recorded in the Orange County Clerk-Recorder's Office. 
(b)  Manner of collection. After recordation, and pursuant to Government Code § 38773.5, the special assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, before the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property, but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(c)  Form of notice. The notice of special assessment shall be in a form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
(Claim of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita) 
In compliance with the provisions of Title 8 of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code, the City Manager of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, on or about the [DAY] day of [MONTH], [YEAR], did cause the premises hereinafter described to be rehabilitated or the structure(s) or improvement(s) on the premises to be demolished or repaired in order to abate a public nuisance on the real property. The abatement was conducted in compliance with a Notice of Abatement dated the [DAY] day of [MONTH], [YEAR]. The City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita did, on the [DAY] day of [MONTH], [YEAR], assess the cost of the abatement, demolition, rehabilitation, or repair upon the real property, and the same has not been paid nor has any part thereof. Therefore, the City of Rancho Santa Margarita does hereby declare the costs of the abatement, demolition, rehabilitation, or repair in the amount so assessed, to wit, the sum of [DOLLAR AMOUNT] dollars ($[  ]), to be a special assessment against the real property. 
The special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent assessments remain unpaid, the property may be sold after three (3) years by the tax collector. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. 
However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, before the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property, but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
The real property upon which the special assessment is levied, is that certain parcel of land located in the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, County of Orange, State of California, commonly known as [STREET ADDRESS], and more particularly described as follows: 
[Legal description, including assessor's parcel number] 
The owner of record of the parcel of land is: 
[Name and address of recorded owner of the parcel] 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.03.070. - Emergency abatement. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Title with respect to the abatement of public nuisances, whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that a premises, a building, or a structure is structurally unsafe, constitutes a fire hazard, or otherwise creates an immediate danger to human life, he or she may, without observing the provisions of this Chapter with respect to abatement procedures, immediately and forthwith abate the existing public nuisance. 
(b)  Any abatement pursuant to this Section shall be limited to the actions necessary to neutralize the immediate danger only. Within five calendar days of any emergency abatement conducted pursuant to this Section, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the responsible person(s) of the nature of the emergency abatement undertaken and the grounds therefore. The notice required by this Subsection shall comply with Section 8.01.050 and shall notify the responsible person(s) of the right to a post-abatement hearing upon written request. 
(c)  Any person who receives a post-abatement notice as described in Subsection (b) of this Section, or any person with a legal or equitable interest in a premises that is the subject of such a post-abatement notice, may request a post-abatement hearing. Any request for a post-abatement hearing must be made, in writing, to the City Manager within ten calendar days of the date of service of the post-abatement notice. Upon receipt of a timely written request, a post-abatement hearing shall be provided to the responsible person(s), which hearing shall be conducted in the manner described in Section 8.03.030, except that in a post-abatement hearing, the Hearing Officer shall also decide whether the City has established, by a preponderance of evidence, that emergency abatement was necessary under the circumstances. 
(d)  Failure to submit a timely written request for post-abatement hearing as provided for in this Section shall constitute a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies, and shall be deemed a conclusive admission that: (1) the nuisance activity or condition described in the post-abatement notice did exist, (2) that the person(s) to whom the notice was directed is/are, in fact, the person(s) responsible for creating or maintaining the nuisance condition or activity, and (3) that emergency abatement was necessary under the circumstances. 
(e)  The required hearing regarding assessment of costs associated with any emergency abatement shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Title. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Chapter 8.04 - Graffiti[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to Title 8. 
State Law reference— Graffiti generally, Penal Code § 594 et seq.; graffiti removal, Government Code §§ 38772 et seq., 53069.3. 
 
Sec. 8.04.010. - Findings, purpose and authority. 
(a)  Graffiti on public and private property in the City creates blight, deteriorates neighborhoods, decreases property values and leads to an increase in other crime. 
(b)  Strengthened enforcement against possession of graffiti tools and the speedy removal of graffiti will assist law enforcement in preventing the spread of graffiti in the City. 
(c)  Government Code § 53069.3 authorizes the City to enact an ordinance to use City funds to remove graffiti if it finds graffiti obnoxious and also authorizes the City to enact an ordinance to recover City funds spent to remove graffiti. 
(d)  Graffiti is obnoxious and is a public and private nuisance. 
(e)  The City authorizes the establishment of a program to allow the use of City funds to remove graffiti from public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.020. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Chapter, words, phrases and terms used herein shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise defined below: 
Cost of removal includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the City in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person(s) responsible for the graffiti. 
Etching tool means any sharp or pointed instrument, which is capable of etching or marking glass, plastic, wood, metal or concrete surfaces. This definition includes, but is not limited to, picks, scribes, awls, markers, and etchers. 
Felt tip marker means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which at its broadest width is at least one-eighth-inch, containing an ink which is not water soluble. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, symbol, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any public or private real or personal property. 
Graffiti implement means any implement capable of marking a surface to create graffiti, including, but not limited to, spray actuators, paint sticks, felt-tip markers or marking pens, marking instruments, drill bits, grinding stones, scribers, glass cutters or etching tools, or other implements capable of scarring glass, plastic, wood, metal or concrete. Graffiti implement does not include highlighters used to mark reading materials or other implements otherwise regulated by state law. 
Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth-inch in width, visible from a distance of 20 feet, and not water soluble. 
Spray actuator means an object which is capable of being attached to an aerosol paint container for the purpose of spraying the substance contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.030. - Graffiti prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to paint, chalk, etch, or otherwise apply graffiti on public or privately owned buildings, permanent structures, or places located on public or privately owned property within the City. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.040. - Possession of graffiti implements prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement for the purpose of defacing, marking or damaging any public or private property, without the express consent of the owner of such property; provided, however, that nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit conduct which is prohibited by Penal Code § 594.1. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.050. - Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a minor to possess any graffiti implement while upon public or private property, without the express consent of the owner of such property. 
(b)  This Section shall not apply to a minor who is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or is attending or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at the school that has, as a written requirement of the class, the need to use any graffiti implement. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.060. - Graffiti on private property prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any private property to permit graffiti or other inscribed materials to remain on structures so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the City, provided the City has given written notice to the owner or occupant requiring removal of the graffiti within a period of not less than three calendar days and such time period has elapsed without remedial action. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.070. - Removal of graffiti. 
(a)  Whenever the City Manager determines that illegal graffiti exists, the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, is authorized to arrange for the removal of the graffiti solely at the City's cost and expense, without reimbursement from the property owner upon whose property the graffiti has been applied, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Removal of graffiti on property owned by a public entity other than the City shall be authorized only after securing the consent of the other public entity; 
(2)  Removal of graffiti on private property shall be authorized only after securing the consent of the property owner; and 
(3)  In removing the graffiti, the area painted or repaired shall not be more extensive than that covered by the graffiti. 
(b)  The procedure for abatement set forth in this Chapter is an alternative procedure to any other procedure permitted by state or local law, including, but not limited to, those procedures set forth in Chapter 8.03 of this Title, and shall neither prohibit the use of any other lawful abatement procedure nor be deemed to prevent the City Council from ordering the commencement of any civil action to abate a nuisance as an alternative to, or in conjunction with, the proceedings set forth in this Chapter. In addition thereto, any nuisance that is defined as a misdemeanor or infraction by any provision of this Code, or by any of the provisions of any code, building standard, regulation or other standard adopted and incorporated by reference by this Code, may be abated by criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.080. - Responsibility for cost of removal. 
(a)  Whenever graffiti has been removed from public or private property at the expense of the City, all costs of removal shall be a personal obligation against the person who placed any of the graffiti. If such person(s) is a minor, the parent or legal guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(b)  Upon the determination of the costs of removal, the City shall invoice the responsible person(s) for such costs. 
(c)  Subject to the notice and hearing requirements of Section 8.03.050, the City may, at its discretion, make the cost of removal of graffiti a special assessment against the property of the person who placed any of the graffiti in accordance with Section 8.03.060. If such person is a minor, the cost of removal of graffiti may be made a special assessment against the property of the parent or legal guardian having custody and control of the minor. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.090. - Graffiti reward. 
A reward in an amount established by resolution of the City Council may be authorized, offered and paid by the City to any person who provides information which leads to the determination of the identity of, and the apprehension and conviction of, any person who defaces with graffiti, public or private property within the City. In the event of damage to public property, the person committing the graffiti or, if that person is a minor, the parent or legal guardian having custody and control of the minor, shall be liable to reimburse the City for any rewards paid pursuant to this Section. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Sec. 8.04.100. - Penalty. 
In addition to other penalties under state law which may be applicable, any violation of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable as provided in Chapter 1.03. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-11-2017)  
Title 9 - Planning and Zoning[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Chapters 9.1 through 9.11. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Chapters 9.01 through 9.11. 
 
Chapter 9.01 - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 9.01.010. - Purpose. 
This Title has been adopted in accordance with Government Code §§ 65800 et seq. and is established to: 
(1)  Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(2)  Implement the General Plan; and 
(3)  Provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land and resources. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.020. - Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known as the Planning and Zoning Title of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code or the "Rancho Santa Margarita Zoning Code." 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 4, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.030. - Authority. 
This Zoning Code is adopted pursuant to Article XI Section 7, of the Constitution of the State and in compliance with the requirements of Government Code Title 7, Planning and Zoning Law, for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(1)  Development Services Director authority. Subject to the general control and supervision of the City Manager, the Development Services Director shall have the following duties, responsibilities, and authority for this Title, as well as other duties, responsibilities, and authority prescribed for the Development Services Director under other laws and ordinances, City regulations, and administrative provisions: 
a.  The Development Services Director shall be responsible for the processing of all development applications in this Title, in accordance with the applicable provisions contained in that Section. Table 9.08.1 of Chapter 9.08 identifies which applications the Development Services Director has authority to approve or deny. 
b.  The Development Services Director shall have authority or responsibilities assigned by the provisions of this Title. Said authority and responsibility may be delegated through deputies or assistants appointed by the Director for such purpose. Therefore, any time the term "Development Services Director" is used in this Title, it shall mean "Development Services Director or his/her designee." 
c.  The Development Services Director shall be responsible for determining the applicable Section of this Title that applies when separate provisions of this Title appear to be in conflict. 
d.  The Development Services Director shall review the plans and process building permit applications for subdivisions and create and assign official street addresses. 
e.  The Development Services Director shall investigate and submit to the Planning Commission or City Council, his/her findings on appeals where it is alleged there is an error or abuse of discretion in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made during the administration of this Title. 
(2)  Building Official authority. Subject to the general control and supervision of the City Manager or his/her designee, the Building Official shall have the following duties, responsibilities and authority for this Title, as well as other duties, responsibilities and authority prescribed for the Building Official under other laws and ordinances, City regulations, and administrative provisions: 
a.  The Building Official shall be responsible for the following inspection and plan checking duties: 
1.  To check plans and make structural inspections of residential and non-residential construction to ensure compliance with the latest adopted Uniform Building Code and other related codes and laws; and 
2.  To check plans and make inspections of construction work for conformity with the latest adopted Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code and any other related Codes and laws. 
b.  The Building Official shall have authority or responsibilities assigned by the provisions of this Title. Said authority and responsibility may be delegated through deputies or assistants appointed by the Building Official for such purpose. Therefore, any time the term "Building Official" is used in this Title, it shall mean "Building Official or his/her designee." 
c.  The Building Official in cooperation with the Development Services Director shall issue certificates of use and occupancy for all building construction and modifications that may change the occupancy or building classification of existing buildings. 
d.  Where any use of land, building, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or addition to any building or structure is being done contrary to the provisions of this Title, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served to any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized to recommence by the Building Official. 
(3)  Code Enforcement authority. Subject to the general control and supervision of the City Manager or his/her designee, the Code Enforcement Officer shall investigate all purported violations of any of the provisions of this Title, investigate complaints and conduct the follow up of violations to this Title, including serving as a courtroom witness. 
(4)  City Engineer authority. Subject to the general control and supervision of the City Manager, the City Engineer shall have the following duties, responsibilities and authority for this Title, as well as other duties, responsibilities and authority prescribed for the City Engineer under other laws and ordinances, City regulations and administrative provisions: 
a.  The City Engineer shall provide the engineering and technical review of plans, and field inspections of drainage, soil, and geological conditions relating to building, infrastructure, and earthwork construction as set forth in this Title. 
b.  The City Engineer shall issue all transportation, grading, landscaping, and encroachment permits. 
c.  The City Engineer shall have authority or responsibilities assigned by the provisions of this Title. Said authority and responsibility may be delegated through deputies or assistants appointed by the City Engineer for such purpose. Therefore, any time the term "City Engineer" is used in this Title, it shall mean "City Engineer or his/her designee." 
(5)  Planning Commission authority. 
a.  The Planning Commission authority is per Chapter 2.20. With respect to this Title, the Planning Commission shall have the authority and responsibilities described and illustrated in Chapter 9.08 and anywhere else the Planning Commission is identified within this Title. 
b.  The Planning Commission's functions are identified in Table 9.08.1 in Chapter 9.08 and include: 
1.  Reviewing certain applications and forwarding recommendations to the City Council; and 
2.  Hearing and deciding appeals to Development Services Director decisions. In certain instances (see Chapter 9.08), the Planning Commission has the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny an application, and their decision is final unless appealed to the City Council. 
(6)  City Council authority. The City Council authority is per Chapter 2.10. With respect to this Title, the City Council shall have the direct authority and responsibilities described and illustrated in Chapter 9.08 Administration, and anywhere else the City Council is identified within this Title. The City Council's primary function is to consider various project applications and Planning Commission recommendations. The City Council has the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny certain applications as identified in Table 9.08.1 of Chapter 9.08. 
The City Council shall constitute the Board of Appeals for decisions by the Planning Commission. Only matters originally heard by the Planning Commission shall be appealable to the City Council and their decision is final (see Chapter 9.08). Appeals heard and decided by the Planning Commission are not appealable to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 4, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.040. - Effect of provisions. 
(a)  Effective date. Chapters 9.01 through 9.11 shall take effect and be in force on and after 30 days following the date of adoption. 
(b)  Effectuation. The provisions of this Title governing the use of land, buildings and structures, the size of yards, abutting buildings and structures, height and bulk of buildings, standards of performance, and other provisions are in effect upon all lands within the City's jurisdiction. 
(c)  Effect on existing laws and ordinances. The provisions of this Title shall not be interpreted to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way affect any existing provision of any statute, permit, deed restriction, or covenant adopted or issued relating to the use of land or buildings, or the erection, construction, moving, alteration or enlargement of any structure or improvement. 
(d)  Effect on private agreements/development agreements. The provisions of this Title shall not interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants, or other existing agreements between parties. 
(e)  Effect on planned community texts and feature plans. The zoning map, standards, and regulations codified in this Title wholly replace the regulations of any previously approved planned community and feature plan documents. Improvements and development existing on or before (30 days following the date of adoption) and that do not conform to the property development and performance standards in this Title shall continue to exist as provided in Section 9.04.080, unless otherwise stated in this Title. 
(f)  Effect on developed land. The provisions of this Title apply to new development, as well as to the modification and redevelopment of previously developed property, unless otherwise noted in Section 9.04.080. Improvements and development existing on or before (30 days following the date of adoption) and that do not conform to the property development and performance standards in this Title shall continue to exist as provided in Section 9.04.080 unless otherwise stated in this Title. 
(g)  Effect on County Code. The provisions of this Title shall supersede and take precedence over any conflicting provision of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange that may have been incorporated into this Code by reference or that may have been saved from repeal therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 5, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 13-01, § 11, 8-14-2013)  
Sec. 9.01.050. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Interpretation as minimum requirements. The provisions of this Title are held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(b)  Interpretation duties. If ambiguity arises concerning the content or intent of this Title with respect to appropriate classifications, allowable uses, definitions, zone boundaries, height, yard, and setback requirements, or other standards or requirements, the Development Services Director shall ascertain all pertinent facts, and set forth the findings and interpretation(s). Unless such finding and interpretation is appealed to the Planning Commission, the Development Services Director's interpretation shall thereafter govern. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.055. - Consistency with all laws. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, any use, entitlement, authorization, license, or permit allowed or issued under this Title, including without limitation any accessory or ancillary use, shall be consistent with applicable State and Federal law. Any permit, license, entitlement, or authorization issued in conflict with the provisions of controlling State or Federal law, or the provisions of this Title, shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 12-9-2009)  
Sec. 9.01.060. - Definitions—General. 
For the purposes of this Title, certain terms are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the past and future tense, and vice versa; words in the singular form shall include the plural form and vice versa; any gender includes the other gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
Words and phrases used in the Zoning Code and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language, and as ultimately determined by the Development Services Director. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 4, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.070. - "A" definitions. 
Abandonment means the cessation of use and maintenance of a property by the owner for a specified period of time. 
Abate means to end a nuisance, emergency, or nonconformance. 
Abut or abutting means a parcel of land having a common boundary with another parcel of land, including parcels which have no common boundary other than a common corner. 
Access means the place or way by which pedestrians and/or vehicles shall have safe, adequate and suitable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this Title. 
Accessory dwelling unit shall mean an attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes an efficiency unit, as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 17958.1, and a manufactured home, as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 18007. 
Accessory structure or accessory building means a structure or building that is incidental to the principal structure. Such structures may be attached to or detached from the principal structure. Typical accessory structures would include, but are not limited to, garages, gazebos, workshops, sheds, decks, and patios. Except for accessory dwelling units and caretaker's residences as defined in this Title, accessory structures and buildings are not designed for human habitation. 
Accessory use means a use of a portion of land or building that is customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building that is located on the same lot as such principal use. Accessory uses typically are very small in proportion to the principal use 
Acreage, gross means the total land area within a defined lot or parcel of land before the exclusion of public streets and rights-of-way, public parks, public school sites and other public facilities. 
Acreage, net means the total area of a site or lot minus any and all required dedications for public streets and rights-of-way, public parks, public school sites and other public facilities. 
Adjacent means lying near or close to each other. Separated only by an alley, street, highway or recorded easement. 
Adjoining means joined contiguous to, in contact with each other so that no third object intervenes. 
Adult business. See Section 9.04.030 and Chapter 6.10. 
Adult day care facility means any family home, group care facility, or similar facility (as determined by the State) licensed by the State to provide less than 24-hour non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. 
Adult living facility. See "Rest home." 
Affordable housing means housing which is rented or sold for an amount that is limited by a set percentage of the County median income, adjusted for family size, as reported and updated annually by the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) as defined in Government Code § 65589.5(h)(3). 
Agent means any person authorized to act for the owner of a property by virtue of a notarized statement of authorization, a proof of contract to purchase, or a lease to the property. 
Allowed means permitted pursuant to the regulation in this Title. 
Alley means a narrow service way, either public or private, which provides a permanently reserved but secondary means of public access. Alleys are not intended for general traffic circulation, but for services and delivery access. Alleys are typically located along rear property lines. 
Alteration means any interior or exterior change to a structure. 
Amateur radio antenna means any antenna used for the purpose of transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) e.g., for a "ham" radio. 
Animal, domestic means any tame and domesticated animal or household pet commonly maintained in a household. 
Animal day care means a commercial recreation facility that provides nonmedical care to domestic animals, typically dogs, in need of supervision on less than a 24-hour basis. This classification includes activities such as feeding, exercising, grooming and incidental activities. 
Animal hospital means a facility where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Same as "veterinary clinic." 
Animal shelter means a facility providing short-term and long-term boarding for stray animals which may include services such as pet adoption, spay/neuter clinics and the reunion of pets and their owners. 
Annexation means the incorporation of land area into the jurisdiction of the City with a resulting change in the boundaries of the City. 
Antenna means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting disks or similar devices used for the transmission and/or reception of electromagnetic radiation waves, including devices having active elements extending in any direction and directional parasitic arrays having elements attached to a generally horizontal boom which may be mounted upon a vertical support structure. 
Antenna, dish means an antenna distinguished from a "conventional" antenna by the use of a parabolic or spherical disk. 
Antenna, ground-mounted means an antenna, the entire weight of which is supported by a platform, framework, or other structural system, which system is affixed directly on or in the ground by a foundation and which system is freestanding, excluding lateral bracing to a building. 
Antenna height means the overall vertical length of the antenna and grade, including any building on which the antenna is mounted. 
Antenna, roof-mounted means an antenna, the entire weight of which is supported by the roof of a building through the use of a framework or other structural system. 
Apartment means one or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a building containing two or more dwelling units for rent only. 
Apartment building means a structure containing two or more apartment units. 
Appeal means a request by a project applicant or other qualified individual or agency for a City body to modify, reconsider, or reverse a decision rendered by a subordinate City body or City staff. 
Applicant means the owner(s) or lessee(s) of property, or their authorized agents, or person(s) seeking discretionary or nondiscretionary approval from the City. 
Arcade, video means a business establishment containing four or more video, pinball, or similar player-operated amusement devices for commercial use. 
Architectural projection means anything attached to and extended outside the outer face of the exterior wall of a structure and not intended for shelter or occupancy, including, but not limited to, stairs, balconies, fireplaces, etc. 
Assisted living facility means an establishment that provides services to assist with daily activities, including, but not limited to, dressing, grooming, bathing, etc. 
Attached means connected, or in a reference to dwelling units, sharing at least one common wall. 
Attic means the uninhabitable space between the upper surface of the top floor and the roof above. An attic is not considered a story. 
Auto repair, major means general repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including, but not limited to, body work, framework, welding, and major painting service. 
Auto repair, minor means the replacement of any part of repair or any part that does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work, minor painting, and upholstering service. 
Average daily traffic (ADT) means the average number of vehicles using a traveled way for a 24-hour period determined by dividing the total number of vehicles for a stated period by the number of days in that time period. In calculating vehicle trips, trucks with trailers shall be adjusted to a passenger car equivalent. 
Awning means a nonstructural roof-like cover that is attached to and projects from the wall of a structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 4-27-2011; Ord. No. 18-01, §§ 4, 5, 2-14-2018)  
Sec. 9.01.080. - "B" definitions. 
Balcony means a platform construction that projects from the wall of a building and is surrounded by railing. 
Bar means any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises for which the license has been issued. 
Base district or base zoning district means a portion of the city within which only certain land uses and structures are permitted and certain standards are established for development of land. 
Basement means an area of a structure partially or completely underground. A basement is not considered a story unless over 50 percent of its height is above finished grade. 
Bed and breakfast means a private, owner-occupied establishment, that provides overnight lodging and breakfast for compensation. 
Boarding or rooming house means a residential building, other than a rest home, containing a single dwelling unit and not more than five guest rooms or suites of rooms where lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation. 
Brewery pub means a commercial business that conducts the retail sale of beer which is brewed on the premises. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, not including vehicles. 
Building, accessory. See "Accessory structure." 
Building coverage means a percentage referring to that portion of a lot covered only with principal and accessory buildings. See also "Floor area ratio (FAR)." 
Building exposure means a building wall which is parallel to or visible from a public or private street, highway, or designated parking area. 
Building frontage means the length of the longest building elevation facing a street. 
Building line means the exterior wall surface of a building, exclusive of architectural projections or eaves. 
Building, main means the primary or principal structure on a property in which the principal use is located. 
Building, main residential a residential building that is the main building on a residential lot. 
Building height means the vertical distance from finished grade or flood protection elevation to the highest point of the roof of a building or to the highest point of a structure other than a building. Chimneys and finials are not included in determining building height. 
 
Building site means the ground area of a lot; or the ground area of two or more lots when used in combination for a building or permitted group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by this Title. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.090. - "C" definitions. 
Car wash, automated means an enclosed building/facility designed for self-service wash and/or wash of motor vehicles by mechanical means only. 
Caretaker means a person residing in a home on a property, whose duties include, but are not limited to, direct care, supervision, or maintenance of the property or uses on the property. 
Caretaker's residence (permanent) means a residence located on a premises with a main non-residential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises, and his/her family. 
Caretaker's residence (temporary) means a temporary accessory structure containing living quarters and kitchen facilities for housing persons responsible for administering, overseeing, or maintaining security for the main use on the site during the construction period. 
Carport means a permanent roofed structure not completely enclosed, and designed for vehicle shelter or storage. 
Catering means a business, which prepares its food on-site to be served and consumed off-site. Catering does not include drive-through restaurants. 
CC&R. See "Conditions, covenants and restrictions." 
Cellular means an analog or digital wireless communication technology. 
Cemetery means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
Center means a commercial or professional use, consisting of one or more buildings sharing common facilities such as off-street parking, access, or landscaping. 
Certificate of use and occupancy means a required document issued by the Department of Building and Safety prior to occupation or use of buildings erected or structurally altered that acknowledges that such use, structure, or building complies with the provisions of this Code. 
Changed plan means a modification to a site development permit. 
Channel letters means individual letters or figures, illuminated or non-illuminated, affixed to a building or freestanding sign structure. 
Check cashing facility means a non-bank business that for compensation engages in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. Check cashing facility does not include a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods that cashes checks or issues money orders as a service that is incidental to its main purpose or business. 
Child day care center or child care nursery means a facility that provides nonmedical care to children under 18 years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis. Child day care facility includes day care centers, employer-sponsored child care centers, and family child day care homes. 
Children's home means one or more buildings used for the semi-permanent, 24-hour care of orphans or other children deprived of parental care, operated by a public agency or a philanthropic or charitable organization, but shall not include commercial enterprises operated by such organizations. 
Church means a structure or portion of a structure that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
Clinic means any facility used for outpatient medical services. 
Clubs and lodges (private) means buildings and facilities, owned or operated by a for-profit or non-profit corporation, association, person or persons, for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, to which membership is required for participation. 
Co-located means the usage of a single support structure and/or site by more than one wireless communications provider. 
Collection facility means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from the public. 
Commercial means a land use or other activity involving the sale of goods or services for financial gain. 
Commercial recreation means a land use or other activity that provides recreational opportunities for financial gain, including, but not limited to "animal day care", "dance studios" and "fitness classes." 
Commercial district means a zoning district allowing specified commercial activities including General Commercial (C), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), and Business Park (BP). 
Community care facility means any facility that provides residential care, day treatment or adult day care for children, adults, or both. See also "Residential care facility." 
Community facility means a noncommercial use established primarily for the benefit and service of the population of the community in which it is located. 
Conditional use means a use that, because of special requirements or characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district only after review by the planning commission and granting of a conditional use permit imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity. 
Conditional use permit (CUP) means a permit issued by the City authorizing establishment and operation of a conditional use. 
Conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) means a set of private agreements recorded against property deeds, which set down certain rules and regulations governing the development and use of said properties. 
Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest, in common, in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in a building on such property. 
Congregate care facility means a facility for long-term residence, which shall include common dining and social and recreational features, special safety and convenience features designed for the needs of the elderly and/or disabled, and provision of social services for residents, which must include at least two of the following: meal services, transportation, housekeeping, linen, and organized social activities. 
Contiguous. See "Adjoining." 
Convalescent facility means a building, wherein for compensation, nursing care is provided for persons suffering from illnesses, other than mental or contagious, which are not of sufficient severity to require hospitalization. 
CUP. See "Conditional use permit." 
Custom house means a house designed especially for construction on a particular residential lot. 
Cybercafe. See Chapter 6.09. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.100. - "D" definitions. 
Dance studio means any premises on which there is conducted all of the following: 
(1)  A program of instruction involving live dance; 
(2)  Instruction is offered indoors; and 
(3)  An instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present. 
Day care/day nursery. See "Child day care center." 
Deck means a structure without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal building, which has an average elevation of 30 inches or greater from finished grade. May include porches and balconies. 
Density means the number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
Density bonus means a minimum density increase of at least 25 percent over the maximum residential density. 
Density bonus housing agreement means a legally binding agreement between a developer and the City to ensure that the requirements of Government Code § 65915 are satisfied. 
Design means the physical aspects of a development, road improvement, or other construction project. Design includes, but is not limited to, street alignment, grading, landscaping, site layout, building elevations, and signage. 
Detached housing. See "Dwelling, single-family detached." 
Development project means a public or private-sector venture involving the development, construction, structural or site modification, or redevelopment of commercial, industrial, residential, or other properties. 
Development plan means a plan created to describe a proposed development on a specific building site. 
Development standard means a numerical maximum or minimum requirement set for each zoning district and regulating the development of building sites. Such standards include, but are not limited to, building setbacks, street frontage, and lot sizes. 
Dish antenna. See "Antenna, dish." 
District or zoning district means a "base district" or "overlay district." 
District, base. See "Base district." 
District, overlay. See "Overlay district." 
Drive-through means any use or structure, such as a bank, restaurant, or automatic teller machine (ATM) that is designed and intended to be used to provide for sales and/or services to patrons who remain in their vehicles. 
Driveway means a traveled way providing vehicular access to a property in single ownership or a nonresidential joint land use of more than one property from an alley or a street. 
Duplex means a building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by two households and containing two attached dwelling units. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential purposes. 
Dwelling, multiple family means a dwelling within a building on one lot, containing separate living units for three or more rental or homeownership households, having separate or joint entrances, and including apartments, condominiums, and townhomes. 
Dwelling, single-family attached means a structure or structures designed to contain two or more dwelling units under separate ownership on one lot that is under common ownership. 
Dwelling, single-family detached means a detached building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one household and containing one dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-02, § 2, 4-27-2011; Ord. No. 18-01, § 6, 2-14-2018)  
Sec. 9.01.110. - "E" definitions. 
Easement means a recorded right or interest in the land of another, which entitles the holder thereof to some use, privilege, or benefit out of or over said land. 
Eave line means the bottom of the roof eave or parapet. 
Emergency shelter means a facility that provides shelter and services to homeless families and/or homeless individuals on a limited short-term basis. 
Employee means any person employed by a firm, business, educational institution, nonprofit agency, corporation, government agency, or other entity. 
Environmental impact report (EIR) means a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects, considerations, and mitigation measures pertaining to a project pursuant to Section 21100 of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the State CEQA Guidelines. 
Environmental review means the process of determining the impact of proposed projects on the environment. The review process shall be carried out in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act and the guidelines of the City. 
Equestrian trail means a right-of-way or easement, public or private, designated for the riding of horses. Such trails may also include pedestrian use (hiking trails) and off-road non-motorized bicycle use. 
Exception means a minor modification(s) to restrictions or requirements set forth in this Title, and which has no potential for adversely impacting adjacent property. 
Extraction operation, commercial the removal or displacement of sand, gravel, rock, aggregate, clay, or similar materials conducted for financial gain. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-02, § 3, 4-27-2011)  
Sec. 9.01.120. - "F" definitions. 
Family care home means a small or large family care home licensed by the State providing 24-hour, non-medical care for persons, including mentally or physically handicapped persons. 
(1)  Large family care home means a home that provides care for seven to 14 persons, including children under the age of 18 years who reside at the home. 
(2)  Small family care home means a home that provides family care for six or fewer persons including children under the age of 18 years who reside at the home. 
Family child day care home means a licensed home that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for 14 or fewer children, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and is either a large family day care home or a small family day care home. 
(1)  Large family day care home means a home that provides family day care for seven to 14 children, inclusive, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home. 
(2)  Small family day care home means a home that provides family day care for six or fewer children, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home. 
Fence means an artificially constructed barrier, such as wooden posts, wire, iron, etc., used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening or confinement. Does not include natural barriers such as hedges, shrubs, trees, or other natural growth. 
Final map means a subdivision map prepared by or under the direction of a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer in accordance with the California Subdivision Map Act, and which is intended to be placed on record in the office of the County Recorder. 
Fitness class means an instructional use including all of the following: 
(1)  Fitness activities, including but not limited to aerobics, boxing, cheerleading, gymnastics, kickboxing, weight training, martial arts, yoga, or Pilates; 
(2)  Instruction is offered indoors; and 
(3)  An instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present. 
Fitness facility means any premises in which a range of indoor and/or outdoor fitness activities and classes are offered. 
Flag means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
Floor area, gross means the sum of the horizontal areas of the several stories of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall separating two buildings, from the centerline of such common wall. Gross floor area excludes basements and attics, the surface area of tennis courts, swimming pools, driveways, parking spaces, decks, and porches. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) means the ratio between the total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot and the total area of that lot (figure 9.01.2). 
Footcandle means a unit of illumination on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot. 
Fortune telling means an activity or establishment involving the foretelling of the future or predicting and providing advice on or about future events for financial or other valuable consideration. Fortune telling includes uses where the fortune is told through astrology, palm reading, psychometry, card or tea reading, clairvoyance, crystal gazing, divination, magic mediumship, phrenology, prophecy, spiritual reading, or similar means. Fortune telling does not include advice or forecasting based on historical trends or given during licensed medical care. 
 
Frontage, street means the length of a property line abutting a street. 
Fuel dispensing station. See "Gas station". 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.130. - "G" definitions. 
Game machine means any electric or electronic machine (e.g., pinball, video games) that provides amusement, enjoyment or entertainment and that may be operated upon the insertion of a coin or token. This term shall not include juke boxes, children's mechanical rides (e.g., horses, rocket ships), or machines that sell merchandise. 
Garage means a building or a portion of a building used primarily for the parking of vehicles belonging to the occupants of the property. 
Gas station means a commercial business which conducts the retail sale of motor vehicle and related petroleum-based fuels including but not limited to gasoline, diesel, ethanol, and propane fuels. Automobile service and repair is not included. 
General plan means the General Plan of the City adopted by the City Council. 
Grade means the lowest horizontal elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk at a point where the height is to be measured; the degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface. 
Grading means an excavation, filling in, spreading, or moving of earth, sand, gravel, rock, or other material on a lot, building site, street right-of-way or other land area. 
Gross floor area means the area included within the surrounding exterior finish wall surface of a structure or portion thereof, excluding the courtyards. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 18-01, § 7, 2-14-2018)  
Sec. 9.01.140. - "H" definitions. 
Hazardous waste means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quality, concentration, toxicity, corrosiveness, flammability, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
HCD means the State Department of Housing and Community Development. 
Home occupation means a business activity conducted in compliance with Section 9.05.060. 
Homeless shelter. See "Emergency shelter." 
Hookah bar means a primary or incidental use which offers the use of hookahs or other similar smoking devices. 
Hospital means an establishment, licensed by the State Department of Health Services, which provides accommodations, facilities and services over a continuous period of 24 hours or more, for observation, diagnosis, treatment or care of human patients who are suffering from mental or physical illness. 
Hotel means a structure or group of structures containing six or more guest rooms or suites offering temporary lodging accommodations to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-02, § 4, 4-27-2011)  
Sec. 9.01.150. - "I" definitions. 
Improvement means the construction of infrastructure and all related appurtenances, bridges, utilities, pedestrian-ways, bikeways, equestrian trails, or landscaping and irrigation in connection with an approved development or public works project, whether involving the subdivision of land or not. 
Interested person means a person who either: 
(1)  Participates in one or more public meetings or hearings held to consider an application for a land use decision; 
(2)  Is a recipient of legally-required notice of a proposed land use decision; or 
(3)  Is the owner of property that is the subject of a proposed land use decision. 
Internet cafe. See "Cybercafe." 
Irrevocable offer of dedication (IOD) means an offer made to the City for the dedication of land or facilities which, at any time, may be accepted by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.160. - "J" definitions. 
Junk means cast off, used or scrap material of any sort. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.170. - "K" definitions. 
Kennel means any place where four or more domestic animals, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained for the purpose of boarding, breeding, raising, or training for a fee or for sale. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.180. - "L" definitions. 
Landscape boundary area means the planted area consisting of trees, shrubs, groundcover, or turf that borders a project site. 
Landscaping means the planting and maintenance of some combination of trees, groundcover, shrubs, vines, flowers or lawn. In addition, the combination or design may include natural features such as rock and stone, and structural features including but not limited to fountains, reflecting pools, art work, screens, walls, fences, and benches. 
Laundromat means a facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
Logo means a trademark, copyright, or symbol of an organization which is consistently used within the conducting of the business activity. 
Lot means any numbered, lettered, or otherwise designated parcel of land shown on: 
(1)  A recorded tract map; 
(2)  A record of survey map recorded pursuant to an approved division of land; or 
(3)  A parcel map. 
Lot area, gross. See "Acreage, gross." 
Lot area, net. See "Acreage, net." 
Lot cluster means any single lot, or a group of adjacent lots having a single uninterrupted perimeter boundary enclosing all of the lots. 
Lot, corner means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets as shown in Figure 9.01.3. 
Lot coverage means that percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves, as shown in Figure 9.01.5. 
Lot depth means the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line. 
Lot, flag means a parcel of land shaped like a flag; the staff is a narrow strip of land providing vehicular and pedestrian access to a street, with the bulk of the property lying to the rear of other lots, as shown in Figure 9.01.3. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot, as shown in Figure 9.01.3. 
Lot line means a line separating one lot from another or from a public right-of-way. 
Lot line adjustment means the reconfiguration of lot lines where an equal or lesser number of lots are created. 
Lot line, front means: 
(1)  A line separating an interior lot from a street or highway; 
(2)  A line separating the narrower street frontage of a corner lot from a street or highway, unless otherwise specified by deed restriction; 
(3)  In the case of lots set back from the street, with long narrow portions for access, the line, or series of lines, delimiting the front of the buildable portion of the lot shall be established as the front lot line, as shown in Figure 9.01.4. 
Lot line, rear means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line; and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or other non-rectangular lot, a line a minimum of ten feet in length within the lot, approximately parallel to and at the maximum distance, within the lot, from the front lot line, as shown in Figure 9.01.4. 
Lot line, side means any lot boundary line, not a front lot line or a rear lot line. On a corner lot, the street right-of-way line with the greatest amount of street frontage shall be the side lot line, unless otherwise specified by deed restriction, as shown in Figure 9.01.4. 
Lot width means the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at a point midway between the front and rear lot line. 
Lower slope means in relation to terraces on manufactured slopes, the lower slope shall be that portion of the slope below the terrace. 
 
Firgure 9.01.3: Lot Types 
 
Figure 9.01.4: Lot Lines 
 
Figure 9.01.5: Lot Coverage 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.190. - "M" definitions. 
Main residential building. See "Building, main residential." 
Manufactured housing means housing that is constructed of manufactured components, assembled partly at the site rather than totally at the site, and as defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 18007. Also referred to as "modular housing" or "factory-built housing." 
Marijuana business means any activity, whether or not carried out for commercial gain, which involves cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storage, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, or sale of marijuana or any marijuana-infused products. This definition shall include any of the foregoing activities conducted by or on behalf of a qualified patient or the primary caregiver of a qualified patient. All references in this Section to "marijuana business," shall be synonymous with "marijuana dispensary," "mobile marijuana dispensary," and "marijuana cultivation site," which are defined in Section 9.05.140. The term "marijuana business" shall not include "personal cultivation of marijuana," as defined in Section 9.05.140. 
Massage establishment means any business or establishment with a fixed location within the City of Rancho Santa Margarita where any individual, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or combination of individuals, offers, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massage services, as defined in Chapter 4.02, within the City, including the business office of a sole provider who provides massage services at such business office. Any type of business or establishment at which massage services are provided shall be considered a massage establishment for purposes of this Title, regardless if the business holds itself out as something other than a massage establishment and/or also offers or provides other types of products or services. Any business or establishment that offers any combination of massage services and sauna facilities, including, but not limited to, showers, baths, wet and dry heat rooms, pools and hot tubs, shall be deemed a massage establishment under this Title. 
Mini-mart or food convenience store means a business offering for sale food products both fresh and refined, including but not limited to fresh fruits and vegetables, prepackaged and processed food products, dairy products, baked goods, and beverages within a building less than 5,000 square feet. 
Mini-storage. See "Self-storage facility." 
Mixed-use development means a project that integrates two or more land uses including residential, office, commercial, service, and employment. 
Mobile home or manufactured home means a home built on a permanent steel chassis in a factory to the specifications of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and installed either with or without a permanent foundation. 
Model home means a dwelling unit temporarily used for display purposes as an example of dwelling units available or to be available for sale or rent in a particular subdivision or other residential development approved by the City. Model homes may also incorporate sales or rental offices for dwellings within the development. 
Modular or factory built home. See "Manufactured housing." 
Monopole means a structure composed of a single spire used to support antennas or related equipment. 
Motel means an establishment otherwise defined as "hotel" with at least 25 percent of all rooms having direct access to parking areas without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building. 
Multi-tenant means a building occupied by more than one business or organization. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 13-01, § 3, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 16-05, § 4, 10-12-2016; Ord. No. 17-02, § 5, 5-24-2017; Ord. No. 17-03, § 3, 9-13-2017; Ord. No. 18-01, § 8, 2-14-2018)  
Sec. 9.01.200. - "N" definitions. 
Noncommercial means a land use or other activity that does not involve the sale of goods or services for financial gain. 
Nonconforming activity means an activity that, under the zoning regulations, is not itself a permitted activity where it is located or does not conform to the development standards, performance standards, or other requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming structure means any structure upon land, including any sign, that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the structure was built or the improvement made, but which, as a result of a subsequently enacted ordinance or law, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
Nonconforming use means any use of land or property that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the use was established, but which, because of a subsequently enacted ordinance or law, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zoning district in which the use is located. 
Non-restricted units means all units within a housing development excluding units restricted for affordable housing. 
NPDES means National Pollution Discharge Elimination Systems of the Clean Water Act. 
Nursing home. See "Rest home." 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.210. - "O" definitions. 
Open space areas means: 
(1)  Land area not devoted to or covered by structures or any area serving motor vehicles (such as parking areas, loading areas, driveways, streets, or alleys), and not part of any required yard; 
(2)  Areas not a part of a manufactured or altered slope having a ratio of steeper than three to one (3:1); or 
(3)  Areas with a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum contiguous area of 300 square feet. 
Outdoor storage, permanent means the use of a premises or part of a premises not enclosed by a building, for the storage of materials or equipment, not otherwise classified as temporary storage. 
Outdoor storage, temporary means the use of a premises or part of a premises not enclosed by a building, for the storage of materials or equipment for a period not greater than 30 days in a 60-day period. 
Overlay district means a certain portion of the City wherein regulations relating to specific environmental and/or physical characteristics are imposed in addition to those of the zoning district covering the land in question. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.220. - "P" definitions. 
Parapet means an architecturally integrated low wall, railing, or screen to protect the edge of a building's platform or roof. 
Parcel means a contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, owned by, or recorded as the property of the same person. 
Parcel map means a map, prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, showing the subdivision of land into four or less lots in accordance with the provisions of the California Subdivision Map Act and this Title, and which shows detailed information sufficient for recordation by the County Recorder. 
Parking facilities, off-site shall include any parking lot or structure for the parking of motor vehicles which serve a use or uses which are located on a different legal lot of record from that of the parking facility and do not directly adjoin the lot served. Off-site parking facilities do not include parking lots or structures which are classified as "joint use/shared parking" as provided by Section 9.06.090. 
Parking facility means an area, either open or enclosed, within a structure or portion thereof, designed or used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Parking lot, public means an open parking facility which is not accessory to a structure or use on the same or another lot. 
Parking management plan means a plan, the principal aim of which is to obtain maximum use from a limited number of parking spaces. 
Parking, shared or joint use means a public or private parking area used jointly by two or more uses. 
Parking space or stall means a designated area within a parking facility designed and used for the temporary parking of one motor vehicle. 
Parking structure means a structure of two or more stories, whether privately or publicly owned, used for parking more than four automobiles. 
Parkway means a piece of land located between the rear of a curb and the front of a sidewalk or between the sidewalk and property line, usually used for planting low ground cover and/or street trees and separating pedestrians from vehicles within the right-of-way. 
Patio means a level, surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal building open on one or more sides whose principal use shall be for outdoor entertaining and recreation. 
Patio cover means a solid or open roof structure not exceeding 12 feet in height and covering a patio or deck. Patio covers may be detached or attached to another structure. 
PC cafe. See "Cybercafe." 
Pedestrian ways means a paved right-of-way for pedestrians that is separate and protected from the traveled portion of the roadway, and free from vehicular traffic. 
Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
Permit means any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Code, together with the application required for such permit, the conditions upon which such permit is issued, and the plans, specifications, reports, and approved modifications pertaining thereto. 
Permitted use means a use permitted in a zone district which requires only ministerial approval. 
Planning commission means the Planning Commission of the City, unless some other commission, board or committee is indicated. 
Planned community means communities developed per land use plans and development agreements that identify specific land uses, levels of development allowed, and important public facilities. 
Porch means a covered deck, usually having a separate roof, at an entrance to a dwelling, which may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural purposes. 
Primary/principal use means the main purpose for which a structure or lot is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which either may be used, occupied, or maintained under this Title. 
Project means any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of this Title. 
Property line means a line separating parcels of real property having separate legal descriptions, or which separates a parcel from a public right-of-way. 
Public facilities means uses principally of an institutional nature and serving a public need, such as hospitals, public schools, libraries, museums, post offices, police and fire stations, public utilities, and other public services. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.230. - "Q" definitions. 
Quasi-public means a use owned or operated by a non-profit institution providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious, or similar types of public programs. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.240. - "R" definitions. 
Recreational area means areas of active play or recreation such as sports fields, schoolyards, picnic grounds, or other areas with intense foot traffic. 
Recreational vehicles means recreational vehicles include the following: 
(1)  Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer; 
(2)  Camper means a structure designed primarily to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and with sufficient facilities to render as suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for camping travel, recreational and vacation purposes; 
(3)  Motor home means a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle for camping, travel, recreation, and vacation purposes; and 
(4)  Full tent trailer means including boats, floats, and rafts plus the normal equipment to transport the same on a street or highway. 
Recycling area means space allocated for the accessory use of collecting and loading of recyclable materials. 
Recycling facility means a center for the collection of recyclable materials. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or industrial use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that tenant or owner. 
Reimbursement agreement means a legal agreement between a person and a government agency whereby the person will be repaid a certain portion of the fees paid in connection with a development or subdivision when further development occurs in the area or other specified events take place. 
Religious, fraternal or service organizations means churches and/or nonprofit organizations engaged primarily in performing charitable, benevolent, patriotic, employment-related or educational functions. 
Residential care facility means any family home, group care facility, or similar facility (as determined by the State) licensed by the State to provide 24-hour non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual, provided by the California Community Care Facilities Act. 
Residential density, maximum means the maximum number of residential units permitted by the City's General Plan Land Use Element and Zoning Code at the time of application, excluding the provisions of Section 9.05.040. 
Residential district means generally, zoning districts for residential uses, including RL, RLM, RM and RH. 
Residential project means a development project which will result in the construction of new dwelling units in the City. Such projects may or may not involve the subdivision of land. 
Restaurant means a commercial establishment where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed. 
Rest home means an institution or premises licensed by the State and used for the housing and care of the ambulatory, aged, or infirm and offering or providing lodging, meals, nursing, dietary or other personal services, but not including the care and treatment of persons with contagious or communicable disease, mental illness, or persons addicted to narcotics or alcohol. The term does not include places where there is surgery, physical therapy, or other similar activities, such as are customarily provided in hospitals. Rest homes also include residential care facilities for the elderly, nursing homes, assisted care facilities, convalescent homes, homes for the aged, veterans' homes and the like, plus other similar names signifying long-term care, which is personal and at most nursing help, rather than medical or surgical care. 
Retail or retail sales means the sale of goods, merchandise, or commodities for consumption or use by the purchaser. 
Reverse vending machine means an automated mechanical device that accepts at least one type of empty beverage containers including but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the State. 
Right-of-way means an area or strip of land, either public or private on which a right of passage has been recorded. Thus, "right-of-way" shall include a public right-of-way, an easement, a common lot containing a private street, or other public or private right of passage consistent with this definition. 
Roadway means that portion of a street, highway, or alley right-of-way designed or used for accommodating the movement of vehicles. The roadway may or may not accommodate vehicle parking. 
Runoff means water that flows at a rate above the infiltration rate of soil which causes water to drain away on the surface from the landscape area it is intended to service. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 4, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.250. - "S" definitions. 
Sanitary sewer means a conduit designed to carry sewage. 
School means any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. 
Screening means solid walls, solid fences or dense hedges, trees or other similar landscaped installed for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structure or hedges. 
Second hand store means a profit or non-profit business or organization that engages in, or specializes in, the sale or resale of second hand merchandise or goods, and whose goods may be principally donated or sold on consignment. This classification does not include antique shops. 
Second dwelling unit. See "Accessory dwelling unit." 
Senior citizen housing development means a housing development that has been designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens as that phrase is used in California Civil Code § 51.3(b)(1) and which qualifies as housing for older persons as that phrase is used in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and implementing regulations. 
Service commercial means retail establishments that primarily render services rather than goods. Such services may include, but not be limited to, copy shops, printing services, appliance repair, salons, photo processing, and postal and packaging services. 
Setback means a minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the lot line; or when abutting a street, the minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the ultimate right-of-way line, as shown in Figure 9.01.6. 
   

Figure 9.01.6: Setbacks 
Shopping center means a group of more than two retail stores and service establishments designed to serve as a unit with shared access and common parking. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a vehicular thoroughfare not within the roadway and set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineations for pedestrian travel. 
Sign means any medium of visual communication, including copy, artwork, structure, component parts, and humans which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to and identify an establishment, product, service, activity, location, or to provide information. 
Sign, A-frame means a freestanding sign usually hinged at the top, or attached in a similar manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter A. Such signs are usually designed to be portable, hence they are not considered permanent signs. 
Sign, abandoned means any display remaining in place or not maintained for a period of 90 days or more in a one-year period, which no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the business premises where the display is located. 
Sign alteration means any change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction, or support of any sign or advertising device. 
Sign, ancillary means a secondary or subordinate sign. 
Sign, animated means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Sign area means the entire surface area of a sign including non-structural trim, but excluding the supports, uprights, or structures upon which the sign is supported. Sign area of cutout letters or displays include the total area within the periphery of the cutout letters or display. The sign area of advertising statuary is the entire surface area of the statuary. 
Sign, banner means a temporary visual display device, with or without copy, usually rectangular in shape made of flexible material, usually cloth, paper, or plastic 
Sign, bench means a sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way or that is visible from a public right-of-way. 
Sign, billboard means an off-site sign used for advertising purposes and whose copy or message is changed from time to time. 
Sign, blade. See "Sign, hanging." 
Sign, building-mounted means a sign affixed to or painted on a building, including awning, window, or canopy. 
Sign, cabinet means a sign that contains all the text and/or symbols within a single enclosed cabinet and may or may not be illuminated. 
Sign, campaign or political means a temporary political sign, which may include any advertising device or sign, not otherwise prohibited by this Title, which is designed to influence the passage or defeat of any measure on the ballot or designed to influence the voters with respect to the nomination, election, defeat or removal of a candidate from public office at any National, State or local election. 
Sign, can. See "Sign, cabinet." 
Sign, canopy means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Sign, City means a sign erected and maintained by the City for public informational, directional or safety purposes. 
Sign, commercial center means a freestanding sign which identifies the name and/or address of a commercial center and which may also identify the principal tenants of the center. 
Sign, community neighborhood identification means a monument or wall sign within the boundaries of a residential development or subdivision containing only the name and/or identifying symbol of the community, residential development, or subdivision. 
Sign, construction means a sign containing information pertaining to a future development or on-going construction on the site where the sign is located, including the name of the project, developer, contractor, architect, financing source, future occupant(s), and other information directly related to the development. 
Sign copy means any words, letters, numbers, designs, logos, or other symbolic representations incorporated into the face of a sign. 
Sign, directional means a sign directing motorists or pedestrians to parking or building entrances or providing similar directional information. 
Sign, directory means a sign or group of signs attached to a building or freestanding that identifies the business, owner, address, or occupation of a group of businesses, but contains no advertising. 
Sign, double-sided means a single structure designed with the intent of providing copy on both sides. 
Sign, electronic message board means a directly illuminated sign which presents variable advertising messages displayed by electronically controlled lighting pattern against a contrasting background, and which may be programmed to change the message display periodically. 
Sign, externally illuminated means a sign made readable by projecting light onto or around the message or copy of the sign. 
Sign face means the exterior surface of sign, exclusive of structural supports, on which is placed the sign copy. 
Sign feature means a unique, artistic, two- or three-dimensional image reflective of a company's use, product or service. 
Sign, flashing means a sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
Sign, freestanding means a sign supported by a base, uprights, or braces placed upon or into the ground and detached from any building. 
Sign, freestanding pole means a sign supported upon the ground and mounted on poles and not attached to any building. 
Sign, freestanding monument means a sign which is supported by a solid base of masonry, brick, block, or wood. 
Sign, garage sale means a temporary sign announcing the limited sale, from a private resident, of goods, furniture, clothing, or similar articles. 
Sign, gas or service station price means a permanent sign subject to state regulation, usually of a monument type, containing the prices and grades of fuel for sale at an automobile service station. 
Sign, hanging means a sign hanging from a building canopy, arcade, or other structural member. 
Sign height means the measurement from the top of the sign face to the average finished grade at the base of the sign. 
Sign, identification means a sign whose commercial copy is limited to the name, type of business, and address of the building, business, office, establishment, person, or activity. 
Sign, interior means a sign inside of any business that is located more than three feet from any window and cannot be seen from outside the building in which the business is located. An interior sign is not a window sign. 
Sign, internally illuminated means a sign which a source of light is projected through a transparent material that consists of the letters of the message or sign copy. 
Sign, major tenant means a business in a multi-tenant center which occupies more than 15 percent of the net building square footage of a building or whose building area is designated as a major tenant suite by the Planning Commission as part of an approved sign program. 
Sign, marquee means a building-mounted sign which is attached flush to or painted on the front of a marquee or similar architectural projection. 
Sign, mobile means a sign attached to or painted on a vehicle used for the purpose of transporting personnel or goods as part of the day-to-day operations of a business. A vehicle sign is not a mobile sign. A portable sign is not a mobile sign. 
Sign, monument means an independent structure supported from grade to the bottom of the sign with the appearance of having a solid base. 
Sign, multi-faced means a single sign having two or more faces. 
Sign, multiple means a sign structure to which are attached two or more separate signs. 
Sign, neon means any glass tube lighting in which a gas and phosphors are used in combination to create a colored sign. 
Sign, nonconforming means any temporary or permanent sign legally erected, established and maintained in conformance with the provisions of all applicable laws in effect at the time of original installation, but which does not conform to the number, size, placement, or other requirements of this Title. 
Sign, off-site means a sign referring to a person, establishment, merchandise, service, event, or entertainment which is not located, sold, produced, manufactured, provided, or furnished on the premises where the sign is located. 
Sign, on-site means a sign referring to a person, establishment, merchandise, service, event, or entertainment which is located, sold, produced, manufactured, provided, or furnished on the premises where the sign is located. 
Sign, painted means any sign which consists of paint or a similar substance applied directly to a building surface, such as a wall, window, rafter, canopy support, or applied directly to the surface of a sign face or structure. 
Sign, pedestrian means a small sign readable primarily from the abutting sidewalk or other walkway, but generally not from the street. 
Sign, portable means any sign designed to be moved easily and which is not permanently affixed to either the ground, a structure, or building, or vehicle. 
Sign program means a plan created and submitted by a project applicant that lays out the number, location, types, heights, style, illumination, etc. of the signs on a property. 
Sign, projecting means a building-mounted sign where the face is not parallel to the building, but which projects out at an angle. 
Sign, real estate means a sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is located are for sale, lease, or rent. 
Sign, revolving means a sign, which all or a portion of, may rotate either on an intermittent or constant basis. 
Sign, roof means a sign erected upon or above the roof eave of a building or other structure. 
Sign, separated panel means a single sign composed of individual panels separated by air space between the panels. 
Sign, special event means a temporary sign which advertises special events and activities, such as charitable events. 
Sign structure means the structural supports, uprights, and bracing for a sign. 
Sign, suspended means a sign oriented toward pedestrians that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
Sign, temporary means any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted, such as signs to promote the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, a new service, or a special sale. 
Sign, under canopy means a sign suspended beneath a projecting canopy, walkway cover, awning ceiling, said signs are considered building-mounted. 
Sign, vehicle means a sign affixed to the vehicle indicating the name of the business which is using the vehicle. The sign copy is limited to the logo, name of business, address of business, and/or telephone number only. 
Sign, wall means a sign attached to, erected against, or painted onto a wall of a building or other structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the wall. 
Sign, window means any written representation, artwork, emblem, or other figure or similar character painted on or otherwise affixed to a window, excepting that portion of sign copy that identifies days and hours a business is open; any interior sign within three feet of any window and visible from off the subject building site shall be considered a window sign. 
Single room occupancy means a building with a common entrance containing a cluster of rental units which provide sleeping and living facilities persons where kitchen and/or bathroom facilities may be shared. 
Single tenant means a building occupied by a single business or organization. 
Site means one or more parcels of land identified by the assessor's records where an integrated building development has been proposed or approved. The site shall include all parcels of land contained within or identified as a part of the development application. An integrated building development shall include all parcels served by common access ways, driveways, parking and landscaping. 
Site development permit means a permit issued by the City, or permits issued by the County of Orange prior to incorporation of the City, for all new residential development projects, and non-residential development projects involving new construction, reconstruction, building additions (see Section 9.08.040(a)(2)), or structural or site modifications as defined herein. 
Site plan means a plan indicating all of the improvements existing and proposed on and off the property (including grading, streets, buildings, utilities, and landscaping). 
Slope means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees. 
Spa. See "Swimming pool." 
Special event means a temporary outdoor use that extends beyond the normal uses and standards allowed by this Title. Special events include, but are not limited to art shows, sidewalk sales, pumpkin and Christmas tree sales, haunted houses, carnivals, special auto sales, grand openings, festivals, home exhibitions, and church bazaars. 
Specific plan means a plan, adopted by City ordinance, which shows the future physical development to be implemented within a specifically defined and circumscribed area of the City. The specific plan describes the types of land uses to be developed on each parcel; a plan for infrastructure in and adjacent to the specific plan area; and written standards, regulations and policies for such items as architectural design, open spaces, preservation of existing structures, and other relevant factors. 
Stable, commercial means any place where horses or other equine are kept, housed, boarded, lodged, fed, hired, trained, sold, rented, or bred for monetary compensation. 
Stable, noncommercial means any place where horses or other equine are kept for the use and enjoyment of the occupants of the premises, or a noncommercial facility for the use of a private homeowner association. 
Storm drain means a conduit designed to carry storm-water runoff. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the top floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the space between the upper surface of the top floor and the roof above is designed for habitation, then it is considered a story. In addition, if the bottom level, including basement, of a structure has more than 50 percent of its height above finish grade on any side, then it is considered a story. 
Street means a right-of-way which provides a primary means of access for vehicular and pedestrian traffic to abutting properties. 
Street frontage. "See Frontage, street." 
Street, public means a street: 
(1)  The right-of-way for which has been dedicated to and accepted by the City for public use; or 
(2)  An easement for which has been granted to the City for public use. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected requiring a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
Swimming pool means a man-made body of water having a depth in excess of 18 inches, designed, constructed and used for swimming, dipping or immersion purposes by humans. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-02, § 5, 4-27-2011; Ord. No. 16-03, § 6, 4-13-2016; Ord. No. 18-01, § 9, 2-14-2018)  
Sec. 9.01.260. - "T" definitions. 
Telecommunications facility. See "Wireless communication facility." 
Temporary use means a use which is associated with a holiday or special event, or which is accessory to a permitted use and transitory in nature. 
Terrace, slope means that level portion of a manufactured slope. 
Theater means a premises used for giving dramatic performances or for showing motion pictures, with all functions and facilities contained within a building unless a drive-in theater is specified. 
Tot lot means a small area developed especially for preschool or elementary school aged children. It may contain such facilities as sand boxes, slides, teeter-totters, swings, climbing apparatus, etc. 
Townhouse means A dwelling unit occupying its own lot but which is physically attached to at least one other dwelling unit. 
Tract map means a map, prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, showing the subdivision of land into five or more lots in accordance with the provisions of the California Subdivision Map Act and this Title, and which shows detailed information sufficient for recordation by the County Recorder. 
Transitional housing means a type of supportive housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and families to permanent housing. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-02, § 6, 4-27-2011)  
Sec. 9.01.270. - "U" definitions. 
Use means the purpose for which land or structures are arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or structures are, or may be, occupied or maintained. "Use" includes construction, establishment, maintenance, alteration, moving onto, enlargement, operation, or occupancy. 
Use, accessory. See "Accessory use." 
Use, conditional. See "Conditional use." 
Use, non-conforming. See "Nonconforming use." 
Use permit, conditional. See "Conditional use permit." 
Use, primary. See "Primary use." 
Use, temporary. See "Temporary use." 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.280. - "V" definitions. 
Value, building or improvement means the cash value of a building or improvement as determined by the Building Official or City Engineer in accordance with the building regulations adopted by the City. 
Variance means a modification of any specific provision of this Title, granted by the City, after a public hearing, in accordance with applicable Sections of this Title. 
Vehicle means a device with wheels capable of moving or being moved along the ground, on pavement, or on rails. 
Veterinary clinic. See "Animal hospital." 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.290. - "W" definitions. 
Wall means a constructed solid barrier of concrete, stone, brick, tile, wood, or similar type of material that closes, marks, or borders a field, yard, or lot, and that limits visibility and restricts the flow of air, light, and noise. 
Wall height means the vertical distance to the highest point of a wall as measured from ground. 
Warehouse means a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosives or that present hazards or conditions commonly recognized as offensive. 
Water feature means man-made feature, such as a pond, fountain, stream, or waterfall installed for landscaping or passive enjoyment purposes, not including pools or spas. 
Wholesale or wholesale business means the sale of goods, merchandise, or commodities to a retailer or resaler rather than to the consumer. 
Wireless communication facility means any facility, other than an amateur "ham" radio or satellite television dish antennas, that contains one or more antennas that are components of a communications network. 
Worksite means a building, grouping of buildings, or property which are in actual physical contact or separated solely by a private or public roadway/right-of-way, and which are owned or operated by the same employer or by employers under common control. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.300. - "Y" definitions. 
Yard means an open space on a lot or parcel of land which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
Yard, front means a yard extending across the full width of any building site between the side lot lines, and measured between the front lot line and the nearest line of any building. However, if any road easement or official ultimate right-of-way line has been established for the street upon which the site fronts, the front yard shall be measured instead from such easement or ultimate right-of-way line to the nearest line of any building. 
Yard, rear means a yard extending across the full width of any building site between the side lot lines, and measured between the rear lot line and the nearest line of any building. 
Yard, side means a yard extending between the front yard and the rear yard of any lot and measured between the side lot line and the nearest line of any building opposite said lot line. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.01.310. - "Z" definitions. 
Zoning district. See "District." 
Zoning map, official means designated official map or maps which show the location and boundaries of the districts established by this Code and are referred to as the "Official Zoning Map" and incorporated as a part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Chapter 9.02 - Enforcement, Violations, Abatement and Penalties 
 
Sec. 9.02.010. - Enforcement. 
The City Council, City Attorney, Chief of Police Services, Code Enforcement Officer, and any official charged with the issuance of licenses or permits shall enforce the provisions of this Title pursuant applicable procedures adopted by the City. Any permit, certificate or license issued after the effective date of this Title that conflicts with the provisions of this Title shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.02.020. - Violations 
Any building or structure set up, erected, built, moved or maintained, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this Title or any condition attached to the granting of any approval is hereby declared to be unlawful and a nuisance, and shall be punishable as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.02.030. - Abatement. 
In addition to any penalties and remedies set forth in Chapter 1.03, the City may commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment of such violation in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps or shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building, structure, or use, and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting, building, moving, or maintaining any such building or structure or using any property contrary to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.02.040. - Revocation of approvals. 
The failure of any person to abide by and faithfully comply with an approved development plan, permit, certificate, license, or other approval, and any and all conditions which may be attached to the granting of such approval pursuant to the provisions of this Title shall constitute grounds for the revocation of such approval by the final approving body as provided in Chapter 9.08. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.02.050. - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies concerning this Title shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Conviction and punishment of any person under the provisions of this Title shall not relieve such persons from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions or removing prohibited buildings, uses, structures, or improvements, and shall not prevent their enforced correction or removal. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Chapter 9.03 - Zoning Districts and Standards  
ARTICLE I. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 9.03.010. - Districts established. 
To carry out the purposes of this Title, the City is divided into the zoning districts identified in Table 9.03.1. These districts are consistent with and necessary to implement the City's general plan. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.03.020. - Official zoning map.[2] 
(a)  Adoption. The boundaries of the districts designated and established by Section 9.03.010 shall be shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Rancho Santa Margarita" or as subsequently amended, and on file in the office of the City Clerk. The zoning map is adopted herein by reference and shall hereafter exist pursuant to and as an integral part of this Title. 
(b)  Amendments—Notations. If changes are made in the district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map, provided in Section 9.08.070 of the official zoning map/change of zoning district, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council. An entry listing the change shall be made on the official zoning map. 
(c)  Replacement. In the event the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council, by resolution, may adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereto. 
Table 9.03.1 
Zoning District/General Plan Designation 
Consistency Matrix 
Zoning District 	General Plan Designation 
Residential Districts 
Residential—Low Density (RL) 
 RL-6,000 
 RL-5,000 	Low Density Residential (LDR) 
Residential—Low-Medium Density (RLM) 
 RLM-4,000-D 
 RLM-4,000-A 	Low-Medium Density Residential (LMDR) 
Residential—Medium Density (RM) 
 RM-3,000-D 
 RM-2,000-A 	Medium Density Residential (MDR) 
Residential—High Density (RH) 	High Density Residential (HDR) 
Commercial and Business Park Districts 
Commercial—General (CG) 	General Commercial (C) 
Commercial—Neighborhood (CN) 	Neighborhood Commercial (NC) 
Auto Center (AC) 	General Commercial (C) 
Business Park (BP) 	Business Park (BP) 
Public/Quasi-Public District 
Community Facility (CF) 	Public/Quasi-public (PQ) 
Parks/Open Space Districts 
Park (P) 	Park (P) 
Open Space (OS) 	Open Space (OS) 
Open Space—Golf (OSG) 	Open Space Golf (OSG) 
Open Space—Regional (OSR) 	O'Neill Regional Park (ONP) 
Other District 
Future Planned Community (FPC) 	Future Planned Community (FPC) 
Overlay Districts 
Auto Center Overlay (ACO) 	General Commercial (C) 
Business Park (BP) 
 
Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant part thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 10-06, § 4, 10-13-2010; Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 6-22-2011) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— See Appendix A to this chapter (ch. 9.03) for the current Official Zoning Map for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
 
Sec. 9.03.030. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the zoning districts shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the City limits shall be construed as following such City limits. 
(4)  Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not referred to in this Section, the Development Services Director shall interpret the zoning district boundaries. The Development Services Director may refer the interpretation to the Planning Commission for a decision. 
(5)  In the event any other uncertainty regarding zoning district boundaries exists, the Development Services Director shall interpret the district boundaries. The Development Services Director may refer the interpretation to the Planning Commission for a decision. 
(6)  Interpretations made by the Development Services Director and/or the Planning Commission may be appealed as provided in Section 9.08.100. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 9.03.040. - Application of provisions. 
The provisions set forth in this Chapter for each zoning district shall be the minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as follows: 
(1)  No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or sign shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in conformity with all of the provisions set forth for the zoning district in which such building, structure, or land is located. 
(2)  No building or other structure shall be erected or altered: 
a.  To exceed the maximum permitted height or bulk; 
b.  To accommodate or house a greater number of units; 
c.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
d.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than required; or 
e.  In any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Title. 
(3)  No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required for or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Title shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building, except as specifically provided in this Title. 
(4)  No yard or lot existing on or after the effective date of this Title, shall be reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this Title unless expressly permitted by this Title. Yards or lots created on or after the effective date of this Title, shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Title. (See Section 9.04.080 for provisions relating to nonconforming lots.) 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.03.050. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Prohibited uses. All land uses and provisions of this Title shall be consistent with controlling Federal, State, and local law. Any use or activity that is illegal under Federal, State, or local law shall be deemed a prohibited use in all zoning districts within the City. Any use that is not consistent with Federal, State or local law and is not expressly permitted in a zoning district as a permitted uses or as a conditionally permitted use, including a use in a district determined to be similar in character to a particular use allowed in such district as provided by this Title, shall be deemed a prohibited use and such use shall not be allowed in such district. 
(b)  Use determination. Unless a use is specifically identified in the table of uses for each applicable zoning district, it is not permitted in that district. However, the Planning Commission shall have the authority to review proposed uses not listed in this Chapter. A proposed unlisted use may be permitted as a principal or accessory use within a Zoning District if the Planning Commission makes written findings that such use: 
(1)  Falls within the purpose and intent of that Zoning District; 
(2)  Is of a comparable nature to the principal, accessory or conditional uses set forth as permitted in the Zoning District; 
(3)  Is not listed in another Zoning District; 
(4)  Will not be inconsistent with any allowable uses in the vicinity of such use; and 
(5)  Is not prohibited under Federal, State or local law. 
(c)  Appeal of decision. The Planning Commission's decision may be appealed as provided in Section 9.8.100. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 12-9-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, adopted December 9, 2009, changed the title of Section 9.03.050 from "Unlisted uses" to "Prohibited uses." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 9.03.060. - Prezoning prior to annexation. 
The City may, by Ordinance, prezone certain contiguous areas outside the City which, in the opinion of the City Council, are in accordance with the general plan and sphere of influence. For this purpose, prezoning maps shall be developed, adopted, and amended in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.08.090. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
ARTICLE III. - BASE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 9.03.070. - Residential districts. 
(a)  Purpose of residential districts. The purpose of these residential district regulations is to: 
(1)  Provide for a variety of well-designed and well-maintained housing types and neighborhoods in the community; 
(2)  Reserve planned neighborhood areas for residential living with a broad range of dwelling unit densities consistent with the General Plan and appropriate standards of public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics; 
(3)  Designate lands to accommodate housing units that meet the diverse economic needs of the residents; 
(4)  Encourage residential development that retains the scale and character of existing residential neighborhoods; 
(5)  Facilitate the provision of adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling unit; 
(6)  Protect residential neighborhoods from incompatible uses. 
The specific uses allowed and development standards that apply to these districts are identified in Subsections 9.03.070(b) and (c). 
Residential - Low Density (RL) Districts—RL-6,000 and RL-5,000. The purpose of the RL districts is to provide for the development of single-family detached homes on moderate to large lots consistent with the General Plan low density residential (LDR) designation. 
Residential - Low-Medium Density (RLM) Districts—RLM- 4,000-D and RLM-4,000-A. The purpose of the RLM districts is to provide for single-family detached (RLM-4,000-D) homes on smaller lots, as well as attached (RLM-4,000-A) townhomes and duplexes consistent with the General Plan low-medium density residential (LMDR) designation. 
Residential - Medium Density (RM) Districts—RM-3,000-D and RM-2,000-A. The purpose of the RM districts is to provide for detached (RM-3,000-D) single-family homes on smaller lots, as well as attached (RM-2,000-A) townhomes, condominiums, duplexes, and apartments consistent with the General Plan medium density residential (MDR) designation. 
Residential - High Density (RH) District. The purpose of the RH district is to provide for high density attached homes, as well as apartments, and senior housing consistent with the General Plan high density (HDR) designation. 
(b)  Residential districts use regulations. 
(1)  Table 9.03.2 identifies the uses permitted in each residential district. 
(2)  Uses listed as conditionally permitted uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.08.110. Accessory uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.04.020. 
(3)  The "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.2 indicates more precisely the use regulations for specific uses or operating characteristics. The notes and exceptions must be reviewed in conjunction with the other information for the class of use. 
(4)  Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be subject to special conditions regarding location, operation, or the design of the use. The Sections of this Title governing these uses are identified in the "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.2. 
(c)  Residential districts development standards. Tables 9.03.3a through 9.03.3d identify the development standards for all of the residential districts. 
All residential additions, alterations and modifications shall to the greatest extent possible, avoid excessive massing of the primary structure, through means of varying rooflines, elevations and other architectural elements. 
(d)  Landscaping in residential districts. Landscaping is required in the front yard for all areas not covered by a driveway or pedestrian walkway pursuant to Sections 9.05.070 and 9.08.140. 
(e)  Site development permit for residential development. Projects shall require site plan review per the site development permit process and standards described in Section 9.08.170. 
(f)  Other applicable regulations for residential districts. Other applicable regulations in the Residential Districts include, but are not limited to, the supplemental district regulations identified in Chapters 9.04 and 9.05 and the administrative processes identified in Chapter 9.08. 
Table 9.03.2 
Uses in Residential Districts 
Use 	RL 
(all lot 
sizes) 	RLM 
(all lot 
sizes) 	RM 
(all lot 
sizes) 	RH 
(all lot 
sizes) 	Notes and Exceptions 
Residential 
Accessory Dwelling Unit 	P 	P 	P 	— 	Subject to Sections 9.04.020 and 9.04.190 
Accessory uses and structures 	A 	A 	A 	A 	Subject to Section 9.04.020 
Adult day care services 					
 Small (6 or fewer) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 Large (7 or more) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Child care facilities 					
 Small (6 or fewer) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 Large (7 to 14) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Convalescent homes 					
 Small (6 or fewer) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 Large (7 or more) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Emergency shelters 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.170 
Home occupations 	A 	A 	A 	A 	Subject to Section 9.05.060 
Manufactured housing 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Marijuana business 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Multi-family homes 	— 	— 	P d 	P 	a. Apartments, condominiums, senior housing, and multi-family clusters such as triplexes and fourplexes. 
					b. A Site Development Permit is required for any project. 
Parks and recreational facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Public buildings and facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Includes: libraries, governmental buildings, police and fire stations, active outdoor recreational facilities, and public utility offices and exchanges. 
Religious, fraternal, or service organizations 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Includes, churches, synagogues, temples, monasteries, religious retreats, and other places of religious worship, and other fraternal and community service organizations. 
Residential care facilities 					
 Small (6 or fewer) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 Large (7 or more) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Second dwelling units 	P 	P a 	P b 	— 	Subject to Section 9.04.020 
Schools (private) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Elementary and secondary schools only. 
Single-family dwellings 
(attached) 	— 	P c 	P d 	P 	a. Townhomes and duplexes. 
					b. A Site Development Permit is required for any project. 
Single-family dwellings 
(detached) 	P 	P a 	P b 	— 	Detached single family homes only. 
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) 	— 	— 	— 	P 	Subject to Section 9.04.180 
Transitional housing 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 
a Only permitted in the RLM-4,000-D zoning district. 
b Only permitted in the RM-3,000-D zoning district. 
c Only permitted in the RLM-3,000-A zoning district. 
d Only permitted in the RM-2,000-A zoning district. 
P = Principal use permitted 
— = Not permitted 
A = Accessory use permitted (subject to Section 9.4.020 Accessory Uses and Structures) 
C = Conditional use permit required (subject to Section 9.8.110 Conditional Use Permit) 
Unless a use is specifically identified, it is not permitted in the district (see Section 9.3.050 Unlisted Uses). 
Table 9.03.3a 
Low Density Residential (RL) Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Zoning District 
	RL 
	RL-6,000 	RL-5,000 
Minimum lot size (square feet) a 	6,000 square feet 	5,000 square feet 
Maximum lot coverage 	60% 	60% 
Maximum building height (feet) 	35 feet and 2 stories 	35 feet and 2 stories 
Setbacks (feet) 
 Front 
 Rear b 
 Side (internal) 
 Side (street) 	  
15' 
10' 
5' 
10' 	  
15' 
10' 
5' 
10' 
Parking and garage/carport 
placement 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Landscaping and screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Notes: 
a - Preservation of common open space is achieved by limiting density to the maximum identified for each zoning district while allowing smaller minimum lot sizes. 
b - The Development Services Director may grant a minor deviation in the rear yard setback area only of no more than 20 percent encroachment into the required setback. 
 
Table 9.03.3b 
Low-Medium Density Residential (RLM) Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Zoning District 
	RLM-4,000-D 	RLM-4,000-A 
Minimum lot size (square feet) a 	4,000 square feet 	4,000 square feet 
Maximum lot coverage 	60% 	60% 
Maximum building height (feet) 	35 feet and 2 stories 	35 feet and 2 stories 
Setbacks (feet) b 
 Front 
 Rear c 
 Side (internal) 
 Side (street) 	  

15' 
10' 
5' 
10' 	  
15' 

10' 
5' 
10' 
Parking and garage/carport 
placement 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Landscaping and screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Note: 
a - Preservation of common open space is achieved by limiting density to the maximum identified for each zoning district while allowing smaller minimum lot sizes. 
b - Buildings located within the RLM-4,000-A zoning district shall maintain a minimum distance of ten feet between buildings. 
c - The Development Services Director may grant a minor deviation in the rear yard setback area only of no more than 20 percent encroachment into the required setback. 
 
Table 9.03.3c 
Medium Density Residential (RM) Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Zoning District 
	RM-3,000-D 	RM-2,000-A 
Minimum lot size (square feet) a 	3,000 square feet 	2,000 square feet 
Maximum lot coverage 	60% 	65% 
Maximum building height (feet) 	35 feet and 2 stories 	35 feet and 2 stories 
Setbacks (feet) b 
 Front 
 Rear c 
 Side (internal) 
 Side (street) 	  
15' 
10' 
5' 
10' 	  
10' 
10' 
10' 
10' 
Parking and garage/carport placement 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Landscaping and screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Note: 
a - Preservation of common open space is achieved by limiting density to the maximum identified for each zoning district while allowing smaller minimum lot sizes. 
b - Buildings located within the RM-2,000-A zoning district shall maintain a minimum distance of ten feet between buildings. 
c - The Development Services Director may grant a minor deviation in the rear yard setback area only of no more than 20 percent encroachment into the required setback. 
 
Table 9.03.3d 
High Density Residential (RH) Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Zoning District 
	RH 
Minimum lot size (square feet) a 	7,500 square feet 
Maximum lot coverage 	65% 
Maximum building height (feet) 	35 feet and 2 stories 
Setbacks (feet) b 	20' from any boundary line of the project 
Minimum unit size (square feet (sf)) 
 Studio 
 1-bedroom 
 2-bedroom 
 3-bedroom 	  
500 square feet 
600 square feet 
700 square feet 
800 square feet 
Parking and garage/carport placement 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Landscaping and screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Note: 
a - Preservation of common open space is achieved by limiting density to the maximum identified for each zoning district while allowing smaller minimum lot sizes. 
b - Buildings located within the RH zoning district shall maintain a minimum distance of ten feet between buildings. 
 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-03, §§ 2—5, 8-27-2008; Ord. No. 09-03, § 5, 3-25-2009; Ord. No. 09-05, § 3, 12-9-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § 7, 4-27-2011; Ord. No. 13-01, § 4, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 16-05, § 5, 10-12-2016; Ord. No. 18-01, § 10, 2-14-2018)  
Sec. 9.03.080. - Commercial districts. 
(a)  Purpose of commercial districts. The purpose of these commercial districts regulations is to: 
(1)  Provide for a variety of local and regional shopping, dining, commercial recreation, and entertainment opportunities in the community consistent with the General Plan. 
(2)  Provide for employment opportunities for existing and future residents. 
(3)  Provide adequate space to meet the needs of commercial development, including off-street parking and loading. 
(4)  Protect commercial areas and surrounding uses from excessive noise, illumination, odor, smoke, traffic, surface water runoff and other objectionable effects. 
Commercial—General (CG) District. The purpose of the CG district is to provide for retail uses that rely primarily on automobile traffic and attract customers Citywide and/or in the regional trade area consistent with the General Plan general commercial (C) designation. 
Commercial—Neighborhood (CN) District. The CN district provides for a variety of retail uses that serve the needs of nearby neighborhoods and have limited potential to negatively impact nearby residents. This district is consistent with the General Plan neighborhood commercial (NC) designation. 
(b)  Commercial districts use regulations. 
(1)  Table 9.03.4 identifies the uses permitted in each commercial district. 
(2)  Uses listed as conditionally permitted uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.08.110. Accessory uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.04.020. 
(3)  The "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.4 indicates more precisely the use regulations for specific uses or operating characteristics. The notes and exceptions must be reviewed in conjunction with the other information for the class of use. 
(4)  Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be subject to special conditions regarding location, operation, or the design of the use. The Sections of this Title governing these uses are identified in the "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.4. 
(c)  Commercial districts development standards. Table 9.03.5 indicates the development standards for the commercial districts. 
(d)  Landscaping for commercial districts. Landscaping is required pursuant to Sections 9.05.070 and 9.08.140. 
(e)  Site development permit for commercial developments. Projects shall require site plan review per the site development permit process and standards described in Section 9.08.170. 
(f)  Other applicable regulations in commercial districts. Other applicable regulations in the commercial districts include, but are not limited to, the supplemental district regulations identified in Chapters 9.04 and 9.05 and the administrative processes identified in Chapter 9.08. 
Table 9.03.4 
Uses in Commercial Districts 
Use 	CG 	CN 	Notes and Exceptions 
Alcoholic beverage retail sale (including wine tasting) 	C 	C 	Sale for on premises and off-premises consumption. 
Animal day care 	C 	C 	a. No overnight boarding. 
			b. Maximum number of animals permitted established through CUP. 
Animal hospitals and clinics 	C 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.040. 
Auto repair services, minor 	C 	— 	Excludes major auto repair services. 
Automated teller machines (ATMs) 	A 	A 	No drive-thrus or walk-ups allowed unless granted with a CUP as part of a financial institution building. Stand-alone ATMs are subject to a CUP. 
Bar/tavern/brewery pub 	C 	C 	a. Includes on-site small-scale brewery for sale for on- and off-premises consumption. 
			b. Accessory uses such as billiards, pool tables, darts, and game machines also allowed. 
Car washes (automatic) 	C 	C 	Permitted only in conjunction with gas stations in compliance with Section 9.04.100. Stand alone car wash facilities subject to a CUP. 
Child day care centers 	C 	C 	
Clubs and lodges (private) 	C 	C 	
Commercial recreation (indoor) 	C 	C 	Includes private gymnasiums, swimming pools, bowling alleys, ice and roller skating rinks, cheerleading, racquet clubs, and classes such as yoga, aerobics, kick-boxing, martial arts, Pilates, dancing, fitness, drama and other similar uses. 
Commercial recreation (outdoor) 	C 	C 	Includes public and private tennis and racquet facilities/clubs and swimming pools. Outdoor night lighting subject to a CUP. 
Convenience services 	P 	P 	Such as dry-cleaners, barber shops, beauty shops, convenience markets without alcohol sales, manicure shops, copy and mail services, home appliance repairs, bicycle repair, tailor shops, photography studios, framing, ticket agencies, watch repair, locksmiths, pet grooming, and similar uses. 
Cyber/Internet cafes 	P 	— 	Subject to Chapter 6.09. 
Dancing and live entertainment 	C 	C 	Includes night clubs, VIP rooms, and similar uses. 
Dry cleaners 	C 	C 	Shall provide a hazardous materials plan for storage, use and removal of all hazardous materials for review and approval by the Planning Commission. 
Emergency/homeless shelter 	C 	C 	Includes temporary and seasonal housing and services for homeless families and individuals. 
Family care home 	C 	C 	Large and small. 
Financial services 	P 	P 	a. Includes banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions. 
			b. Check cashing facilities not permitted. 
			c. Drive through or ATM requires a CUP in any zone. 
Game machines (three or fewer) 	A 	A 	For three or more games, see video arcades below. 
Gas or fuel dispensing stations 	C 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.100. 
May have a mini-mart, food convenience store or restaurant. 
Hookah bars 	— 	— 	
Hotels and motels 	C 	— 	
Kennels 	C 	C 	a. Subject to Section 9.04.040. 
Laundromat 	C 	C 	Laundromats with hazardous materials shall be required to provide a hazardous materials plan in the case of spills. 
Massage establishment 	P 	P 	Subject to a Massage Establishment Permit pursuant to Chapter 4.02. 
Medical and dental offices 	P 	P 	Including physical therapy and laboratories. 
Marijuana business 	— 	— 	
Office uses (general) 	P 	P 	Includes business, financial, professional, real estate, travel agencies, and similar office uses. 
Parking lots (commercial and public) 	C 	A 	
Pet stores/pet grooming 	P 	P 	No overnight care/boarding of animals. If overnight care or boarding of animals is provided, use is considered a "kennel" and subject to Section 9.04.040. 
Pool halls and billiard centers 	C 	— 	
Public buildings and facilities 	C 	C 	a. Includes: libraries, governmental buildings, police and fire stations, active outdoor recreational facilities and public utility offices and exchanges. 
			b. Public schools are not subject to a conditional use permit. 
Radio and television towers and installations, radar installations, microwave relay stations, and cellular towers and installations (commercial) 	C 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.050. 
Recycling facilities 	A 	A 	Reverse vending machines and recycling areas are permitted as accessory uses. Recycling collection areas are subject to a Conditional Use Permit per Section 9.04.090. 
Religious, fraternal, or service organizations (non-profit) 	C 	C 	Includes churches, temples, synagogues, monasteries, religious retreats, and other places of religious worship and other fraternal and community service organizations. 
Restaurants (sit-down) 	P 	P 	a. Outdoor seating and dining requires Conditional Use Permit. 
			b. Subject to nuisance standards in Section 9.05.010. 
			c. Alcohol sales requires a Conditional Use Permit and ABC license. 
			d. Live entertainment requires a conditional use permit. 
Restaurants (drive-thru) 	C 	C 	Subject to nuisance standards in Section 9.05.010. 
Retail sales and services (Commercial General) 	P 	N/A 	
Retail sales and services (Commercial Neighborhood) 	N/A 	P 	Department stores, warehouses and other large retail sales and services stores are not permitted in the Commercial Neighborhood District. 
Schools (business, vocational, and professional schools not requiring outdoor facilities) 	C 	C 	Includes schools such as secretarial, computer, tutoring centers, preschools, private primary and secondary schools and colleges, technological, art, craft and music schools. 
Storage and display (outside) 	A 	A 	Subject to Section 9.04.110. 
Theaters (walk-in) 	C 	— 	
Video arcades 	C 	C 	
 
P = Principal use permitted 
— = Not permitted 
A = Accessory use permitted (subject to Section 9.04.020) 
C = Conditional use permit required (subject to Section 9.08.110) 
N/A = Not applicable 
Unless a use is specifically identified, it is not permitted in the District. Uses prohibited by Federal, State or local law are not permitted (see Section 9.03.050). 
Table 9.03.5 
Commercial Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Zoning District 
	CG 	CN 
Minimum lot size (square feet [sf]) 	No minimum 	No minimum 
Maximum building height (feet) 	40' A 	35' A 
Setbacks 
 Adjacent to residential use or district 
 Adjacent to non-residential use b 
 Adjacent to street c 	  
20' a 
20' 
15' 	  
20' a 
10' 
15' 
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) 	1.0 	0.6 
Off-street parking 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Loading 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Lighting 	Subject to Section 9.05.080 
Landscaping and screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Noise levels 	Subject to Chapter 5.04 of the 
Municipal Code 
Notes: 
a. Or height of nearest building/structure on site, whichever is greater. 
b. Setback measured from back of curb when adjacent land use is a parkway. Otherwise, setback is measured from the property line. 
c. Setback measured from back of curb. 
A - Architectural features exceeding the maximum height may be permitted subject to an alternative development standard pursuant to Section 9.08.050. 
 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, §§ 4, 6, 3-25-2009; Ord. No. 09-05, § 4, 12-9-2009; Ord. No. 11-05, § 2, 6-22-2011; Ord. No. 13-01, § 5, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 13-02, § 6, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 16-05, § 6, 10-12-2016; Ord. No. 17-03, § 4, 9-13-2017)  
Sec. 9.03.090. - Business park district. 
(a)  Purpose of business park district. The purpose of these business park district regulations is to: 
(1)  Provide for and maintain an employment center in the Rancho Santa Margarita Business Park that includes employment generating uses such as general office, light industrial, light manufacturing, warehousing, and research and development. Service and retail commercial uses that primarily support the businesses in the business park may also be appropriate. 
(2)  Provide adequate space to meet the needs of business park uses including off-street parking and loading. 
(3)  Protect adjacent uses from excessive noise, illumination, odor, smoke, traffic, surface water runoff and other objectionable effects. 
(b)  Business park district use regulations. 
(1)  Table 9.03.6 identifies the uses permitted in the business park (BP) district. 
(2)  Uses listed as conditionally permitted uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.08.110. Accessory uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.04.020. 
(3)  The "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.6 indicates more precisely the use regulations for specific uses or operating characteristics. The notes and exceptions must be reviewed in conjunction with the other information for the class of use. 
(4)  Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be subject to special conditions regarding location, operation, or the design of the use. The Sections of this Title governing these uses are identified in the "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.6. 
(5)  In addition to the use regulations listed in Table 9.03.6, the combined total of the gross square footage for commercial recreation uses within the business park district shall be limited to five percent or 175,000 square feet of the overall usable building square footage in the business park district, whichever is less. 
(c)  Business park district development standards. Table 9.03.7 indicates the development standards for the business park district. 
(d)  Landscaping for business park district. Landscaping is required pursuant to Sections 9.05.070 and 9.08.140. 
(e)  Site development permit for business park developments. Projects shall require site plan review per the site development permit process and standards described in Section 9.08.170. 
(f)  Other applicable regulations in business park district. Other applicable regulations in the business park district include, but are not limited to, the supplemental district regulations identified in Chapters 9.04 and 9.05 and the administrative processes identified in Chapter 9.08. 
Table 9.03.6 
Uses in Business Park District 
Use 	Classification 	Notes and Exceptions 
Adult Business 	P 	Subject to Section 9.04.030. 
Animal day care 	C 	a. No overnight boarding. 
b. Maximum number of animals permitted established through CUP. 
Animal hospital 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.040. 
Auto dealerships 	— 	
Auto repair 	C 	
Automated teller machines (ATMs) 	C 	a. No drive-thru facilities. 
b. No stand-alone walk up facilities. 
c. Indoor facilities only. 
Brewery pub 	C 	May include sale of alcoholic beverages for on- and off-site consumption, as well as dining facilities. 
Catering establishments 	P 	May also include the sale of items manufactured on-site as an accessory use. 
Child day care centers 	— 	Includes public and private schools, preschools, day care and tutoring schools. 
Commercial recreation (indoor) 	C 	a. Includes private gymnasiums, racquet clubs, weight loss centers, and fitness classes such as yoga, aerobics, kick-boxing, martial arts, Pilates, dancing, fitness, drama and other similar uses. 
b. Subject to Section 9.03.090.B. 
Commercial recreation (outdoor) 	— 	Includes public and private tennis and racquet facilities/clubs and swimming pools. 
Day care centers 	— 	Includes public and private schools, preschools and tutoring schools. 
Emergency/homeless shelter 	C 	Temporary, seasonal and transitional shelters for homeless families and individuals. May include meals and services subject to the conditions in the CUP. 
Financial services 	P 	a. Includes banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions. 
b. Excludes check cashing facilities. 
c. Drive-through requires a CUP. 
Gas or fuel dispensing stations 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.100. May include a mini-mart, food convenience store or restaurant. 
Hookah bars 	— 	
Kennels 	C 	a. Must be completely contained within a sound-attenuated building. 
b. Subject to Section 9.04.040. 
Light industrial 	P 	Light manufacturing, distribution, and wholesaling activities that do not involve substantial noise or other nuisances, such as obnoxious odors or vibrations. All work must be completed indoors, and all equipment and materials must be screened pursuant to Section 9.04.110. 
Medical and dental offices 	P 	
Marijuana business 	— 	
Office uses (general) 	P 	Includes business, financial, professional, real estate, travel agencies, weight loss centers without exercise equipment, and similar office uses. 
Preschools 	— 	Includes public and private schools, day care and tutoring schools. 
Public buildings and facilities 	C 	Excludes public schools. 
Radio and television towers and installations, radar installations, microwave relay stations, and cellular towers and installations (commercial) 	C 	a. Subject to Section 9.04.050. 
b. No stand alone/freestanding towers allowed. 
Recycling facilities 	C 	
Religious, fraternal, or service 
organizations (non-profit) 	— 	Includes churches, temples, synagogues, monasteries, religious retreats, and other places of religious worship and other fraternal and community service organizations. 
Research and development 	P 	Includes research and development of computer software, information systems, communication systems, transportation, geographic information systems, multi-media and video technology. Development and construction of proto-types may be associated with this use. 
Retail sales (small-scale and/or accessory) 	C 	a. Includes office cafeterias, delicatessens, snack bars, newsstands, mail services, and other small-scale accessory retail uses without the sale of alcohol. May also include the sale of items manufactured on-site. 
b. Square footage devoted to retail sales may not exceed 500 square feet or ten percent of gross building square footage, whichever is larger. 
Schools (business, vocational and 
professional schools only) 	C 	Public and private primary, secondary and higher education schools (including preschool and day care) are prohibited. 
Storage and display (outside) 	A 	Allowed only as an accessory use subject to Section 9.04.110. 
 
P = Principal use permitted 
— = Not permitted 
A = Accessory use permitted (subject to Section 9.4.020). 
C = Conditional use permit required (subject to Section 9.08.110). 
Unless a use is specifically identified, it is not permitted in the District. Uses prohibited by Federal, State or local law are not permitted (see Section 9.03.050). 
Table 9.03.7 
Business Park Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Business Park District 
Minimum lot size (square feet [sf]) 	10,000 square feet 
Maximum building height (feet) 	35 feet and 2 stories A 
Setbacks 
 Adjacent to residential use or district 
 Adjacent to non-residential use b 
 Adjacent to street c 	  
40' a 
10' 
20' 
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) 	1.0 
Off-street parking 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Loading 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Lighting 	Subject to Section 9.05.080 
Landscaping and screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Noise levels 	Subject to Chapter 5.04 of the Municipal Code 
Outdoor storage and display 	Subject to Section 9.04.110 
Notes: 
a. Or height of nearest building/structure on site, whichever is greater. 
b. Setback measured from back of curb when adjacent land use is a parkway. Otherwise, setback is measures from the property line. 
c. Setback measured from back of curb. 
A—Maximum height of building may be increased through the alternative development standards process described in Section 9.08.050. 
 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, §§ 4, 7, 3-25-2009; Ord. No. 09-05, § 5, 12-9-2009; Ord. No. 13-01, § 6, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 13-02, § 7, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 16-05, § 7, 10-12-2016)  
Sec. 9.03.100. - Public/quasi-public district. 
(a)  Purpose of public/quasi-public district. The purpose of these public/quasi-public district regulations is to: 
(1)  Provide adequate space to meet the needs of public and quasi-public facilities including off-street parking and loading. 
(2)  Protect adjacent areas from excessive noise, illumination, odor, smoke, traffic, surface water runoff and other objectionable effects. 
(b)  Public/quasi-public district use regulations. 
(1)  Table 9.03.8 identifies the uses permitted in the public/quasi-public (PQ) district. 
(2)  Uses listed as conditionally permitted uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.08.110. Accessory uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Sections 9.04.020 and 9.04.120. 
(3)  The "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.8 indicates more precisely the use regulations for specific uses or operating characteristics. The notes and exceptions must be reviewed in conjunction with the other information for the class of use. 
(4)  Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be subject to special conditions regarding location, operation, or the design of the use. The Sections of this Title governing these uses are identified in the "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.8. 
(c)  Public/quasi-public district development standards. Table 9.03.9 indicates the development standards for the public/quasi-public district. 
(d)  Landscaping for public/quasi-public district. Landscaping is required pursuant to Sections 9.05.070 and 9.08.140. 
(e)  Site development permit for public/quasi-public developments. Projects shall require site plan review per the site development permit process and standards described in Section 9.08.170. 
(f)  Other applicable regulations in public/quasi-public district. Other applicable regulations in the community facility district, include, but are not limited to, the supplemental district regulations identified in Chapters 9.04 and 9.05 and the administrative processes identified in Chapter 9.08. 
Table 9.03.8 
Uses in Public/Quasi-Public (PQ) District 
Use 	CF 	Notes and Exceptions 
Adult day care center 	C 	
Animal shelters 	C 	
Botanical gardens 	C 	Includes arboretums 
Caretaker residences (temporary and 
permanent) 	A 	Subject to Section 9.04.060 and Section 9.04.130 
Clubs and lodges (private, nonprofit) 	C 	Hookah bars are prohibited. 
Community event space (indoor, public) 	P 	Includes reception halls, and auditoriums. 
Cultural centers 	C 	
Emergency shelters 	P 	Subject to Section 9.04.170 
Health-related institutional uses 	C 	Includes assisted care facilities, convalescent and nursing homes, homes for the aged, children's homes, sanitariums, and hospitals. 
Marijuana business 	— 	
Museums 	C 	Includes galleries 
Public buildings and facilities 	P 	Includes libraries, government buildings, community centers, corporate yards, public utility offices and exchanges, police stations, and fire stations. 
Radio and television towers and installations, radar installations, microwave relay stations, and cellular towers and installations (commercial) 	C 	a. Accessory use allowed subject to Section 9.04.050 
		b. No stand alone facilities allowed. 
Recycling facilities 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.090 
Religious, fraternal, or service organizations (non-profit) 	C 	Includes churches, temples, synagogues, monasteries, religious retreats, and other places of religious worship and other fraternal and community service organizations. 
Schools (private/religious) 	C 	a. Includes private colleges, universities, elementary, middle, and high schools. 
		b. No private tutorial schools permitted. 
Schools (public) 	P 	Includes public colleges, universities, elementary, middle and high schools 
Transitional housing 	C 	
 
P = Principal use permitted 
— = Not permitted 
A = Accessory use permitted (subject to Section 9.4.020 Accessory Uses and Structures) 
C = Conditional use permit required (subject to Section 9.8.110 Conditional Use Permit) 
Unless a use is specifically identified, it is not permitted in the district (see Section 9.3.050 Unlisted Uses). If a use is prohibited by any State or Federal law, it is not permitted in the district. 
Table 9.03.9 
Public/Quasi-public Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Community Facility 
Minimum Lot Size (square feet [sf]) 	N/A 
Maximum Building Height (feet) 	35 feet 
Front, Side and Rear Yard Setbacks (feet) 	All buildings and structures shall be setback from all property lines a distance equal to or greater than the height of the building or structure, unless otherwise regulated through a Conditional Use Permit. 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio 	0.6 
Off-Street Parking 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Loading 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Lighting 	Subject to Section 9.05.080 
Landscaping and Screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Noise Levels 	Subject to Chapter 5.04 of the Municipal Code 
 
Notes: 
 N/A = not applicable 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 6, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, § 4, 3-25-2009; Ord. No. 09-05, § 6, 12-9-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § 8, 4-27-2011; Ord. No. 13-01, § 7, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 16-05, § 8, 10-12-2016)  
Sec. 9.03.110. - Parks/open space districts. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these parks/open space district regulations is to provide a variety of passive and active recreational opportunities in the community, as well as to maintain important natural resources. 
Parks (P) district. The purpose of the parks district is to provide for and maintain active and passive parks, whether privately or publicly owned. 
Open space (OS) district. The purpose of the open space district is to provide open space for outdoor recreation, buffering of incompatible uses, preservation of natural resources, and protection of public health and safety. 
Open Space—Golf (OSG) district. The purpose of the open space golf district is to provide for the development of golf courses. 
O'Neill Regional Park (ONP) district. The sole purpose of the O'Neill Regional Park District is to identify areas of O'Neill Regional Park that are located in the City and designated on the City's official zoning map. Because the County of Orange is the jurisdiction responsible for development and maintenance of O'Neill Regional Park, this Title does not identify specific uses or standards for the ONP district. 
(b)  Parks/open space districts use regulations. 
(1)  Table 9.03.10 identifies the uses permitted in the parks/open space districts. 
(2)  Uses listed as conditionally permitted uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.08.110. Accessory uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.04.020. 
(3)  The "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.10 indicates more precisely the use regulations for specific uses or operating characteristics. The notes and exceptions must be reviewed in conjunction with the other information for the class of use. 
(4)  Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be subject to special conditions regarding location, operation, or the design of the use. The Sections of this Title governing these uses are identified in the "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.10. 
(c)  Parks/open space districts development standards. Table 9.03.11 indicates the development standards for the parks/open space districts. 
(d)  Landscaping for parks/open space districts. Landscaping is required pursuant to Sections 9.05.070 and 9.08.140. 
(e)  Site development permit for parks and open space areas. Projects shall require site plan review per the site development permit process and standards described in Section 9.08.170. Routine maintenance, including, but not limited to, repair, modification or replacement of site furnishings, equipment, irrigation, landscaping and other similar projects, shall not be considered a modification or enhancement. 
The Development Services Director shall have the authority to approve minor modifications or minor enhancements. 
(f)  Other applicable regulations in parks/open space districts. Other applicable regulations in the parks/open space district, include, but are not limited to, the supplemental district regulations identified in Chapters 9.04 and 9.05 and the administrative processes identified in Chapter 9.08. 
Table 9.03.10 
Uses in Parks/Open Space Districts a 
Use 	OS 	P 	OSG 	Notes and Exceptions 
Accessory uses and structures incidental to the operation of a permitted use 	A 	A 	A 	
Archery range 	C 	— 	— 	
Alcohol sales for on- or off-premises 
consumption 	S 	S 	C 	a. Must be accessory to a primary use. 
b. Alcohol sales in the OS and P zones for on-premises consumption may only be permitted with a proper ABC license and a special event permit. 
Caretaker residences (temporary and permanent) 	A 	A 	A 	Subject to Section 9.04.060 and Section 9.04.130. 
Community event space (indoor) 	C 	C 	C 	Includes community centers, museums, reception halls, auditoriums, and other traffic generating facilities. 
Concession stands 	S 	S 	C 	
Dancing and live entertainment 	S 	S 	C 	
Driving ranges 	— 	— 	C 	
Eating and drinking establishments 	— 	— 	A 	a. Drive-throughs not allowed. 
b. Must be incidental to and integrated with a principal use. 
c. A conditional use permit and ABC License is required by the Planning Commission if alcohol is to be consumed on the premises or if there is to be dancing or live entertainment. 
Equestrian facilities (commercial and 
noncommercial) 	C 	— 	C 	Includes stables and related riding facilities. 
Golf course (regulation or par 3) 	— 	— 	P 	The outdoor night lighting of golf courses shall be permitted through a conditional use permit. 
Golf course (miniature) 	— 	— 	C 	Subject to Section 9.05.080. 
Maintenance/support facilities 	A 	A 	A 	
Marijuana business 	— 	— 	— 	
Mitigation areas 	P 	P 	P 	Biotic, archeological, historical, paleontological. 
Outdoor amphitheater 	P 	P 	— 	Subject to Section 9.05.080. 
Picnic area 	P 	P 	P 	
Public facilities and utilities 	P 	P 	P 	
Recreation facilities (active, outdoor) 	C 	P 	C 	a. Includes large and small multi-purpose sports fields and courts; playgrounds and playground equipment; to lots and circuit training courses. 
b. Includes private swimming pools and tennis clubs. 
c. The outdoor night lighting of recreational uses identified in "a" and "b" above shall not be permitted unless a conditional use permit is approved by the City. 
d. Batting cages conditionally permitted in the Parks District. 
Recreation facilities (active, indoor) 	— 	P 	C 	Gymnasiums and similar facilities. 
Recreation facilities (passive, outdoor) 	C 	C 	C 	Rest areas, botanical gardens, and nature study areas. 
Recycling facilities 	— 	— 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.090. 
Sports retail accessory shop 	— 	A 	A 	a. Must be incidental to a principal use. 
b. Includes sales and/or rental of attire and equipment. 
Trails 	P 	P 	P 	a. Includes pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian. 
b. Circuit training courts require approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission. 
 
Notes: 
a - Because the County of Orange is the jurisdiction responsible for development and maintenance of O'Neill Regional Park, this Title does not identify specific uses or standards for the ONP District. 
P = Principal use permitted 
— = Not permitted 
A = Accessory use permitted (subject to Section 9.04.020). 
C = Conditional use permit required (subject to Section 9.08.110) 
S = Special Event Permit as a temporary use only (subject to Sections 9.05.110 and 9.08.180) 
Unless a use is specifically identified, it is not permitted in the District. Uses prohibited by Federal, State or local law are not permitted (see Section 9.03.050). 
Table 9.03.11 
Parks/Open Space Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Zoning District 
	OS 	P 	OSG 
Minimum Lot Size (square feet [sf]) 	No minimum 	½ acre 	1 acre 
Maximum Building Height (feet) 	N/A 	35' 	35' 
Front Yard Setback (feet) 
 Adjacent to Residential 
 Adjacent to Non-Residential 
 Street 	  
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 	  
35' 
25' 
25' 	  
25' a 
25' a 
50' 
Side Yard Setback (feet) 
 Adjacent to Residential 
 Adjacent to Non-Residential 
 Street 	  
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 	  
35' 
35' 
25' 	  
15' a 
15' a 
35' 
Rear Yard Setback (feet) 
 Adjacent to Residential 
 Adjacent to Non-Residential 
 Street 	  
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 	  
35' 
25' 
25' a 	  
25' a 
25' 
50' 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 	N/A 	0.5 	0.4 
Loading 	N/A 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Lighting 	N/A 	Subject to Section 9.05.080 
Landscaping and Screening 	N/A 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Noise Levels 	N/A 	Subject to Chapter 5.04 of the Municipal Code 
Off-Street Parking 	N/A 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
 
Notes: 
a. Or height of nearest building/structure on-site, whichever is greater. 
N/A - not applicable 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, § 4, 3-25-2009; Ord. No. 09-05, § 7, 12-9-2009; Ord. No. 13-01, § 8, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 16-05, § 9, 10-12-2016)  
Sec. 9.03.120. - Future planned community district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the future planned community (FPC) district is to encourage innovative design and development that is consistent with the General Plan future planned community designation and land use assumptions. 
(b)  Future planned community use regulations. Permitted uses and structures in the FPC district shall be designated in a specific plan. The specific plan shall include all parcels within the district and shall identify the existing and proposed uses on all parcels. 
(c)  Future planned community district development standards. 
(1)  The development standards for the FPC district shall be designated in a specific plan. The development standards may be applied uniformly throughout a district or may be applied to individual parcels in accordance with the provisions of the specific plan. 
(2)  The development standards and any supplementary regulations adopted as part of the specific plan shall supersede other conflicting requirements of this Title. In cases where an item is not addressed in the specific plan, the appropriate provision of this Title shall regulate. 
(d)  Specific plan process. Specific plans for the FPC district shall be prepared and processed pursuant to Section 9.08.190, and must be prepared prior to annexation as described in Section 9.08.090. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.03.130. - Auto center district. 
(a)  Purpose of auto center district. The purpose of the auto center district regulations is to: 
(1)  Provide for the retail sale of automobiles in the community consistent with the General Plan. 
(2)  Provide an attractive and architecturally compatible environment along Santa Margarita Parkway in an effort to maximize the retail sale of automobiles in the City. 
(3)  Provide for employment opportunities for existing and future residents. 
(4)  Provide adequate space to meet the needs of auto dealerships, including off-street parking, display and loading. 
(5)  Protect adjacent uses from excessive noise, illumination, odor, smoke, traffic, surface water runoff and other objectionable effects. 
(b)  Auto center use regulations. 
(1)  Table 9.03.12 Uses in Auto Center District identifies the uses permitted in the auto center district. 
(2)  Uses listed as conditionally permitted uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.08.110 Conditional Use Permit. Accessory uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.04.020 Accessory Uses and Structures. 
(3)  The "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.12 indicates more precisely the use regulations for specific uses or operating characteristics. The notes and exceptions must be reviewed in conjunction with the other information for the class of use. 
(4)  Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be subject to special conditions regarding location, operation, or the design of the use. The Sections of this Title governing these uses are identified in the "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.12. 
(c)  Auto center development standards. Table 9.03.13 indicates the development standards for the auto center district. 
(d)  Landscaping for auto center district. Landscaping is required pursuant to Sections 9.5.070 Landscape and Screening and 9.8.140 Landscape Plan Review of this Title. 
(e)  Site development permit for commercial developments. Projects shall require site plan review per the Site Development Permit process and standards described in Section 9.8.170 Site Development Permit. 
(f)  Other applicable regulations in auto center district. Other applicable regulations in the auto center district include, but are not limited to, the supplemental district regulations identified in Chapters 9.4 Regulations for Special Uses and Structures and 9.5 Special Regulations and the administrative processes identified in Chapter 9.8 Administration. 
Table 9.03.12 
Uses in Auto Center District 
Use 	Classification 	Notes and Exceptions 
Auto dealerships 	C 	Retail automotive sales and associated repair services. 
Marijuana business 	— 	
Office uses (general) 	A 	Permitted only in conjunction with new auto retail auto dealerships and associated repair services. 
Storage and display (outside) 	A 	Subject to Section 9.04.110 
 
P = Principal use permitted 
— = Not permitted 
A = Accessory use permitted (subject to Section 9.04.020 Accessory Uses and Structures) 
C = Conditional use permit required (subject to Section 9.08.110 Conditional Use Permit) 
Unless a use is specifically identified, it is not permitted in the District. Uses prohibited by Federal, State or local law are not permitted (see Section 9.03.050 Prohibited Uses). 
Table 9.03.13 
Auto Center Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Auto Center District 
Minimum Lot Size (square feet [sf]) 	No minimum 
Maximum Building Height (feet) 	40 feet A 
Setbacks 	
 Adjacent to Residential Use or District 	20' a 
 Adjacent to Non-Residential Use b 	20' 
 Adjacent to Street c 	15' 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio 	1.0 
Off-Street Parking 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Loading 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Lighting 	Subject to Section 9.05.080 
Landscaping and Screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Noise Levels 	Subject to Chapter 5.04 Noise Control of the 
Municipal Code 
 
Notes: 
a  Or height of nearest building/structure on site, whichever is greater. 
b  Setback measured from back of curb when adjacent land use is a parkway. Otherwise, setback is measured from the property line. 
c  Setback measured from back of curb. 
A - Architectural features exceeding the maximum height may be permitted subject to an Alternative Development Standard pursuant to Section 9.08.050. 
(Ord. No. 10-06, § 5, 10-13-2010; Ord. No. 13-01, § 9, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 16-05, § 10, 10-12-2016)  
Sec. 9.03.140. - Auto center overlay district. 
A.  [Purpose of auto center overlay district.] The purpose of the auto center overlay district regulations is to: 
(1)  Expand the opportunity to provide for the retail sale of automobiles in the community consistent with the General Plan. 
(2)  Provide an attractive and architecturally compatible environment along Santa Margarita Parkway in an effort to maximize the retail sale of automobiles in the City. 
(3)  Provide for employment opportunities for existing and future residents. 
(4)  Provide adequate space to meet the needs of auto dealerships, including off-street parking, display and loading. 
(5)  Provide additional opportunities to expand the auto center district in appropriate areas without creating additional nonconforming lots, uses or structures. 
(6)  Protect adjacent uses from excessive noise, illumination, odor, smoke, traffic, surface water runoff and other objectionable effects. 
B.  Auto center overlay use regulations. 
(1)  In addition to the uses permitted within the underlying base Zoning Districts, Table 9.03.14 Uses in Auto Center Overlay District identifies the uses permitted in the auto center overlay district. 
(2)  Uses listed as conditionally permitted uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.08.110. Accessory uses are subject to the review requirements and conditions contained in Section 9.04.020. 
(3)  The "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.14 indicates more precisely the use regulations for specific uses or operating characteristics. The notes and exceptions must be reviewed in conjunction with the other information for the class of use. 
(4)  Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be subject to special conditions regarding location, operation, or the design of the use. The Sections of this Title governing these uses are identified in the "notes and exceptions" column of Table 9.03.14. 
C.  Auto center overlay development standards. Notwithstanding the development standards permitted for the underlying base zoning districts, Table 9.03.15 Auto Center Overlay Development Standards indicates development standards for uses within the auto center overlay district. The development standards in Table 9.03.15 are only applicable to uses identified within Table 9.03.14 Uses in Auto Center Overlay District. With regard to uses identified in Table 9.03.14 Uses in Auto Center Overlay District, in the event of a conflict between the development standards set forth in Table 9.03.15 Auto Center Overlay Development Standards and another development standard, the development standards in Table 9.03.15 shall prevail. 
D.  Landscaping for auto center overlay district. Landscaping is required pursuant to Sections 9.05.070 Landscape and Screening and 9.08.140 Landscape Plan Review of this Title. 
E.  Site development permit for commercial developments. Projects shall require site plan review per the Site Development Permit process and standards described in Section 9.08.170 Site Development Permit. 
F.  Other applicable regulations in auto center district. Other applicable regulations in the auto center overlay district include, but are not limited to, the supplemental district regulations identified in Chapters 9.04 Regulations for Special Uses and Structures and 9.05 Special Regulations and the administrative processes identified in Chapter 9.08 Administration. 
Table 9.03.14 
Uses in Auto Center Overlay District 
Use 	Classification 	Notes and Exceptions 
Auto dealerships 	C 	Includes new and used automobiles. 
Auto repair 	C 	Includes both major and minor repair services, such as body work, painting, upholstery, restoration, mechanical repairs, cleaning, detailing, tire repair, transmission repair, tinting, oil changes, car wash and stereo installation. 
Auto repair services associated with an auto dealership may be approved as an accessory use to the auto dealership. 
Marijuana business 	— 	
Office uses (general) 	A 	Permitted only in conjunction with vehicle sales/rental and auto repair services. 
Radio and television towers and installations, radar installations, microwave relay stations, and cellular towers and installations (commercial) 	C 	Subject to Section 9.04.050. 
Storage and display (outside) 	A 	Subject to Section 9.04.110. 
Retail sales 	A 	Permitted only in conjunction with vehicle sales/rental and auto repair services, including auto parts. 
Vehicle rental 	C 	Includes motorcycles, recreational vehicles, boats, trailers and other similar vehicle sales. 
Vehicle rentals associated with an auto dealership may be approved as an accessory use to the auto dealership. 
Vehicle sales 	C 	Includes motorcycles, recreational vehicles, boats, trailers and other similar vehicle sales. 
 
P = Principal use permitted 
— = Not permitted 
A = Accessory use permitted (subject to Section 9.04.020) 
C = Conditional use permit required (subject to Section 9.08.110) 
Unless a use is specifically identified, it is not permitted in the District. Uses prohibited by Federal, State or local law are not permitted (see Section 9.03.050). 
Table 9.03.15 
Auto Center Overlay Development Standards 
Development Standard 	Auto Center District 
Minimum Lot Size (square feet [sf]) 	4.5 acres a 
Maximum Building Height (feet) 	40 feet A 
Setbacks 	
 Adjacent to Residential Use or District 	20' b 
 Adjacent to Non-Residential Use c 	20' 
 Adjacent to Street d 	15' 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio 	1.0 
Off-Street Parking 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Loading 	Subject to Chapter 9.06 
Lighting 	Subject to Section 9.05.080 
Landscaping and Screening 	Subject to Section 9.05.070 
Noise Levels 	Subject to Chapter 5.04 Noise Control of the 
Municipal Code 
 
Notes: 
a  Acreage may consist of the sum of acreage from multiple adjacent parcels. This minimum lot size only applies to the establishment of uses listed in Table 9.03.14 Uses in Auto Center Overlay Zoning District. Additionally, wireless communication facilities are exempt from maintaining a minimum lot size. 
b  Or height of nearest building/structure on site, whichever is greater. 
c  Setback measured from back of curb when adjacent land use is a parkway. Otherwise, setback is measured from the property line. 
d  Setback measured from back of curb. 
A - Architectural features exceeding the maximum height may be permitted subject to an Alternative Development Standard pursuant to Section 9.08.050. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, §§ 3, 4, 6-22-2011; Ord. No. 12-04, § 6(Exh. 1), 6-27-2012; Ord. No. 13-01, § 10, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 16-05, § 11, 10-12-2016)  
APPENDIX A. - ZONING MAP 
 
(Ord. No. 11-05, §§ 3, 4, 6-22-2011; Ord. No. 12-04, § 6(Exh. 1), 6-27-2012; Ord. No. 14-03, § 6(Exh. 1), 9-24-2014; Ord. No. 15-02, § 4(Exh. 1), 8-12-2015)  
Chapter 9.04 - Regulations for Special Uses and Structures 
 
Sec. 9.04.010. - General requirements. 
Accessory uses and structures may be developed as permitted in this Chapter provided such uses are located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal use, and such uses are incidental to, and do not alter, the use of land as permitted within the specific zoning district in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.020. - Accessory structures. 
(a)  Development standards for attached accessory structure. A fully-enclosed, attached accessory structure shall be made structurally a part of the main building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements applicable to the principal structure. Decks, porches and balconies shall be regulated by Subsection 9.04.020(d). Open patio covers shall be regulated by Subsection 9.04.020(e). Accessory dwelling units shall be regulated by Section 9.04.190. 
(b)  Development standards for detached accessory structure. Detached accessory structures shall satisfy all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The structure shall not exceed the height of the principal structure on the building site, except as may otherwise be permitted under Section 9.04.190 (accessory dwelling units). 
(2)  The structure shall conform to the front and side yard requirements of the applicable zoning district unless otherwise noted in this section or Section 9.04.190 (accessory dwelling units). 
(3)  The structure shall maintain a minimum separation of five feet between the detached accessory structure and the main building. 
(4)  If less than 450 square feet in gross floor area, the structure shall be located a minimum distance from the parcel's rear and side property line equal to the height of the structure. However, if the structure is 450 square feet or more in gross floor area, the structure shall conform to the same rear yard setback requirement as required for main buildings in the applicable zoning district. 
(5)  Detached fireplaces, barbecues, fire pits, landscape structures and other similar structures, with a height less than five feet, shall be permitted to encroach into the rear and side setback areas unless the adopted Uniform Building Code regulations require a more restrictive setback. If such structures are five feet or greater in height or if the structure is 450 square feet or more in gross floor area, they shall maintain the minimum side and rear yard setback for the zoning district. No detached fireplace, barbecue, fire pit, landscape structure or other similar structures shall exceed eight feet in height unless approved through the alternative development standard process described in Section 9.08.050. 
(6)  Recreational play structures including swings and playgrounds, which are not permanently affixed to the ground, shall be permitted to encroach into the rear and side setback areas. Any recreational play structure which requires a building permit shall maintain the requirements described in Subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4) above. 
(c)  Additional development standards for attached and detached accessory structures in residential districts. 
(1)  Accessory structures located in residential and future planned community (FPC) districts shall be subject to the development standards for that district, as well as the following requirements: 
a.  Exterior sides used to enclose the structure shall be finished with wood, stucco, masonry, or other material of similar texture and durability as the principal structure, and which is compatible with the existing structure. 
b.  The roof material shall be concrete, slate, tile, asphalt shingle, or other material of similar appearance, texture, substance, and durability as the principal structure, and which is compatible with the existing structure. 
c.  Roof eaves and gables shall be no less than 12 inches, measured from the vertical side of the unit, unless otherwise approved by the Development Services Director or, upon referral, the Planning Commission. 
d.  Exterior finish colors for accessory structures shall be the same as the principal structure. 
e.  Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the requirements of Section 9.04.190. 
(2)  The following building materials shall not be used in the construction and finish of an accessory structure that requires a building permit: 
a.  Exterior sides of accessory structures shall not use metal siding and/or exposed metal supports, cloth, canvas, plastic sheeting, corrugated fiberglass, or corrugated metal. 
b.  Roofs of accessory structures shall not use cloth, canvas, plastic sheeting, corrugated fiberglass, or corrugated metal. 
c.  Temporary shade structures may utilize canvas or other similar material, provided the shade structure is not permanently affixed to the ground. 
(d)  Decks, porches, and balconies. Decks, porches, and balconies more than 30 inches above finished grade may be erected as accessory structures in conjunction with the principal use on the building site subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Setbacks. 
a.  Front yard setback. Attached decks, porches and balconies shall conform to the front yard requirements of the applicable district. 
b.  Side yard setback. If an attached deck, porch or balcony is 450 square feet or more in area, the deck, porch or balcony shall conform with the side yard requirement of the applicable district. If the attached deck, porch or balcony is less than 450 square feet in area, the deck may extend into a side yard not more than three feet, but shall in no case be closer than three feet from the side property line. 
c.  Rear yard setback. If an attached deck, porch or balcony is less than 450 square feet in area, the deck, porch or balcony may be located a minimum distance from the rear property line equal to three feet, whichever is greater. However, if the deck is 450 square feet or more in area, the deck shall conform to the same rear yard setback requirement as required for the principal structure in the applicable district. 
(2)  Decks, porches and balconies over six feet in height measured from finished grade shall not exceed 60 percent of the total length of the principal building elevation to which it is attached and shall maintain all building setbacks of the principal structure. 
(3)  Detached decks. Detached decks shall comply with the requirements for detached accessory structures in Subsections 9.04.020(b) and (c). 
(e)  Patios and patio covers. Patios and patio covers may be erected as accessory structures in conjunction with the principal use on the building site subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A wholly enclosed covered patio shall maintain the same yard requirements as set forth for the main structure. 
(2)  An open patio cover may be erected within the required rear yard to a minimum of three feet from the rear property line. Such structure shall maintain the same front and side yards as required for the principal structure on the building site. 
(3)  Patio covers located on properties where individual lots for each residential unit do not exist shall be permitted only upon the approval of a site plan and building designs by the Development Services Director. Issuance of building permits shall be approved upon a finding of consistency with the Development Services Director approved plans. 
(4)  Patio cover setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the cover and not the footing. 
(f)  Antennas. An antenna may be installed on a lot in any zoning district if it complies with the criteria identified in this Section. Satellite television antennae less than 30 inches in diameter are permitted in any zone and are not subject to the requirements of this Section, provided that such antennae are attached to a permitted main or accessory structure on the lot. 
(1)  RL, RLM, RM, RH and FPC zoning districts or residential land uses. 
a.  Locations prohibited. No satellite dish antenna shall be located in a front or corner-side yard. 
b.  Setbacks. Front and street-side property lines, 20 feet; interior side and rear property lines, ten feet, except that no setback shall be required in interior side and rear setback areas if the antenna does not exceed six feet in height. 
c.  Maximum height. Fifteen feet, measured from ground level immediately under the antenna to the highest point of the antenna or any appurtenance attached to it, provided that the Development Services Director may approve mounting an antenna on the rear half of a roof if no other feasible location exists. 
(2)  CG, CN, BP, CF, P, and OS zoning districts or non-residential land uses. 
a.  Roof-mounted antennas. Satellite dish antennas shall be located on the roof of a structure whenever possible, providing the dish is not visible from public roadways or can be adequately screened from view of public roadways. 
b.  Ground-mounted antennas. All satellite dish antennas that cannot be installed on the roof in a manner that is not visible from a public roadway shall be located directly adjacent to a building, whenever possible. Ground-mounted dishes shall be located to the rear or interior side of the building, whenever possible, in order to be screened from view from the front of the building and public roadways. Ground-mounted antennas shall be adequately screened from view from public roadways, unless required for antenna focusing purposes. Ground-mounted antennas located on properties adjacent to residential land uses shall be completely screened from view. 
c.  Location prohibited. No satellite dish antenna shall occupy a required parking space or adversely impact any vehicle circulation. 
d.  Maximum height. Twenty feet measured from ground or ten feet measured from roof level immediately under the antenna to the highest point of the antenna or any appurtenance attached thereto. 
e.  Permit required. A site plan review shall be required for all satellite dish antennas in any C, BP, CF, P, or OS district. 
(g)  Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment such as air conditioning units and heating and ventilation units shall maintain the same setback requirements as described in the Uniform Building Code. Mechanical equipment located within a front yard or that is otherwise visible from the public right-of-way shall be screened per Section 9.05.070. See Section 9.04.120 regarding swimming pool and spa equipment. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 18-01, § 11, 2-14-2018)  
Sec. 9.04.030. - Adult businesses. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. It is the intent of this Section to prevent community-wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools, churches, parks, public facilities and residentially zoned districts or uses. The City Council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this Section to: 
(1)  Establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses; and 
(2)  To mitigate the negative secondary effects of adult businesses, while permitting the location of adult businesses in certain areas to comply with existing legal standards. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Except as otherwise specified, as used herein, the terms and phrases shall have the same meaning as defined in Chapter 6.10. 
(2)  Establishment of an adult business. To "establish" an adult business shall be defined to include any of the following: 
a.  The opening or commencement of any adult business as a new business; 
b.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any adult business defined herein; 
c.  The addition of any of the adult businesses defined herein to any other existing adult business; or 
d.  The relocation of any such adult business. 
(c)  Minimum proximity requirements. No adult business shall be established or located in any zoning district in the City other than the business park zoning district, and subject to the distance requirements of certain specified land uses or zones as set forth below: 
(1)  No such business shall be established or located within 1,000 feet of any other adult business. 
(2)  No such business shall be established or located within 1,000 feet from any existing residential zoning district or use, park, church or school. 
(3)  The distances set forth above shall be measured as a radius from the primary entrance of the adult business to the property lines of the property so zoned without regard to intervening structures. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.040. - Animal care facilities. 
In addition to the requirements of the zoning district in which an animal hospital/clinic, kennel, or animal day care facility is located, the following conditions shall apply to the establishment, maintenance, and operation of the facility: 
(1)  All animal service and confinement areas and all animal runs shall be located within an air conditioned and sound attenuated building; 
(2)  All facilities for the treatment and confinement of animals shall be designed, installed, constructed, and maintained to meet applicable standards established by relevant County and State public health agencies; 
(3)  All animal waste shall be double bagged and disposed of in a timely manner. The cleaning product, Chlorhexiderm, or other similar cleaning products, shall be used when mopping the interior of the building. No animal waste or animal crates shall be washed down into the storm drains; and 
(4)  All uses on the site shall comply with existing National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements, including, but not limited to, Chapter 5.10, the Rancho Santa Margarita Local Implementation Plan and the best management practices developed by the County of Orange. 
Additional conditions may be placed upon the animal care facility through the conditional use permit process. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.050. - Wireless communication facilities. 
The purpose of this Section is to provide placement, design and screening criteria for wireless communication facilities in order to protect the public health, safety, general welfare, and quality of life while preserving the rights of wireless communication providers. These regulations are intended to establish flexible guidelines for the governance of wireless communications facilities that recognize the unique land use distribution and topography in the City. 
(1)  Exemptions. In the event an emergency or disaster is declared for the area, the Development Services Director may exempt wireless communication facilities from the requirements of this Section during the duration of such emergency or disaster. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Minor wireless communication facility means a wireless communication facility that is building-, facade-, or wall-mounted, and does not exceed the height of the parapet wall or roof line of the building. A roof-mounted facility that is concealed or is of a small diameter and does not exceed the maximum height of the district, is considered a minor wireless communication facility. 
b.  Major wireless communication facility means a wireless communication facility that is ground-mounted, and/or is mounted in any manner on property or buildings owned by the City or in rights-of-way over which the City has regulatory authority. 
c.  Co-location facility means a wireless communication facility that meets the requirements of Government Code § 65850.6(a). 
(3)  Prohibited uses. Wireless communication facilities that incommode the public use of the road or highway are prohibited. 
(4)  Development criteria. The following regulations shall apply to the placement of wireless communication facilities: 
a.  All wireless communication facilities may be mounted subject to the preferred order of placement and general provisions of this Section: 
1.  Co-located with other wireless communication facilities. 
2.  On existing structures such as buildings, communication towers, and utility facilities. 
b.  Wireless communications facilities shall be located where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. 
c.  Ground-mounted wireless communication facilities shall be located in close proximity to existing above ground utilities, such as electrical towers, water tanks or utility poles (which are not scheduled for removal or undergrounding in the next 18 months), light poles, trees of comparable heights, and in areas where they are otherwise visually compatible and will not detract from the appearance of the city. 
d.  For all ground-mounted communication facilities, the support structures shall be set back from all residential property lines a distance equal to and no less than, the height of the highest point of the wireless communication facility. 
e.  Wireless communication facilities shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any other communication facility except when located on an existing building, structure or wireless facility. For the purpose of this Section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the proposed major wireless communication facility to the nearest property line of any residential land use, or to the nearest point of another major wireless communication facility. 
Design standards. 
(1)  Wireless communication facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other legally required seals or signage. 
(2)  Accessory equipment shall meet the following standards: 
a.  All accessory equipment associated with the operation of the wireless communication facility shall be located within a building, enclosure, or underground vault that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located, subject to City approval. 
b.  Accessory equipment permitted to be located above ground shall be visually compatible with the surrounding buildings and include sufficient landscaping to screen the structure from view. 
c.  Accessory equipment enclosures shall be limited to the housing of radio, electronic and related power equipment, and shall not be used for any other purpose, including storage. 
(3)  Wireless communication facilities shall have subdued colors and non-reflective materials that blend with surrounding materials and colors. 
(4)  All screening for building-mounted facilities shall be compatible with the existing architecture, color, texture and or materials of the building. 
(5)  The monopole foundation and structures upon which antenna are to be mounted, shall be no greater in diameter or cross Sectional dimension than is necessary for the proper functioning of the wireless communication facility. However, such facility shall be designed to accommodate at least two antennas. 
(6)  In considering an application for any major or minor wireless communication facility, the Planning Commission shall consider the cumulative visual effects of existing wireless communication facilities in determining the location of an additional facility and in imposing conditions on the facility, all as necessary to minimize negative visual impacts of the applied for facility. 
(7)  Security fencing, if permitted or required, shall conform to the following: 
a.  No fence shall exceed six feet in height. 
b.  The fence material shall be compatible with the underlying zoning requirements. 
c.  Security fencing shall be screened from view through the use of appropriate landscaping material. 
Height standards. Wireless communication facilities utilizing a free-standing support structure shall be limited to the maximum building height for the applicable zoning district. 
Noise. Any noise generating equipment shall meet the requirements of Chapter 5.04 of the Municipal Code. 
Co-location. 
(1)  All applicants shall cooperate in good faith with existing wireless communication facilities operators in co-locating additional antennas on support structures and/or on existing buildings provided the existing operator has received a discretionary permit for such use at said site from the City. 
(2)  All applicants shall exercise good faith in cooperating in co-locating with other providers and sharing the permitted site, provided such proposed shared use does not prevent or unreasonably interfere with the existing use (e.g., significant interference in broadcast or reception capabilities as opposed to competitive conflict or financial burden). Such good faith cooperation shall include sharing technical information necessary to evaluate the feasibility of co-location. In the event a dispute arises as to whether a provider has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the City may require a third party technical study at the expense of either or both the applicant and the existing operator as to the feasibility of co-locating. 
(3)  Failure to comply with the co-location requirements of this Section may result in the denial of a permit request or revocation of an existing permit. 
(4)  A co-location facility shall be a permitted use. 
(5)  Performance standards. 
a.  The site in which the wireless facility is located must be maintained in a condition free of trash, debris, and refuse in accordance with Section 9.05.100. 
b.  Lawfully-erected wireless communication facilities that have not provided wireless communication services for a cumulative period of 90 days in a one-year period shall be considered abandoned and be removed promptly from the premises no later than three months after the discontinuation of use, except as otherwise provided by law. Such removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules and regulations of the City. The wireless communication provider shall send to the City a copy of the discontinuation notice required by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) or Federal Communications Commission (FCC) at the time the notice is sent to the regulatory agencies. 
c.  All facilities determined to be abandoned and not removed within the required three-month period from the date of notice shall be in violation of this Chapter, and operators of the facility and the owners of the property shall be subject to penalties for violations under the enforcement and penalties provisions of this Section. The City may remove all abandoned facilities following the three-month removal period at the operators' expense. Facilities removed by the City shall be stored for no less than 15 days and thereafter be disposed of by public auction, if deemed to be of value by the City, or otherwise as permitted by law. 
(6)  Permit application and other submittal requirements. 
a.  For minor and co-location wireless communication facilities, the applicant shall submit a completed "site development permit application" to the Development Services Director. 
b.  For major wireless telecommunication facilities, the applicant shall submit a completed "conditional use permit application" to the Development Services Director. 
(7)  Approval of wireless communication facilities. 
a.  Major and minor wireless communications facilities shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed in writing within ten business days pursuant to Section 9.08.100. 
b.  Co-location facilities are subject to administrative approval. 
(8)  Nonconforming wireless communication facilities. Any wireless communication facility constructed in violation of this Section, or in violation of any prior ordinance or regulation, is subject to immediate abatement or revocation of permit. 
(9)  Enforcement. 
a.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to periodic inspection by the City to determine whether they are in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Section. 
b.  If any conditions are discovered that may result in a danger to life or property, the City will give written notice to the permittee and/or the property owner at their last known address, describing the dangerous condition and demanding that the condition be corrected within the period of time specified in that notice. 
c.  Failure to comply with any applicable provision of this Section, or with conditions that may be imposed in connection with a variance, approved permit, or conditional use permit, will constitute a public nuisance as well as grounds for immediate revocation of the permit or other entitlement. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, § 4, 3-25-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections A.—I. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (1)—(9).  
Sec. 9.04.060. - Caretaker facilities. 
Caretaker facilities may be developed as permitted in specific zoning districts for the exclusive use of personnel employed for the maintenance and security of the principal use, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Permanent caretaker facilities are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Must be listed as a permitted use in the applicable zoning district. 
b.  Must meet all yard setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(2)  Temporary caretaker facilities are subject to Section 9.04.130. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.070. - Fences, walls, hedges and landscape screening. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Fences, walls, hedges and landscape screening may be erected within required yard setbacks in all zoning districts subject to the requirements of this Section. 
(2)  Fences are required to be located in internal side yards between residences and in any yard located between a residence and an open space or park use. 
(3)  For the purposes of this Section, the words "fence" and "wall" shall have the same meaning, and any reference to fences shall include walls. In addition, all height restrictions applying to fences and walls shall apply equally to landscaping planted within required yards forming a barrier serving the same visual purpose as a fence or wall. 
(b)  Measurement of height. The height of any fence, wall, hedge or landscape screening shall be measured from the finished grade upon which the fence is placed and the top of the fence as illustrated in Figure 9.04.1. For fences or walls that are located on a natural or manufactured slope in a side or rear yard, the fence may be staggered in height where the minimum height is not less than five feet. Plans for such fences and walls shall be subject to the approval of the Development Services Director. 
   

Figure 9.04.1 Fence and Wall Height 
(c)  Height limits. The following height limits apply to all zoning districts, except as identified in Subsection 9.04.070(d). 
All residential and future planned community (FPC) lots. 
(1)  Front yard. Three and one-half feet. 
(2)  Side yard. Six feet with the exception of corner lots. Corner lot side yards shall maintain a height limit of three feet within ten feet of a corner side property line. At no time shall such fence, wall, hedge or landscape screening encroach into any area of unrestricted visibility as specified in Section 9.06.100. 
(3)  Rear yard. Six feet. 
All commercial and business park lots. As identified in Section 9.05.070. 
(d)  Exceptions to height limits. 
(1)  Lots adjacent to arterials and highways with a noise contour of 65 dBA or greater as shown in the General Plan Noise Element may, for noise attenuation purposes, install and maintain a fence or wall to a maximum of eight feet. Any such wall over six feet in height shall be subject to administrative approval (Section 9.08.040) to ensure that the fence or wall is compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(2)  Any wall over eight feet in height shall be subject to discretionary approval through an alternative development standard as described in Section 9.08.050. Such wall or fence visible from public rights-of-way shall have architectural treatments designed to mitigate its visual impact. 
(3)  The Development Services Director may approve fences up to five feet in height in front yards if the following requirements are met: 
a.  The portion of the fence above three and one-half feet in height is of open vertical bar construction with a minimum spacing of three inches between vertical elements. 
b.  The City Engineer confirms the proposed fence allows adequate sight distance for vehicles using driveways and/or street intersections. 
(4)  Where the elevation of an adjoining building site to the side or rear is higher than the base of the fence or wall in the side or rear setback area, the height of the fence or wall may be measured from the elevation of the adjoining building site to the top of the fence or wall as illustrated in Figure 9.04.1. However, in no case shall such a fence or wall exceed eight feet from the base of the fence or wall to the top. This exception shall not apply to situations where the subject fence or wall is located adjacent to a street or alley. 
(e)  Fence/retaining wall combinations. If a fence is a vertical extension of a retaining wall, and the combined retaining wall and fence height is greater that six feet within a side or rear yard or greater than three and one-half feet within a front yard (measured from the base of the retaining wall), the base of the fence shall be stepped back from the top of the retaining wall a minimum of two feet as illustrated in Figure 9.04.2. This provision is subject to the review and approval of the Development Services Director. 
 

Figure 9.04.2 Fence/Retaining Wall Combinations 
(f)  Prohibited materials. Barbed wire, razor wire and other similar materials are prohibited in all zoning districts. Chain link fencing is only permitted under the following circumstances: 
(1)  In commercial and business park zoning districts and only when not visible from the public right-of-way; 
(2)  Temporary fencing associated with a construction site, special event or other similar temporary use; and 
(3)  In the park zoning district and only when associated with existing sports field fencing. New permanent chain link fencing in the park zoning district shall only be permitted as part of an approved changed plan. 
(g)  Requirements for all zoning districts. All fences, walls, hedges and landscape screening are subject to the following additional height and design standards: 
(1)  Fences located on corner lots and adjacent to driveways shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 9.06.100. 
(2)  All swimming pools, whirlpools, and spas shall be enclosed by a minimum five-foot high fence with a self-closing gate. 
(3)  Tennis court fencing shall be in compliance with the setback and height requirements of Chapter 9.04. 
(4)  Where walls are used along property frontages, or screen walls are used to conceal storage and equipment areas, they shall be designed to blend with the site's architecture. Both sides of all walls or fences shall be architecturally treated when visible from public right-of-way and public areas such as parking lots and plazas. Landscaping should be used in combination with such walls whenever possible. 
Long expanses of fence or wall surfaces shall be offset or architecturally designed to prevent monotony. Landscape pockets or vines should be provided whenever practicable. 
(h)  Building permits required. Building permits are required prior to the erection of fences in accordance with the requirements of the most recent Uniform Building Code adopted by the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 9-14-2011)  
Sec. 9.04.080. - Nonconforming uses, lots and structures. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  The provisions to this Section apply to all existing, legal nonconforming uses, activities and structures as defined in Section 9.01.200, and to any use, building or structure made nonconforming upon adoption of this and subsequent ordinances. 
(2)  Any conforming or nonconforming use or structure established illegally under the ordinance in effect at the time of establishment is considered an illegal use or structure and shall be subject to immediate abatement or correction. 
(b)  Nonconforming use—Continuation of use. 
(1)  The lawful use or occupancy of a building existing at the time this Title or amendments thereto take effect may be continued provided there is no alteration or addition to any structure, nor any enlargement of area, space, or volume occupied by such nonconformity. 
(2)  A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed to another use, except to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(3)  Any legal non-conforming use that is discontinued for 90 days within a one-year period or more shall not be re-established. 
(4)  A legal non-conforming use shall not increase in intensity or expand its activities. 
(c)  Nonconforming buildings and structures—Continuation of use. A legal nonconforming building or structure shall be allowed to remain for the lifetime of the structure provided the structure and property on which it is located are maintained in good condition and repair. 
(d)  Repairs and maintenance. 
Ordinary repairs and maintenance work. Ordinary repairs and maintenance work may be made to a legal nonconformity, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Maintenance work shall not include structural alterations, except those required by law or those required to make the structure and use conform to the standards and use regulations of the zoning district in which such structure and use are located. 
(2)  Ordinary repairs and the repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, and plumbing may be made to an extent not exceeding the latest assessed valuation of the structure. In no case, however, shall the cubic content of the structure as it existed when it became nonconforming be increased. 
Repairs to damages. In the event damage or destruction to a non-residential structure exceeds one-half of the assessed valuation of such structure, that structure shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with all use and area regulations for new structures in the zoning district in which such structure is located. In the event damage or destruction to a residential structure exceeds one-half of the assessed valuation of such structure, that structure may be reconstructed on the approved building footprint as of the date of adoption of this Title, as determined by the Building Official, but shall comply with all other use and area regulations for new structures in the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
Strengthening and restoring. Nothing set forth in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any structure or its support structure, or part thereof, declared to be unsafe by any officer of the City charged with protecting the public safety upon the order of such officer. 
(e)  Enlargement. A legal nonconformity shall not be enlarged in volume or extended or relocated beyond the area it occupies. However, when a residential or commercial structure established legally becomes nonconforming under the provisions of this Title, specifically related to setbacks, lot size or height limit, the structure may be enlarged or extended under the following provisions: 
(1)  A structure shall not extend or enlarge into any nonconforming setback area; however, the structure may extend or enlarge in any direction where the setbacks are conforming to the provisions of this Title. 
(2)  The structure shall comply with all applicable lot coverage restrictions. 
(f)  Removal of nonconforming uses or structures. The City may adopt abatement programs for nonconforming uses and structures. The abatement program shall identify an amortization period and process for the removal of nonconforming use or structure. 
(g)  Violations. Any of the following violations shall immediately terminate the right to operate a legal nonconformity: 
(1)  Changing to another use not permitted in the district; 
(2)  Increasing or enlarging the area, space, or volume occupied by or devoted to such nonconforming use; or 
(3)  Increasing the number of personnel employed or volume of business performed so that such increase constitutes an intensification of the nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.090. - Solid waste and recycling facilities. 
(a)  Purpose. The provisions of this Section are established to provide for the collection, storage and removal of solid waste from non-residential and multi-family establishments and for the redemption and recycling of reusable materials and to make such facilities convenient to the consumer in order to reduce the solid waste stream to landfills and increase the recycling of reusable materials. The recycling facilities outlined by this Section are intended to encourage recycling services by providing a comprehensive and easily understood program of permitting and regulating such uses. 
(b)  Land use standards. 
Trash and recycling enclosure requirements. 
(1)  All trash and recycling bins shall be completely screened from view, with the exception of temporary bins and roll-off boxes used for construction and demolition projects. 
(2)  All trash and recycling bin lids shall remain closed at all times, with the exception of the temporary opening and closing of the lids for the collection and removal of solid waste. 
(3)  Trash and recycling enclosures shall be used for the collection of solid waste only. Trash and recycling enclosures shall not be used for storage, stockpiling or other similar uses. 
(4)  Any non-residential or multi-family establishment desiring to provide recycling on-site, but having sufficient space on-site, may reduce the parking requirement by one parking space in order to allow for an expanded trash enclosure for recycling, subject to Development Services Director approval. 
Recycling facility permit requirements. No person shall permit the placement, construction, or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining all required approvals and permits pursuant to the provisions set forth in this Section. Recycling facilities shall be permitted as set forth in Table 9.04.1. 
Recycling facility operational/site standards. Permitted and conditionally permitted recycling facilities shall meet all of the applicable criteria and standards in this Section. 
The criteria and standards for recycling facilities are as follows: 
(1)  Reverse vending machines. Reverse vending machines do not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers and are permitted in the zoning districts identified in Table 9.04.1, provided the machines: 
a.  Are established in conjunction with a commercial or business park use or community facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the City; 
b.  Are located near the entrance to the structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
c.  Do not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use; 
d.  Do not occupy more than 50 square feet; 
e.  Are constructed of durable rustproof and water proof material; 
f.  Have sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine exclusive of operating instructions; 
g.  Comply with illumination requirements in this Title; 
h.  Are maintained in a clean, dry, and litter-free condition on a daily basis; and 
i.  Are clearly marked to identify the phone number of the operator or responsible person if the machine is inoperative or in violation of this Code. 
(2)  Recycling areas. Recycling areas no greater than 100 square feet in size are permitted as accessory uses in the zoning districts identified in Table 9.04.1. All recycling areas must meet the landscaping and screening and outdoor storage regulations identified in Section 9.05.070 and the parking requirements identified in Chapter 9.06. 
(3)  Small collection facilities. Small collection facilities may be located in the zoning districts identified in Table 9.04.1 and do not require additional parking spaces provided that they comply with the following standards: 
a.  The facility is established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the City; 
b.  The facility is no larger than 500 square feet and occupies no more than five parking spaces, not including space that will be needed periodically for removal of materials or exchange of containers, provided said parking spaces are not necessary to satisfy the minimum on-site parking requirements of this Title; 
c.  The facility is set back ten feet from the public right-of-way and does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
d.  The facility and signs are in compliance with the requirements of this Title; 
e.  Hours of operations are restricted to the same as the primary use; 
f.  The facility is clearly marked to identify the phone number of the operator or responsible person if the machines are inoperative or in violation of this Title; and 
g.  The site is maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
(4)  Large collection facilities. A large collection facility is one that is larger than 500 square feet, or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a primary use, and which may have a permanent building. Large collection facilities are permitted in the zoning districts identified in Table 9.04.1, subject to approval of a site plan review and conditional use permit, and the facility shall meet the following standards: 
a.  The facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use; 
b.  The facility will be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or; 
1.  Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence or wall at least six feet in height with landscaping; 
2.  At least 150 feet from property zoned or planned for residential use; 
c.  The facility shall meet all development standards as required in this Title; and 
d.  The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.100. - Gas and fuel dispensing stations. 
(a)  Purpose. The provisions of this Section are established to provide for the needs of motorists with appropriately designed and located gas and fuel dispensing stations. 
(b)  Discretionary permits required. All gas and fuel dispensing stations require a site development permit and conditional use permit as described in Sections 9.08.170 and 9.08.110. 
(c)  Use regulations. 
(1)  The following activities are permitted as primary uses in gas and fuel dispensing stations: 
a.  Sale and dispensing of engine fuels and lubricants; 
b.  Sale and service of tires, batteries, automotive accessories, and replacement items; 
c.  Minor automotive repair, including all government mandated automobile diagnostic evaluations; and 
d.  Other incidental customer services and products. 
(2)  The following activities may be permitted as accessory uses subject to a site development permit and conditional use permit as described in Sections 9.08.170 and 9.08.110. 
a.  Sale of groceries and sundries; 
b.  Automatic or manual automobile washing, waxing, interior cleaning, and detailing services; 
c.  Sale of liquefied or pressurized butane, propane, or natural gas; 
d.  Fast-food restaurants with or without drive-through facilities. These uses are subject to all County, State and Federal health regulations. 
(3)  The outdoor storage of motor vehicles other than the temporary parking of an automobile being serviced or for the temporary use of employees during work hours shall be prohibited. 
Table 9.04.1 
Allowed Recycling Facilities 
Base 
District 	Reverse 
Vending 
Machine 	Recycling 
Area 	Collection 
Facility, 
Small 	Collection 
Facility, 
Large 
RL-6,000 	— 	— 	— 	— 
RL-5,000 	— 	— 	— 	— 
RLM-4,000-D 	— 	— 	— 	— 
RLM-4,000-A 	— 	A 	— 	— 
RM-3,000-D 	— 	— 	— 	— 
RM-2,000-A 	— 	A 	— 	— 
RH 	— 	A 	— 	— 
CG 	P 	A 	C 	C 
CN 	P 	A 	C 	C 
BP 	P 	A 	P 	C 
PQ 	P 	A 	P 	C 
P 	P 	A 	C 	— 
OS 	— 	— 	— 	— 
OSG 	— 	— 	— 	— 
FPC 	— 	A 	C 	C 
 
— = Not permitted 
P = Permitted 
C = Conditional Use Permit 
A = Permitted as an accessory use or structure 
(d)  Site development standards. 
(1)  Building site area. No minimum. 
(2)  Minimum street frontage. Minimum street frontage is required as follows: 
a.  One hundred feet on one street for a station that engages only in the sale and dispensing of engine fuels and lubricants; and 
b.  One hundred fifty feet on one street for a station that engages in any two or more activities listed in Subsections (c)(1) and (2). 
(3)  Building height. Maximum of 25 feet. 
(4)  Setbacks. The minimum setback requirements are as follows: 
a.  For corner lots, the minimum front setback and the minimum street side setback shall be the minimum setback required by the zoning district of the abutting property. 
b.  For interior lots, the minimum front setback shall be the minimum front setback required by the zoning district of the abutting properties. If the required front setbacks of the abutting properties differ, the station is required to provide the greater setback. 
c.  The minimum side setback and the minimum rear setback are as required by the applicable zone, except that if the lot abuts residentially zoned property, the minimum side or rear setback along the common property line is 15 feet or as required by the zone, whichever is greater. 
(5)  Vehicular access, queuing, and driveway visibility regulations. Prior to issuance of a building permit, a plan of vehicular access and queuing for the entire street frontage of the building site containing the station shall be approved by the City Engineer. 
(6)  Lighting. All exterior and interior lighting shall be designed and located to confine direct rays to the building site. 
(7)  Signs. All project identification signs shall conform to the design regulations as set forth in the Chapter 9.07. 
(8)  Trash and storage area. All storage of cartons, containers, and trash shall be shielded from view within a building area or enclosed by a solid masonry wall not less than six feet in height. No trash or storage area shall be located within 50 feet of any adjacent residential uses. 
(9)  Enclosed uses. All activities other than the sale of motor fuel shall be contained in the primary building on-site, except that motor oil, tires, batteries and other automotive supplies may be displayed at pump islands or adjacent to a building if the display or storage racks and containers are designed to appear as an integral part of the pump island or building exterior. 
(10)  Landscaping and screening. The landscaping and screening requirements (Section 9.05.070) of the zoning district in which the station is located shall apply. 
(e)  Abandonment or discontinuation of use. When a gas and fuel dispensing station is abandoned or the use changed, the property owner shall remove the underground storage tanks in accordance with all applicable County, State, and Federal procedures and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.110. - Storage and display—Outdoor. 
(a)  Outside storage as accessory use. The outside storage of materials and equipment, where permitted in non-residential zoning districts as incidental to the use of an office, store, warehouse, or other commercial building located on the same building site, shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Any outdoor area used for storage shall be completely enclosed by a solid masonry wall, with necessary solid appearing gates, with a minimum height of six feet and a maximum height of eight feet. The substitution of a fence, decorative wall, or dense plantings which will adequately buffer the area may be approved as a part of the development review procedures. 
(2)  The storage of materials or equipment shall not be higher than the enclosure surrounding it. Exceptions may be granted by the Planning Commission in cases where the stored materials are within a container, such as bins or tanks, for finished products in transition or in other situations where the provisions of this Subsection are not appropriate. 
(3)  The required off-street parking facilities and driveways shall not be used for any storage or display purpose which would at any time preclude the use of the area for the required parking for the site unless allowed by a special event permit. 
(b)  Outside displays of merchandise and products. The outside displays of merchandise and products shall be prohibited in all zoning districts, except where specifically permitted by this Title, and in particular, Section 9.05.110. Permitted outside displays shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Every portion of a lot used for outside displays (such as garden centers and other outdoor sales displays) shall comply with all the setback requirements for the applicable zoning district, except for vehicular sales and rentals. 
(2)  Every portion of a lot used for outside displays shall be considered as a part of the gross floor area in calculating the parking requirements for the subject use, except for vehicular sales and rentals. 
(3)  Every portion of a lot used for the sale, rental, or lease of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other similar vehicles shall comply with the screening, access, circulation, paving, bumper, lighting, and other applicable provisions of this Title required for parking facilities. For inventory parking of vehicles, tandem parking is permitted, subject to maintenance of a 25-foot drive aisle. In addition to the landscape requirements required by Chapter 9.06 all sites shall provide a minimum ten-foot landscaped buffer area between the street frontage and display area; and 
(4)  All outside display areas shall be designated and approved by the Planning Commission through a site development permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.120. - Swimming pools and spas. 
The provisions of this Section apply to swimming pools, whirlpools and spas: 
(1)  Location and setback requirements. 
a.  Pools, whirlpools and spas shall be located no closer than three feet from the edge of the water to any side or rear property line. 
b.  No pool, whirlpool, or spa shall be located within the front yard setback of a lot. 
(2)  Fence required. Pools, whirlpools and spas must be enclosed by a fence as required by the adopted Uniform Building Code. 
(3)  Filter and heating equipment. Filter, heating, and other pool support equipment shall maintain the setback requirements described within the adopted Uniform Building Code. All pool equipment shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 5.04 of the Municipal Code. All pool equipment shall be completely screened from view from any public right-of-way and from any adjacent property. 
(4)  Supplemental pool structures. 
a.  Supplemental swimming pool, whirlpool and spa structures less than five feet in height shall be located no closer than three feet from the edge of the structure to any side or rear property line. 
b.  Supplemental pool structures including pool slides, waterfalls, grottos, etc., which exceed five feet in height shall be set back from the rear and side property lines at a distance equal to the maximum height of the structure. 
c.  In no instance shall a supplemental pool structure exceed a height of eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, § 4, 3-25-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections A.—D. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (1)—(4).  
Sec. 9.04.130. - Temporary uses and structures. 
(a)  Purpose. This Section allows for the establishment of certain temporary uses of limited duration, provided that such uses are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure. Some temporary uses may be considered a special event and subject to Sections 9.05.110 and 9.08.180. 
(b)  General standards for all temporary uses and structures. All temporary uses and structures shall meet the following general requirements, unless otherwise specified in this Title: 
(1)  The temporary use shall not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(2)  The temporary use shall not have substantial adverse noise impacts on nearby residential uses. 
(3)  Permanent alterations to the site are prohibited. 
(4)  If the property is developed, the site of the temporary use shall contain an area that supports the temporary use without encroaching into or creating a negative impact on existing buffers, open space, landscaping, pedestrian and vehicular traffic movements (including emergency vehicle access), and parking space availability. 
(5)  If the property is undeveloped, the site of the temporary use shall contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use to occur, as well as any parking and traffic movement that may be associated with the temporary use, without disturbing sensitive or protected resources, including required buffers. 
(6)  Temporary structures shall be located so as to not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the property. 
(7)  The temporary use shall not violate any applicable conditions of approval that apply to the principal use on the site. 
(8)  Off-street parking shall be adequate to accommodate the proposed temporary use. 
(9)  All approved temporary signs associated with the temporary use shall be removed when the activity ends. 
(10)  All inspections and permits required by applicable construction codes shall be obtained. 
(11)  Any temporary use or structure, which will be utilized for longer than 90 days, may be reviewed for aesthetic impacts by the Development Services Director. 
(12)  All temporary structures shall be approved through a site development permit as identified in Section 9.08.170, unless otherwise approved through a special event permit identified in Sections 9.05.110 and 9.08.180. 
(c)  Specific standards for certain temporary uses and structures. 
Construction-related activities. Temporary construction-related activities, including construction offices and storage buildings, outdoor storage, restroom facilities, employee parking areas and any other temporary construction-related use or activity, may occur on the same site or on a site that is adjacent to or nearby the construction site. On-site and off-site uses shall be removed within 30 days after issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. If the use was off-site, the off-site property shall be restored to its previous condition. 
Temporary office facilities and temporary classroom facilities. Temporary facilities used as sales/leasing offices or temporary classrooms, including those located in a model unit of a residential project, or used during construction to expand or replace a permanent building, or used as temporary classrooms for private schools, may be permitted on the same site as the permanent use. Sales offices may be established for pre-sales or leasing prior to construction of the project. 
(1)  Such temporary facilities may remain on the site for up to 12 months. This period may be renewed for two six-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request, submitted to the Development Services Director thirty days prior to the expiration of the permit. In no event, however, shall such extensions allow the temporary use to remain on the site for more than two years, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission through a site development permit as described in Section 9.08.170. 
a.  Temporary classrooms approved by the Planning Commission through a site development permit shall apply for a renewal of the temporary facilities at least three months prior to the expiration of the temporary use established within the site development permit. 
If the approval for a temporary classroom expires, a new site development permit must be approved by the Planning Commission as described in Section 9.08.170. 
(2)  In addition to meeting the general standards of Subsection 9.04.130(b), all temporary structures approved pursuant to this Section shall meet the following standards and requirements: 
a.  Location. Such structures may be located anywhere on site, except within the established setbacks for the zoning district, existing vegetated buffers, or other areas designated on the site plan to remain free from land disturbance. 
b.  Other requirements. 
1.  The temporary structure shall be factory-fabricated and transportable. 
2.  Underskirting shall be installed around all temporary structures requiring site plan approval. 
3.  All permits required by applicable building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes shall be obtained from the Building Official prior to installation of the temporary structure. 
4.  For those temporary structures requiring site plan approval by the Planning Commission, the temporary structure shall be compatible with the existing buildings on the site in terms of exterior color. 
5.  A sketch plan containing sufficient information to show compliance with the above standards shall be submitted to and approved by the Development Services Department prior to installation of the temporary structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.140. - Water features. 
The following regulations apply to water features: 
(1)  Location and setback requirements. 
a.  Water features less than five feet in height shall be located no closer than three feet from the edge of the water feature to the property line. Structures shall maintain the setbacks required by the adopted Uniform Building Code. 
b.  Water features in excess of five feet in height shall be set back from all property lines at a distance equal to the maximum height of the feature. 
c.  In no instance shall a water feature exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  Filter, aeration, and heating equipment. Filter, heating, and other support equipment shall maintain the setback requirements described within the Uniform Building Code. All equipment shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 5.04 of the Municipal Code. All equipment shall be completely screened from view from any public right-of-way and from any adjacent property. 
(3)  Runoff. The water feature shall generate no detectable runoff from the property. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, § 4, 3-25-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections A.—C. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (1)—(3).  
Sec. 9.04.150. - Cybercafes. 
All regulations for cybercafes are contained within Chapter 6.11. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.160. - Massage establishments. 
All regulations for massage establishments are contained within Chapter 4.02. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.04.170. - Emergency shelters. 
(a)  Development and management standards. An emergency shelter must meet the following development and management standards: 
(1)  The shelter may serve no more than ten persons per night unless State law requires a different limitation greater than ten, in which case the shelter may serve no more than the number of persons required by State law. 
(2)  The shelter shall provide sufficient parking as required in Table 9.06.3 Non-Residential Parking Requirements. 
(3)  The waiting and client intake areas shall be at least 250 square feet in total gross floor area. 
(4)  The shelter shall prepare and file a management plan with the City that includes clear operational rules and standards, including, but not limited to, standards governing expulsions and lights-out. As part of the management plan, each shelter must provide 24-hour on-site supervision when the shelter is operating. An "on-site 24-hour manager" shall mean one or more identified individuals, at least one of whom shall be present at the emergency shelter at all times, and who shall have authority to enforce the management plan and all rules set forth therein, and to ensure compliance with all development and management standards. 
(5)  No person may stay at a shelter for longer than six months within a one-year period. 
(6)  All lighting shall be subject to Section 9.5.080 Lighting Standards. 
(7)  Security shall be provided during the hours the shelter is in operation. 
(b)  Findings required for disapproval of an emergency shelter. The City may not disapprove an emergency shelter from any zoning district where it is considered a permitted use unless it makes written findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record as to one of the following: 
(1)  The City has met or exceeded the need for emergency shelters as identified in the Housing Element, and that the disapproval is not based on any of the reasons prohibited by California Government Code Section 65008. 
(2)  The emergency shelter would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development of the emergency shelter financially infeasible. As used in this paragraph, a "specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Inconsistency with this Title or the General Plan land use designation shall not constitute a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety. 
(3)  The denial of the project or imposition of conditions is required in order to comply with specific State or Federal law, and there is no feasible method to comply without rendering the development of the emergency shelter financially infeasible. 
(4)  The emergency shelter is proposed on land zoned for agriculture or resource preservation that is surrounded on at least two sides by land being used for agricultural or resource preservation purposes, or which does not have adequate water or wastewater facilities to serve the project. 
(5)  The emergency shelter is inconsistent with both this Title and the General Plan land use designation as specified in any element of the General Plan as it existed on the date the application was deemed complete, and the City has adopted a revised Housing Element that is in substantial compliance with State law. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 9, 4-27-2011)  
Sec. 9.04.180. - Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities. 
SRO facilities must meet the following development and management standards: 
(1)  SRO facilities shall contain a cluster of at least five rental units which each provide sleeping and living facilities for one or two persons. 
(2)  SRO parking standards shall be subject to the requirements in Table 9.06.3 Non-Residential Parking Requirements. 
(3)  SRO units shall have a minimum of 100 net square feet of space for a single occupancy and 120 net square feet for a two-person occupancy. The calculation for net floor space in the sleeping area includes built-in cabinets, sinks and closets, but excludes toilet compartments. A unit larger than 225 square feet shall not be considered an SRO. 
(4)  A management plan shall be submitted as part of the permit application for review and approval by the City. The management plan shall contain management policies, operations, emergency procedures, security program, rental procedures, maintenance plans, and staffing needs. 
(5)  An on-site, 24-hour manager is required in every SRO project. An "on-site 24-hour manager" shall mean one or more identified individuals, at least one of whom shall be present at the SRO project at all times, and who shall have authority to enforce the management plan and all rules set forth therein, and to ensure compliance with all development and management standards. In addition, a single manager's unit shall be provided which shall be designed as a complete residential unit, and be a minimum of 225 square feet in size. 
(6)  SRO facilities shall be treated as non-residential uses. As such, Section 9.5.040 Density Bonus does not apply and residential dwelling unit limitations (e.g., statistical summary) are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 10, 4-27-2011)  
Sec. 9.04.190. - Accessory dwelling units. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Section is to provide reasonable regulations for the development of accessory dwelling units (ADUs) within the City. It is the intent of this Section to permit ADUs subject to standards that will ensure that the ADUs contribute to a suitable living environment, while preserving the integrity and character of single-family residential neighborhoods. The regulations in this Section are intended to promote the goals and policies of the City's General Plan and comply with the requirements codified in State Planning and Zoning Law related to ADUs in residential areas, including California Government Code § 65852.2. It is not the intent of this Section to override lawful use restrictions as may be set forth in any applicable deed restriction or covenant affecting real property. 
(b)  Conforming ADUs. An ADU that conforms to this Section and all applicable provisions of Section 9.04.020 (accessory structures) shall: 
(1)  Be deemed an accessory use or an accessory building and not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located; 
(2)  Be deemed a residential use that is consistent with the General Plan and the zoning designation for the lot upon which it is located; 
(3)  Not be considered in the application of any ordinance, policy, or program to limit residential growth; and 
(4)  Not be considered a new residential use for the purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. 
(c)  Locations permitted. 
(1)  A maximum of one ADU may be permitted on a lot in any single-family residential zoning district that includes one proposed or existing legally established single-family detached dwelling unit. 
(2)  The City shall ministerially approve an application for a building permit to create within a single-family residential zoning district one ADU per single-family lot if the ADU is contained within the building envelope of an existing legally established single-family residence or accessory structure, including, but not limited to, a studio, pool house, or other similar structure, has independent exterior access from the existing residence, and the Development Services Director determines that the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety. 
(d)  Permit procedures. Prior to issuance of a building permit for an ADU, the applicant shall obtain approval from the Development Services Director. ADUs are subject to the following processing procedures. 
(1)  An application must be submitted on a form approved by the Development Services Director. The application must demonstrate compliance with the requirements of paragraphs (c), locations permitted, and (e), standards, of this Section and shall be submitted with the appropriate fee as may be approved by resolution of the City Council. 
(2)  The Development Services Director will review and approve complete ADU applications that comply with the requirements of paragraphs (c), locations permitted, and (e), standards, of this Section. The application shall be considered ministerially with no discretionary review or public hearing. 
(3)  The Development Services Director shall approve or deny an ADU application within 120 days of receiving the complete application. 
(4)  Construction of an ADU is subject to any applicable fee adopted under the California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5 (commencing with § 66000) and Chapter 7 (commencing with § 66012). 
(e)  Standards. An ADU must meet all of the following standards. 
(1)  An ADU shall be either: 
a.  Detached from the primary residence, but located on the same lot; 
b.  Attached to the primary residence; 
c.  Located within the living area of the primary residence (living area is defined as the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including basements and attics, but not including the garage); or 
d.  Located within an existing accessory structure, such as a converted garage, carport, or other covered parking space, which conforms with all applicable building and safety standards for habitability. 
(2)  ADUs shall conform to the development standards for the zoning district in which they are located, including, but not limited to, setbacks, lot coverage, and height. 
a.  No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an ADU. 
b.  A setback of five feet from the side and rear property lines shall be required for an ADU constructed above an existing garage. 
(3)  ADUs located within the living area of the existing dwelling must have exterior access independent from the primary residence. 
(4)  ADUs must conform to the most recent building, engineering, and fire codes, including but not limited to the Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, and Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(5)  The increased floor area of an attached ADU shall not exceed 50 percent of the proposed or existing primary residence living area, with a maximum increase in floor area of 1,200 square feet, and the cumulative building square footage for the property shall not exceed the maximum site coverage for the applicable zoning district. 
(6)  The total floor area for a detached ADU shall not exceed 1,200 square feet. 
(7)  ADUs shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence. 
(8)  One off-street parking space shall be provided for an attached or detached ADU. The required parking space may be permitted in setback areas, or through tandem parking on an existing driveway, unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based on specific site conditions, based on fire and life safety issues, or that it is not permitted anywhere else in the jurisdiction. "Tandem parking" means that two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another. 
a.  Off-street parking spaces shall be replaced when a garage, carport or other covered parking is demolished or converted to a non-parking use in conjunction with the construction of an ADU. Replacement spaces may be located in any permissible configuration on the same lot as the ADU, or by use of mechanical automobile parking lifts. 
b.  Additional parking for the ADU is not required in any of the following circumstances. It is the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate the applicable circumstance(s). 
1.  The ADU is located within one-half mile of public transit; 
2.  The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district; 
3.  The ADU is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure, as set forth in Subparagraph (c)(2) of this Section; 
4.  When on-street parking permits are required but are not offered to the occupant of the ADU; and 
5.  When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the ADU. 
(9)  The design, materials, and overall appearance of the ADU shall be generally consistent with the primary residence and shall comply with Subsection 9.04.020(c). 
(10)  Occupancy and ownership. 
a.  An ADU shall remain under the same ownership as that of the primary residence and shall not be sold or owned separately from the primary residence. 
b.  The property owner must occupy either the primary residence or the ADU as his or her domicile. 
c.  If rented, ADUs or the related primary residence shall not be rented for a term shorter than 30 days. 
d.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for the ADU, a deed restriction shall be recorded against the title of the property in the County Recorder's office and a copy filed with the Director of Development Services. Said deed restriction shall run with the land and shall bind all future owners, heirs, successors, or assigns. The form of the deed restriction shall be provided by the City and shall provide that: 
1.  The property shall include no more than one ADU. 
2.  The ADU may not be sold, mortgaged, or transferred separately from the primary residence. 
3.  The owner of the property shall occupy either the primary residence or ADU as his or her domicile. 
4.  The ADU may be rented, but may not be rented on a short-term basis of less than 30 days. 
5.  The ADU is restricted to the approved size and other attributes as allowed by this Section. 
6.  The deed restriction runs with the land and may be enforced against future property owners. 
7.  The deed restriction may not be modified or terminated without the prior written consent of the City's Development Services Director. 
(11)  Utility connections. An ADU shall have utility connections that conform to the City's building and plumbing requirements. 
a.  For an ADU described in Subparagraph (c)(2) of this Section, an applicant shall not be required to install a new or separate utility connection directly between the ADU and the utility. 
b.  For an ADU that is not described in Subparagraph (c)(2) of this Section, the City may require a new or separate utility connection directly between the ADU and the utility. 
(12)  Passageway. No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an ADU. "Passageway" means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from the street to one entrance of the ADU. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 3, 2-14-2018)  
Chapter 9.05 - Special Regulations[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— The regulations contained in this Chapter apply to all zoning districts. 
 
Sec. 9.05.010. - Air contaminants and other nuisance emissions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to protect people and property from hazards and nuisances associated with airborne contaminants. 
(b)  General. Except as otherwise established by an approved site development permit, any permitted business operation shall be performed or carried out entirely within a building that is designed and constructed so that the enclosed operations and uses do not cause or produce a nuisance to adjacent sites, such as but not limited to the following: radio frequency interference, sound, vibration, electromechanical disturbance, electromagnetic disturbance, radiation, air pollution, dust, emission of toxic or nontoxic odors, or toxic or nontoxic matter. 
Any land use within the BP zoning district that causes significant emissions of vapor, odors, or other airborne particulates as a result of manufacturing processes shall be deemed to be heavy industrial, which is prohibited in the City and subject to code enforcement and/or abatement activities. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.020. - Residential condominium conversions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to: 
(1)  Provide standards and criteria for regulating the conversion of duplex or multi-family dwelling units to residential condominium, stock cooperative and community apartment types of ownership; 
(2)  Determine when such conversions are appropriate; 
(3)  Provide for public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(4)  Provide adequate off-street parking; and 
(5)  Mitigate any hardship caused by the displacement of tenants. 
(b)  General. The provisions and procedures of this Section shall apply to all conversions of existing multi-family dwelling rental units to residential condominiums, stock cooperatives, and community apartments notwithstanding any other provision of this Title. 
(c)  Standards. Conversion projects shall conform to the standards and requirements applicable to the zoning district in which the proposed project is located. 
(d)  Application requirements. 
(1)  A "site development permit application" must be submitted to the Development Services Director for any proposed residential to residential condominium conversion project. 
(2)  A "conditional use permit application" must be submitted to the Development Services Director for any proposed non-residential to residential condominium conversion project. 
(3)  Each application for a residential condominium conversion project shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  An engineering report on the general condition of all structural, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical elements of the existing development including noise insulation, and the estimated cost of repair or improvements, if any are needed. Said report shall be reviewed, dated and signed by the Building Official and be made available to prospective buyers. 
b.  A complete mailing list of all tenants occupying the subject property and two corresponding sets of stamped addressed envelopes. Within 15 days after the acceptance of the complete application and engineering report, the Development Services Director shall notify each tenant of the application, forward a copy of the above required engineering report, and informing them of the process. The Development Services Director shall mail a notice of public hearing to each tenant on the mailing list. 
c.  A housing program, including, but not limited to the following, shall be provided by the applicant: 
1.  The means by which the provision of housing affordable to lower and moderate income households will be achieved; 
2.  A housing report addressing the balance of housing in the community, including vacancy rates and other available housing of similar type and rent, the current rents and estimated monthly payments and fees of the units to be converted, and all improvements and/or renovations contemplated. 
3.  A survey of existing tenants as to their length of occupancy, and the number of those projected to purchase one of the units; and 
4.  A relocation plan that identifies the steps that will be taken to ensure the successful relocation of each tenant in the event that the conversion takes place. The relocation plan shall also state what specific relocation assistance existing tenants will be given, including the cost of physical moving, first and last months rent, security and cleaning deposits, phone connection, and utility deposits. Particular consideration shall be given to the elderly, handicapped, families with children, and other tenants with special needs who may encounter difficulty in finding a new residence. 
(e)  Tenant provisions. The property owner shall provide tenants 90 days preemptive right to purchase a unit or right of exclusive occupancy upon more favorable terms and conditions than those on which the unit will be initially offered to the public. Such right shall be irrevocable for a period of 90 days after the commencement of sales and notification of tenant of such right. Documentation of such notice shall be filed with the City. 
The property owner shall also provide all tenants, who choose not to exercise their right to purchase, a termination of tenancy notice 60 to 90 days following the 90-day preemptive right to purchase. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.030. - Non-residential condominiums. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to: 
(1)  Provide standards and criteria for regulating non-residential condominium projects; 
(2)  Determine when such conversions are appropriate; 
(3)  Provide for public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(4)  Provide adequate off-street parking; 
(5)  Properly regulate signage; and 
(6)  Protect the property rights of the owners of non-residential condominium units from uses that may be permitted within the same zoning district, but may be incompatible within the same structure. 
(b)  General. The provisions and procedures of this Section shall apply to all new construction of and conversions of existing non-residential tenant-occupied or owner-occupied units to non-residential condominiums. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Non-residential condominium projects shall conform to the standards and requirements applicable to the zoning district in which the proposed project is located. 
(2)  Non-residential condominium projects shall also adhere to the following regulations: 
a.  Notice of restriction. Prior to the recordation of the final map, the applicant shall submit to the satisfaction of the Development Services Director, a "declaration of use restriction." This declaration shall ensure that only uses that are deemed compatible within the same building will be allowed and that there is adequate parking for all the allowed uses on the development site. This declaration shall be recorded against the subject property to provide notice of the use restrictions to all future owners of condominium units. This declaration may not be modified without the approval of the Planning Commission. 
b.  Review of covenants, conditions and restrictions. Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be submitted to the Development Services Director and City Attorney for review and approval prior to the recordation of the final map. The CC&Rs shall include provisions for the creation of a maintenance association for all commonly-owned elements created as a result of the condominium project, a definition of what is to be included in the new common elements, provisions for adequate property maintenance of the common areas, and responsibility for the maintenance of all walls and fences within the project. The applicant shall provide the Development Services Department with a copy of the recorded CC&Rs within 30 days of recordation. The provisions of the CC&Rs, including, but not limited to, those concerning the creation of a maintenance association, a definition of what is to be included in the common elements, provisions for adequate property maintenance of the common areas, and responsibility for the maintenance of all walls and fences within the project may not be modified without the written approval of the City. Said maintenance association may not be dissolved without prior approval of the City, in which case a new maintenance association should be established to replace the dissolved maintenance association. 
c.  Prior to the purchase of a non-residential condominium unit, the purchaser shall submit to the City, written acknowledgment of the zoning restrictions and limitations on use. 
(d)  Application requirements. 
(1)  For conversions, a complete mailing list of all tenants occupying the subject property and two corresponding sets of stamped addressed envelopes. Within 15 days after the acceptance of the complete application, the Development Services Director shall notify each tenant of the application. The Development Services Director shall mail a notice of public hearing to each tenant on the mailing list. 
(2)  A floor plan that demonstrates how the individual units are planned to be configured and sold. 
(3)  A sign program as deemed necessary by the Development Services Director. Said sign program shall address permanent and temporary signage. 
(4)  Proposed use restrictions. 
(e)  Required findings. 
(1)  The project and uses proposed are consistent with the General Plan. 
(2)  The project and uses proposed are consistent with the provisions of this Title, including, but not limited to, parking requirements and use standards. 
(3)  Approval of the project is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(4)  The location, size, design and operating characteristics of the project will not create conditions or situations that may be incompatible with other permitted uses in the vicinity. 
(5)  Approval of the project will not result in conditions or circumstances contrary to the public health and safety and the general welfare. 
(6)  Approval of the project shall comply with the regulations and development standards defined in Section 9.08.170 and the State of California Map Act as set forth in Government Code §§ 66410 et. seq. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.040. - Density bonus. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to set forth the procedures for complying with Government Code §§ 65915 et seq. Government Code § 65915 requires that each city adopt an ordinance that specifies the method by which the City will provide concessions and/or incentives to a developer that proposes to construct affordable housing units as specified in this Section. This Section identifies the procedures and requirements by which such a housing development proposal shall be submitted to and evaluated by the City, and provides the means by which a density bonus and/or other concessions may be granted to a developer that agrees to provide targeted dwelling units as specified in Government Code § 65915. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This Section applies only to a housing development containing five or more dwelling units, excluding density bonus units. 
(2)  The maximum density bonus allowed (unless otherwise granted as a concession/incentive) is 25 percent for non-condominium housing developments and ten percent for condominium developments. 
(3)  Density bonus calculations resulting in a fractional unit are rounded up to the next whole number. 
(4)  Density bonus units are permitted in locations in the City other than the area or property where the lower income units are located. 
(5)  The granting of the density bonus shall not be interpreted to require a General Plan amendment, zone change, or other discretionary approval. 
(c)  Summary tables. Tables 9.05.1 and 9.05.2 summarize the available density bonuses, incentives, and concessions pursuant to State and City Density Bonus Law. 
(d)  State density bonuses, incentives, and concessions for construction of affordable and senior housing. 
(1)  Basic density bonus (very-low and lower-income units). A residential development is eligible for a 20 percent density bonus if it includes at least five dwelling units, and the applicant seeks a density bonus and agrees to construct at least one of the following: 
a.  Ten percent of the total units of the residential development as units affordable to lower-income households; or 
b.  Five percent of the total units of the residential development as units affordable to very-low income households. 
(2)  Basic density bonus (senior housing). A senior housing development is eligible for a 20 percent density bonus if it includes at least 35 dwelling units, and the applicant seeks a density bonus. Senior housing developments are not required under State law to be affordable to very-low, lower or moderate-income households. 
(3)  Basic density bonus (moderate-income ownership units). A residential development is eligible for a five percent density bonus if it includes at least five dwelling units, and the applicant seeks a density bonus and agrees to construct ten percent of the total units as ownership units affordable to moderate-income households. 
a.  Very-low income units. For each one percent increase above five percent in the percentage of units affordable to very-low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
b.  Lower-income units. For each one percent increase above ten percent in the percentage of units affordable to lower-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
c.  Moderate-income ownership units. For each one percent increase above ten percent of the percentage of ownership units affordable to moderate-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
_____ 
Table 9.05.1 
Density Bonus Summary 
Pursuant to State Density Bonus Law: A State density bonus may be selected from only one category, except that bonuses for land donation may be combined with others, up to a maximum of 35 percent, and an additional sq. ft. bonus may be granted for a day care center. 
Target Units or Category 	Minimum % Target Units 	Bonus Granted 	Additional Bonus for Each 1% Increase in Target Units 	% of Target Units Required for Maximum Bonus 
Very-low income 	5% 	20% 	2.5% 	11% 
Lower-income 	10% 	20% 	1.5% 	20% 
Moderate-income (ownership units only) 	10% 	5% 	1% 	40% 
Senior housing type 1 (35 units or more; no affordable units required) 	100% senior 	20% 	— 	— 
Land donation for very-low income housing 	10% of market-rate units 	15% 	1% 	30% 
Condominium conversion—Moderate-income 	33% 	25% (A) 	— 	— 
Condominium conversion—Lower-income 	15% 	25% (A) 	— 	— 
Day care center 	— 	Sq. ft. in day care center (A) 	— 	— 
Pursuant to City Density Bonus 
Senior housing type 2 	100% senior; 50% affordable 	50% (B) 	1% 	100% (for maximum 100% bonus) (B) 
 
Notes: 
(A) Or an incentive of equal value, at the City's option. 
(B) A density bonus may be granted equal to the percentage of affordable senior units (at least 50 percent and up to a maximum of 100 percent) subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
Table 9.05.2 
State Density Bonus Incentives and Concessions Summary 
Target Units or Category 	% of Target Units 
Pursuant to State Density Bonus 
Very-low income 	5% 	10% 	15% 
Lower-income 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Moderate-income (ownership units only) 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Condominium conversion—33% moderate-income 	(D) 		
Condominium conversion—25% lower-income 	(D) 		
Day care center 	(D) 		
Maximum incentive(s)/Concession(s) (A)(B)(C) 	1 	2 	3 
 
Notes: 
(A) A concession or incentive may be requested only if an application is also made for a density bonus. 
(B) Concessions or incentives may be selected from only one category (very-low, lower, or moderate). 
(C) No concessions or incentives are available for land donation. 
(D) Condominium conversions and day care centers may have one concession or a density bonus at the City's option, but not both. 
d.  Senior housing. No additional density bonus is provided for senior-only units. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Calculation of density bonus. 
a.  When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded to the next larger whole number. 
b.  The density bonus units shall not be included when determining the number of target units required to qualify for a density bonus. When calculating the required number of target units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded to the next larger whole number. 
c.  The developer may request a lesser density bonus than the project is entitled to, but no reduction will be permitted in the number of required target units pursuant to Subsections (d)(1), (2), and (3). Regardless of the number of target units, no residential development may be entitled to a total density bonus of more than 35 percent. 
d.  Each residential development is entitled to only one density bonus, which may be selected by the applicant based on the percentage of either very-low income target units, lower-income target units, or moderate-income ownership target units, or the project's status as a senior housing type. Density bonuses from more than one category may not be combined, except that bonuses for land dedication pursuant to Subsection (e). may be combined with bonuses granted pursuant to this Subsection, up to a maximum of 35 percent, and an additional square footage bonus for day care centers may be granted as described in Subsection 9.05.040(e). 
(6)  Incentives and concessions. A residential development is eligible for incentives and concessions if it includes at least five dwelling units, and the applicant seeks a density bonus and agrees to construct affordable units as follows: 
a.  Very-low income units. A residential development is entitled to one incentive or concessions for a project that includes at least five percent of the units for very-low income households; two incentives or concessions for a project that includes at least ten percent of the units for very-low income households; and three incentives or concessions for a project that includes at least 15 percent of the units for very-low income households. 
b.  Lower-income units. A residential development is entitled to one incentive or concession if it includes at least ten percent of the units for lower-income households; two incentives or concessions if it includes at least 20 percent of the units for lower-income households; and three incentives or concessions if it includes at least 30 percent of the units for lower-income households. 
c.  Moderate-income ownership units. A residential development with ownership units affordable to moderate-income households is entitled to one incentive or concession for a project that includes at least ten percent of the ownership units for moderate-income households; two incentives or concessions for a project that includes at least 20 percent of the ownership units for moderate-income households; and three incentives or concessions for a project that includes at least 30 percent of the ownership units for moderate-income households. 
(7)  The requirements of this Section are minimum requirements and shall not preclude a residential development from providing additional affordable units or affordable units with lower rents or sales prices than required by this Section. 
(8)  In accordance with State law, neither the granting of an incentive or concession nor the granting of a density bonus shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan amendment, zoning code amendment or rezone, or other discretionary review application approval. 
(e)  State density bonus for land donation. 
(1)  When an applicant for a residential development seeks a density bonus for the donation and transfer of land for the development of units affordable to very-low income households, as provided for in this Section, the residential development shall be eligible for a 15 percent density bonus above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density in accordance with State law. For each one percent increase above the minimum ten percent land donation described in Subsection (e)(2), the maximum density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent. This increase shall be in addition to any increase in density allowed by Subsection (d), up to a maximum combined density bonus of 35 percent if an applicant seeks both the density bonus authorized by this Section and the density bonus authorized by Subsection (d). When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded to the next larger whole number. This density bonus applies only when land is donated for the construction of very-low income housing. 
(2)  The City may approve the density bonus described in this Section if it makes all of the following findings when approving the residential development: 
a.  The applicant will donate and transfer the land no later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or applicable development review application for the residential development. 
b.  The developable acreage and zoning regulations of the applicable zoning district of the land to be transferred will permit construction of units affordable to very-low income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the total number of residential units in the proposed development, or will permit construction of a greater percentage of units if proposed by the developer to qualify for a density bonus of more than 15 percent. 
c.  The transferred land is at least one acre in size or is large enough to permit development of at least 40 units, has the appropriate General Plan land use designation, has the appropriate zoning and development standards to make feasible the development of very-low income housing, and at the time of project approval is, or at the time of construction will be, served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. 
d.  No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other applicable development review application for the residential development, the transferred land will have all of the applicable development permits and approvals, other than any required building permit approval, necessary for the development of the very-low incomes housing units on the transferred land unless the City Council finds that the applicant has provided specific assurances guaranteeing the timely completion of the very-low income units, including satisfactory assurances that construction and permanent financing will be secured for the construction of the units within a reasonable time. 
e.  The transferred land and the very low income units constructed on the land will be subject to a recorded density bonus housing agreement ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with the density bonus housing agreement, which restriction shall be filed for recordation by the Development Services Director with the Orange County Recorder's Office on the property at the time of dedication. 
f.  The land will be transferred to the City or to a housing developer approved by the City. The City reserves the right to require the applicant to identify a developer for the very-low income units and to require that the land be transferred to that developer. 
g.  The transferred land is within the site boundaries of the proposed residential development. The transferred land may be located within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed residential development provided that the City Council finds, based on substantial evidence, that off-site donation will provide as much or more affordable housing at the same or even lower income levels, and of the same or superior quality of design and construction, and will otherwise provide greater public benefit, than donating land on site. 
(f)  State density bonus or incentive or concession for day care centers. 
(1)  A residential development that includes at least five dwelling units; includes affordable target units and includes a day care center that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the residential development, is eligible for either of the following, at the option of the City, and if requested by the applicant in accordance with State law: 
a.  A density bonus in addition to those permitted by Subsections (d) and (e) that is equal to the square footage of the gross floor area of the day care center; or 
b.  An additional incentive or concession that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the day care center. 
(2)  The City may approve the density bonus or incentive or concession described in this Section if it makes all of the following findings and requires as a condition of approval that: 
a.  The day care center will remain in operation for a period of time equal to or longer than the period of time during which the target units are required to remain affordable pursuant to the density bonus housing agreement. 
b.  Of all children who attend the day care center, the percentage of children of very-low income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are proposed to be affordable to very low income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households in the residential development. 
c.  The applicant shall be responsible for all costs of monitoring compliance with these provisions. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other requirement of this Section, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive or concession for a day care center if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate day care center facilities. 
(g)  State density bonus for condominium conversions. 
(1)  An applicant shall be eligible for either a density bonus or other incentives or concessions of equivalent financial value in accordance with State law if the applicant for a conversion of existing rental apartments to condominiums agrees to provide 33 percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project as target units affordable to households with moderate incomes or less, or to provide 15 percent of the total units in the condominium conversion project as target units affordable to lower-income households. All such target units shall remain affordable for the period specified in the density bonus housing agreement. 
(2)  For purposes of this Subsection, a density bonus means an increase in units of 25 percent over the number of units to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion. 
(3)  No condominium conversion shall be eligible for a density bonus if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives or concessions were previously provided pursuant to this Chapter or Government Code § 65915. 
(h)  Definition of "concession" or "incentive." 
(1)  Incentives or concessions that may be requested pursuant to this Section may include the following: 
a.  A reduction of development standards or a modification of Zoning Code requirements which exceed the minimum building standards provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with § 18901) of Division 13 of the State Health and Safety Code and which result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Reduced minimum lot sizes. 
2.  Reduced lot dimensions 
3.  Reduced minimum yards. 
4.  Increased maximum lot coverage or reduced usable open space. 
5.  Increased maximum building height. 
6.  Reduced minimum distance between buildings. 
b.  Approval of mixed use buildings or developments in conjunction with the residential development, if non-residential land uses will reduce the cost of the residential development, and if the City finds that the proposed non-residential uses are compatible with the residential development and with existing or planned development in the area where the proposed residential development will be located. 
c.  Density bonus for senior housing type 2 pursuant to Subsection 9.05.040(d). that is in excess of the density bonus that the project is entitled to under this Section. 
d.  Deferral until occupancy of development impact fees (e.g., park fees, fire fees, sanitary sewer trunk line fees, storm drain trunk line fees, fire fees, street tree fees, library fees or traffic impact fees). 
e.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
(2)  Applicants may seek a waiver or modification of development standards that will have the effect of precluding the construction of a residential development meeting the criteria of Subsections (d)(1), (2), or (3) at the densities or with the incentives or concessions permitted by this Section. The applicant shall show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible based upon appropriate financial analysis and documentation. 
(i)  Density bonus application requirements and process. Density bonus projects shall follow the application and processing requirements of Section 9.08.120. 
(j)  Requirements for targeted affordable dwelling units. 
(1)  Each targeted affordable unit shall be constructed per the requirements of this Title, unless otherwise waived as a concession/incentive. 
(2)  Each targeted affordable unit shall be available for occupancy at the same time as the first non-targeted unit. 
(3)  On-site targeted affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the site when combined with market rate units. 
(4)  Off-site targeted units affordable located in an area that is geographically different from the area where the market rate units are located shall not create an over-concentration of targeted units. 
(5)  The exterior of targeted affordable units shall be substantially similar to the market rate units. 
(6)  Targeted affordable units shall remain as such throughout the term of the density bonus housing agreement. 
(k)  Granting a concession or incentive. When the requirements of this Section are satisfied, the requested concession/incentive shall be granted unless the following finding is made: The requested concession is not required to make the units affordable. 
(l)  Agreement. Before the City Council may grant a density bonus, the developer must execute a density bonus housing agreement with the City. The density bonus housing agreement must include and identify the following: 
(1)  Type, size, and location of each targeted unit; 
(2)  The term of the agreement; 
(3)  The terms of the construction of the targeted unit; and 
(4)  Means of availability. 
The agreement must be reviewed and approved by the Development Services Director prior to City Council approval. The City Council shall direct execution and recordation of the agreement. 
(m)  Terms of the agreement. The terms of the agreement as specified may be lengthened as required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. However, lower income and qualifying residential units shall be maintained as affordable for a minimum of 30 years, and moderate income units shall be maintained as affordable for ten years. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.050. - Fuel modification standards. 
(a)  Purpose. Special regulations are necessary to ensure public safety and reduce fire damage to structures located in areas subject to risk from wildland fires. The primary purpose of the fuel modification standards is to reduce the level of risk from wildland fires by removal of native flammable vegetation and replacement with drought-tolerant, fire-resistant plants that reduce radiant and convective heat. This planting program will provide fire-suppression forces and a safe area in which to take an action to protect life and property. 
(b)  Applicability. Any development application that will require the issuance of a building permit for a primary structure(s) where property is immediately adjacent to mature flammable vegetation, shall require that a fuel modification program be approved by the Orange County Fire Authority prior to building permit issuance in conformance with Title 10. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.060. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. These regulations are provided so that certain incidental and accessory uses may be established in residential neighborhoods under conditions that will ensure their compatibility with the neighborhood. They are intended to protect the rights of the residents to engage in certain home occupations that are harmonious with a residential environment. 
(b)  Home occupations permitted. Home occupations are permitted when conducted as an accessory use to a residential use in any residential zoning district. 
(c)  General requirements. The establishment and conduct of home occupations shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All home occupations generally shall be conducted only within the enclosed area of the dwelling and shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the structure. The business may be located in a garage, provided all off-street parking requirements for the applicable zoning district are met. 
(2)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation. 
(3)  The principal character or use of the dwelling within which the home occupation is conducted shall in no way be altered (by the use of color, materials, construction, lighting, signs, sounds noises, vibrations, display of equipment, etc.) so that it may be reasonably recognized as serving a non-residential use. 
(4)  No motor or mechanical equipment shall be permitted other than that normally incidental to the residential use of the structure. 
(5)  Home occupations may not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that considered normal within the surrounding neighborhood. 
(6)  No storage of materials and/or supplies, indoors or outdoors, shall be permitted that will be hazardous to surrounding neighbors or detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(7)  Wholesale and retail sales of automobiles is not permitted. 
(8)  Dating services are not permitted. 
(9)  Fortunetelling, palm reading, psychics, and similar activities are not permitted. 
(10)  Massage services are not permitted. 
(11)  No more than two rooms in the dwelling or 20 percent of the residence, whichever is less, shall be employed for the use of the home occupation. 
(12)  Electrical or mechanical equipment that creates visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside of the dwelling unit shall be prohibited. 
(13)  Home occupations may not create any smoke, odor, liquid, or solid waste other than that normally incidental to residential use of the structure. 
(14)  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials or equipment maintained on the premises. 
(15)  Required residential off-street parking shall be maintained. 
(16)  There shall be no signs. 
(17)  There shall be no more than one employee, who is not a resident of the site where the home occupation is established, working on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.070. - Landscape and screening. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish landscaping regulations that are intended to: 
(1)  Enhance the aesthetic appearance of development in all areas of the City by providing standards relating to quality, quantity and functional aspects of landscaping and landscape screening. 
(2)  Increase compatibility between residential and abutting commercial and business park land uses. 
(3)  Reduce the heat and glare generated by development. 
(4)  Minimize impervious surfaces. 
(5)  Meet Federal, State and local water quality regulations, such as the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements. 
(6)  Protect public health, safety, and welfare by minimizing the impact of all forms of physical and visual pollution, controlling soil erosion and runoff, screening incompatible land uses, preserving the integrity of neighborhoods, and enhancing pedestrian and vehicular traffic and safety. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  A concept landscape/irrigation plan, which may be included on a detailed site plan, shall be submitted as part of a site development permit application. 
(2)  The concept plan shall meet the intent of this Section by exhibiting a generalized design layout which adequately demonstrates the desired landscaping program in terms of location, irrigation system, size/scale, function, theme and similar attributes. The concept plan shall provide the City with a clear understanding of the landscaping program prior to the preparation of a detailed, comprehensive landscape/irrigation plan. 
(c)  General requirements. A comprehensive landscape/irrigation plan shall be prepared after approval of the site development permit application by the City. Submittal of the comprehensive plan shall be concurrent with the required grading plan(s) and other documents and reports. 
This Section provides the regulations to be followed in the preparation of the comprehensive landscape/irrigation plan. In addition to the following regulations, the Development Services Director and/or City Engineer may require further information to ensure effective implementation of a comprehensive landscape/irrigation plan. 
(1)  Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect registered to practice in the State. 
(2)  Landscape designs shall be in harmony with the surrounding environment. 
(3)  Landscape design and construction shall emphasize drought-tolerant landscaping whenever/wherever possible. 
(4)  A fully dimensioned comprehensive Landscape/Irrigation Plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  List of plants (common and Latin); 
b.  Size; 
c.  Location; 
d.  Irrigation plan; 
e.  Hardscape; 
f.  Water elements; and/or 
g.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Development Services Director. 
(5)  The planting of trees, shrubs and ground cover shall comply with the following installation requirements: 
a.  A minimum of 15 percent of the net site area shall be landscaped. 
b.  Landscape areas shall have plant material selected and plant methods used which are suitable for the soil and climatic conditions of the site. Sizes of the plant materials shall conform to the following minimum mix: 
1.  Trees. 
Twenty percent, 24-inch box; 
Fifty percent, 15-gallon; and 
Thirty percent, five-gallon. 
2.  Shrubs. 
Sixty percent, five-gallon; and 
Forty percent, one-gallon. 
3.  Ground cover. Should be able to cover 100 percent, within one year. 
In addition, mature specimen trees in 36-inch and 48-inch boxes shall be provided in sufficient quantity, subject to the approval of the Development Services Director, to provide variety and emphasis of focal areas in the landscaping plan. 
c.  Trees shall be long-lived (minimum life expectancy of 60 years), clean, require little maintenance, be structurally strong, insect and disease resistant, and require little pruning. 
d.  Trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be planted so that at maturity they do not interfere with utility service lines, traffic safety sight areas, and basic property rights of adjacent property owners. 
e.  All plant materials (except trees) shall be sized to reach maturity within five years. 
f.  Trees planted near public curbs and within public and private parking lots shall have a limited root structure and shall be installed so as to prevent physical damage to sidewalks, curbs, gutters and other public improvements. A deep root system shall be used. 
g.  Where trees are planted in paved areas, they shall have a protected tree gate. Tree gates shall be cast iron with a natural finish. A deep root system shall be used. 
h.  Concrete mow strips shall be required to separate all turf areas from other landscaped areas. 
i.  Buffer planting at an average depth of 15 feet and a minimum depth of five feet shall occur along all freeways (tollroads) and major arterials in order to visually screen uses and provide noise reduction. This landscaping shall be in addition to the screening requirements outlined below. 
j.  Appropriate shrubbery and creeping vines at an average depth of ten feet and a minimum depth of five feet, shall be provided along all walls and fences adjoining all public rights-of-way other than freeways (tollroads) and major arterials. 
k.  When inorganic ground cover is used, it shall be in combination with live plants and shall be limited to an accent feature. 
l.  All landscaped areas shall have an approved automatic irrigation system(s). 
m.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy, all residential developments shall be provided with trees, shrubs, ground cover, and automatic irrigation systems of a type and quality generally compatible with single-family dwellings in the front yard and that portion of the side yards visible from the public rights-of-way and shall be permanently maintained. 
(6)  All automatic irrigation systems shall be required to use irrigation controllers that meet the Irrigation Association's protocol for smart controllers. 
(7)  Whenever landscaping is removed from an existing site, it shall be replaced with landscaping of similar or better size, quality and quantity. Minor deviations from this standard (e.g., removal of small amounts of grass, flowers or shrubs) may be approved by the Development Services Director. Major deviations from this standard shall require the approval of an alternative development standard. 
(d)  Parking lot landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Landscaping is required: 
a.  At interior areas not used for parking or for access/circulation within the parking lot; 
b.  In all non-hardscaped areas; and 
(2)  The following minimum landscape area requirements apply to parking lots: 
a.  Parking lots with 21 spaces or less: 
1.  Landscape five percent of interior parking area; and 
2.  Minimum one 24-inch box tree for every four parking spaces. 
b.  Parking lots with more than 21 spaces: 
1.  Landscape ten percent of interior parking area; 
2.  Minimum one 24-inch box tree for every four parking spaces. 
3.  Canopy trees of mixed species that will provide 40 percent shading of the lot within 15 years; and 
4.  Islands at the ends of all parking aisles with an average width of five feet, with six-inch curbs, and automatic irrigation. 
(e)  Screening requirements. 
(1)  Each development shall be provided with sufficient screening so that neighboring properties are effectively shielded from any potential adverse impacts of that development or so that the new development shields itself from existing potential impacts from uses already in operation and shall also adhere to the requirements in Section 9.04.070. 
The following screening standards apply: 
a.  A screen referred to in Subsections b., c., or d. below shall consist of one or any combination of the following: 
1.  Walls including retaining walls. A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, tile or other similar type of solid masonry material a minimum of six inches thick. 
2.  Berms. A berm shall be constructed of earthen materials and it shall be landscaped. 
3.  Fences, solid. A solid fence shall be constructed of wood, or other materials a minimum nominal thickness of two inches, and it shall form an opaque screen. 
4.  Landscaping. Vegetation consisting of evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs spaced, planted and maintained so as to provide an opaque screen. 
b.  Abutting residential areas. An opaque screen shall be installed along all building site boundaries where the premises abut areas zoned for residential. Except as otherwise provided below, the screening shall have a total height of not less than six feet and not more than seven feet. Where there is a difference in elevation on opposite sides of the screen, the height shall be measured from the point of highest elevation. 
c.  Parking areas abutting freeways (tollroads) and major arterials. An opaque screen shall be installed along all parking areas abutting freeways (tollroads) and major arterials. Except as otherwise provided below, the screening shall have a total height of not less than 36 inches and not more than 78 inches. See also Section 9.06.100. 
d.  Notwithstanding the requirements listed above, where the finished elevation of the property at the boundary line, or within five feet inside the boundary line is lower than an abutting property elevation, such change in elevation may be used in lieu of, or in combination with, additional screening to satisfy the screening requirements of this Section. 
(f)  Setback and parkway treatment standards. Landscape plans for setback and parkway areas shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Setback and parkway areas shall be properly designed and landscaped in order to establish a high level of development quality while providing for neighborhood identity where appropriate. The design shall utilize uniform street tree plantings with complementary landscape materials. 
(2)  Provide a design which ensures the desired screening, shading, appearance and compatibility with established setback and parkway areas, including a sensitive transition between diverse landscape types and patterns. 
(3)  Incorporate mounding within the overall design, with landscaped slopes not exceeding a three-to-one ratio, or three feet in height. A minimum depth of six feet of landscaping shall be placed on the exterior side of all perimeter walls and fences. 
(4)  Incorporate walls and fences into the landscape design, including the special treatment of meandering walls, and wall breaks or openings where the design shall complement the interior landscaping of the adjacent development. 
(g)  Corner treatment standards. Landscape plans for any development involving corner parcels shall include additional special design requirements, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A minimum landscape area of 500 square feet for each corner area adjacent to a "major/primary arterial" street as described in the General Plan, and 300 square feet for each corner area adjacent to other public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Incorporate significant landscape and water features, including specimen trees, coordination with wall breaks or openings, and special "city entry" image treatment, wherever appropriate. 
(3)  Trees shall be a minimum of 24-inch box size with at least 25 percent of the trees 36-inch box size or greater. 
(4)  Ensure that any corner landscape plan within a "traffic safety sight area" shall be designed to protect public safety. 
(h)  Installation of landscaping. All required landscaping shall be properly installed, irrigated, inspected and maintained prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy. 
(i)  Maintenance of landscaping. 
(1)  Maintenance of approved landscaping shall consist of regular watering, mowing, pruning, fertilizing, clearing of debris and weeds, the removal and timely replacement of dead plants, and the repair and timely replacement of irrigation systems and integrated architectural features. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy, the landowner shall file, with the Development Services Department, a maintenance agreement and easement subject to the approval of the City Engineer and City Attorney. The agreement and easement shall ensure that if the landowner or subsequent owner(s) fails to maintain the required/installed site improvements, the City may file an appropriate lien(s) against the property in order to accomplish the required maintenance. 
(3)  Whenever landscaping is removed from an existing site, it shall be replaced with landscaping of similar or better size, quality and quantity. Minor deviations (e.g., removal of small amounts of grass, flowers or shrubs) from this standard may be approved by the Development Services Director. Major deviations from this standard shall require the approval of an alternative development standard as provided in Section 9.08.050. 
(j)  Right-of-way clearance. Any landscaping that overhangs into the public right-of-way shall be kept trimmed to a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet over streets and roadways and eight feet over sidewalks and walkways. No landscaping may encroach into the public right-of-way so as to interfere with the intended purpose of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.080. - Lighting. 
(a)  Lighting standards. 
(1)  Exterior lighting shall be energy-efficient and shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections are contained within the boundaries of the parcel. 
(2)  All exterior lighting shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
(3)  No lighting shall blink, flash, or be of unusually high intensity or brightness. 
(4)  All lighting fixtures shall be appropriate in scale, intensity, and height to the use being served. 
(5)  Security lighting shall be provided throughout the site and at all entrances/exits. 
(6)  Parking lot lighting shall be at least one foot-candle at all points but shall not exceed an average of three foot-candles over the entire parking lot. 
(7)  Lights used in parking lots shall require a conditional use permit when they are more than 22 feet above finished grade. 
(b)  Lighting plan. The Development Services Director may require a lighting plan for common open space and recreation areas in residential districts, multi-family development projects, commercial centers and business park developments. The lighting plan may also be required to include a photometric study demonstrating compliance with the lighting standards. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.090. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-02, § 5, adopted August 14, 2013, repealed the former Section 9.05.090 in its entirety, which pertained to noise standards, and derived from Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, and Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, adopted November 14, 2007.  
Sec. 9.05.100. - Property maintenance. 
Property maintenance standards. All properties, buildings, paving, fences, walls, landscaping, and any other structures within the City shall be kept and maintained in a clean, neat, orderly, operable, and usable condition according to the following requirements: 
(1)  Premises. Yards and shrubs must be properly cut. This includes front, side, and rear yards and porches visible from the public right-of-way. All of the premises must be kept clean and free of litter, debris, stored vehicles, garbage and animal waste. 
(2)  Trash. All trash (such as glass, paper, dust, leaves, yard clippings, straw, wood, and metal) should be put into a garbage container for pickup by the appropriate waste hauler. Fallen trees or tree limbs are not allowed anywhere on public or private property. 
(3)  Grass and weeds. Shrubbery and other vegetation should be kept neatly trimmed. 
(4)  Storage buildings. These are not allowed in the front yard. Dilapidated storage buildings are not allowed anywhere. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles, boats, trailers. These objects must not be placed on the front yard or the driveway. These objects may be parked in a side yard, but shall be completely screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
A derelict or abandoned vehicle left on public or private property will be removed in accordance with the State Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.110. - Special events. 
(a)  Purpose. This Section provides regulations for special events, including temporary outdoor sales activities, retail events, and special activities such as carnivals, fairs, and large (i.e., 150 or more people) neighborhood block parties. This Section is not intended to control or regulate the normal promotional/sale activities conducted within the approved display area of a business establishment as provided for by other applicable provisions of this Title. 
(b)  Special center-wide events. Special center-wide events include the temporary outdoor display and sale of merchandise, arts and crafts shows, fairs, entertainment, or similar events within a commercial center. Commercial centers may conduct such events subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Special center-wide events may be held up to three times a year over a maximum of three consecutive days per event. Centers may apply for approval for each event on an individual basis, approval of more than one event on a single application, or approval of an ongoing "special events program" specifying the dates, activities and signage for each event throughout the year. In no case shall the combined total of center-wide events plus individual sales for any business exceed six events during any calendar year. 
(2)  Events shall be subject to approval of a special event permit. Applications shall be submitted to the Development Services Director by the commercial center owner or manager. 
(3)  The application shall include provision for removal of temporary facilities and cleanup and restoration of the activity site within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event, unless another time limit is specified in the special event permit. The City may require a cash bond or other guarantee to be posted to ensure cleanup within the specified time limit. 
(4)  The application shall be reviewed by the Orange County Fire Authority and Police Services, and the event shall comply with fire prevention standards and emergency access requirements as specified by the Battalion Chief and Chief of Police. The Development Services Director may also submit the application to other agencies for review and approval of an event. 
(c)  Outdoor sales by individual businesses. 
(1)  Sidewalk or parking lot sales include the temporary outdoor display and sale, by a retail business, of merchandise which is normally displayed indoors at the same location as the outdoor sale. 
(2)  In addition to the center-wide events provided for in this Section, individual businesses may conduct individual sidewalk or parking lot sales. Subject to prior written consent of the center management (if applicable) and approval of a special event permit, such sales may be conducted up to three times a year over a maximum of three consecutive days per sale. In no case shall the combined total of center-wide events plus individual sales for any business exceed six events during any calendar year. Businesses may apply for approval of more than one event on a single application or for each event on an individual basis. 
(d)  Car dealership special events. Car dealers desiring to hold special events to promote sales require a special event permit and are subject to the following time limits: 
(1)  A maximum period of up to 24 days per event may be approved under a special event permit application issued by the Development Services Director. No more than 18 separate events totaling no more than 60 days are allowed per dealership. 
(2)  No sales tents or other similar advertising structures are allowed to be used for car dealership special events. 
(3)  All signage must be in compliance with the provision of Chapter 9.07. 
(e)  Christmas tree and pumpkin sales facilities. The following regulations apply to temporary Christmas tree and pumpkin sales facilities: 
(1)  Date of opening. Christmas tree and pumpkin sales shall adhere to the following opening dates: 
a.  Christmas tree sales facilities shall not open for business prior to the day after Thanksgiving. 
b.  Pumpkin sales facilities shall not open for business prior to October 1. 
(2)  Merchandise to be sold. Christmas tree and pumpkin sales are limited to the following: 
a.  A Christmas tree sales facility shall not engage in the sale of any merchandise not directly associated with Christmas trees and Christmas decorations. 
b.  A pumpkin sales facility shall not engage in the sale of any merchandise not directly associated with pumpkins and Halloween decorations. 
(3)  Removal of facility. Christmas tree and pumpkin sale facilities must meet the following removal regulations: 
a.  Christmas tree sales facilities shall be removed and the premises cleared of all debris and restored to the condition prior to the establishment of the facility within seven days after Christmas. 
b.  Pumpkin sales facilities shall be removed and the premises cleared of all debris and restored to the condition prior to the establishment of the facility within seven days after Halloween. 
(f)  Farmer's markets. Farmer's markets may be held in commercial or business park centers up to once a week for a maximum of 12 hours per event subject to an approved special event permit and the requirements of Subsection (b)(4). 
(g)  Off-site agricultural sales. A temporary stand for the sale of a single, seasonal agricultural product not grown on site may be permitted subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A special event permit shall be obtained. Said special event permit may be good for a period of time not to exceed 120 days. 
(2)  The stand shall be limited to the sale of a single agricultural product at any one time. 
(3)  The applicant shall secure an electrical permit from the Building Department if the facility is to be powered. 
(4)  The facility shall be removed and the premises cleared of all debris and restored to the condition prior to the establishment of the facility within seven days of the expiration of the permit. 
(5)  The facility shall comply with the fire prevention standards as approved and enforced by the Orange County Fire Authority. 
(6)  In addition to the above requirements, an approved site development permit shall be required when the sales facility is located in a residential zoning district. 
(h)  Special outdoor events—Non-residential zone districts. 
(1)  Special outdoor events are events of a predominantly noncommercial nature including, but not limited to, pageants, fairs, carnivals, religious or entertainment events, and large community gatherings in outdoor facilities. 
(2)  Special outdoor events are permitted in all nonresidential zoning districts provided the following requirements are met: 
a.  Activities conducted on property owned by or leased to the City and on public road rights-of-way shall require an encroachment permit issued by the City Engineer. 
b.  Events shall not exceed ten consecutive days. Events recurring more than four times in a calendar year are not considered temporary and shall not be eligible for a special event permit. 
c.  A special event permit shall be required for special outdoor events of 150 people or more, including spectators and participants. 
(3)  Applications for special event permits shall be referred by the Development Services Department to other affected City departments or other public agencies as may be appropriate for review and comment. Issues including, but not limited to, security, food and water supply, use of tents and canopies, sanitation facilities, medical services, noise, signage, fire protection and traffic control, shall be satisfactorily addressed by the applicant, as required by the Development Services Director or other City departments in their administration of other City regulations. Such other regulations may require the applicant to obtain permits such as building, electrical, health and tent permits from other outside agencies. Required permits by outside agencies are the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  A cash bond or other guarantee for removal of the temporary use and cleanup and restoration of the activity site within seven days of the activity conclusion may be required as a condition of the special event permit. 
(5)  The applicant must provide proof to the City of minimum liability insurance in an amount determined by the City Attorney for the special event prior to approval of the special event. 
(6)  The Development Services Director may also require the applicant to provide notification to affected neighboring uses. Reasonable notification requirements shall be determined by the Development Services Director. 
(i)  Special outdoor events—Residential zone districts or land uses. 
(1)  Within residential districts, special outdoor events may include, but are not limited to, pageants, fairs, carnivals, religious or entertainment events and neighborhood or community gatherings in outdoor facilities where vehicular traffic on any public right-of-way would be impeded by the event. 
(2)  Special outdoor events are permitted in all residential zoning districts subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Activities conducted on property owned by or leased to the City or on public rights-of-way shall require an encroachment permit issued by the City Engineer. 
b.  Events shall not exceed three consecutive days. Events recurring more than four times in a calendar year are not considered temporary and shall not be eligible for a special event permit. 
c.  A cash bond or other guarantee shall be posted with the City for removal of the temporary use and cleanup and restoration of the activity site within seven days of the conclusion of the event. 
(3)  Applications for permits or certificates required by this Section shall be referred by the Development Services Department to other affected City departments or public agencies as may be appropriate for review and comment. 
Issues, including but not limited to police and security, food and water supply, use of tents and canopies, sanitation facilities, medical services, noise, signage, fire protection and traffic control, shall be satisfactorily addressed by the applicant, as required by the Development Services Director or other City departments in their administration of other City regulations. Such other regulations may require the applicant to obtain permits such as building, electrical, health, tent, encroachment, and other permits. Required permits by outside agencies are the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The applicant must provide to the City proof of minimum liability insurance in an amount determined by the City Attorney for the special event prior to approval of the event. 
(5)  The Development Services Director may also require the applicant to provide notification to affected residents. Reasonable notification requirements shall be determined by the Development Services Director. 
(j)  Garage/yard/moving sales. 
(1)  Garage sales include the display of household goods for sale in the garage, driveway, and/or front yard of a single dwelling unit. Neighborhood or community garage sales with more than five residences participating shall be subject to the additional provisions applicable to a "special outdoor events—residential zone districts or uses" identified above. 
(2)  Garage sales shall be permitted as temporary accessory uses in residential zoning districts subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Garage sales may be conducted a maximum of six days per calendar year per residence, and may not be conducted on more than two consecutive days. 
b.  The hours of the sale shall be no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 8:00 p.m. 
c.  No item for sale shall obstruct the public right-of-way. 
d.  It is unlawful for any person to exchange, barter, trade or sell any of the following at a garage sale: firearms, ammunition, explosives, un-domesticated animals and livestock, any item of personal property from which the serial number has been removed, or any other item prohibited by City, County, State, or Federal law. 
(k)  Estate sales. 
(1)  Estate sales include sale of household goods inside the dwelling unit. 
(2)  Estate sales shall be permitted as temporary accessory uses in residential zoning districts subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Estate sales may be conducted a maximum of ten days per calendar year per residence, and may not be conducted on more than two consecutive weekends. 
b.  The hours of the sale shall be no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 8:00 p.m. 
c.  No item for sale shall obstruct the public right-of-way and shall not be located on the driveway or within the front yard. 
d.  It is unlawful for any person to exchange, barter, trade or sell any of the following at an estate sale: firearms, ammunition, explosives, un-domesticated animals and livestock, any item of personal property from which the serial number has been removed, or any other item prohibited by City, County, State, or Federal law. 
e.  The estate sale shall not create any significant increase in parking, traffic or circulation. 
(l)  General requirements for special event permits. The following general operational conditions shall apply to all special events for which a special event permit is required: 
(1)  Activities shall be restricted to that portion so designated on the site plan. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide documentation to the Development Services Department of an approved site plan by the Orange County Fire Authority and Police Services for meeting public safety requirements when applicable. 
(3)  The City Engineer shall review and approve the site plan regarding adequate parking and traffic circulation for both vehicular and pedestrian, including provisions for emergency ingress/egress. 
(4)  Adequate space shall be provided on walkways for the passage of pedestrian traffic (minimum five feet). 
(5)  The site plan and all signs shall comply with this Title and the specific design standards set forth in this Section. 
(6)  Any sales activities shall be confined to the sale of the goods specified in the special event permit only. 
(7)  The special event permit shall specify the event's expiration date and the removal date of all associated materials. 
(8)  All signs and other display materials placed in outdoor areas shall be removed within 24 hours after the close of business on the last day of the event, unless otherwise specified by the Development Services Director in the special event permit. 
(9)  Flood, laser, or search lights are not permitted unless the event involves over 500 people and is approved as part of the special event permit. 
(10)  Sound systems are not permitted unless approved as part of the special event permit. 
(11)  Additional conditions may be applied as determined by the Development Services Director as necessary to protect the public's health, safety, and welfare. 
(12)  A special event permit does not relieve an applicant from obtaining other permits or permissions as may be required by other county, state or other agencies. 
(m)  Review process. 
(1)  The Development Services Director has the authority to issue special event permits pursuant to Sections 9.08.040 and 9.08.180, provided the following criteria are met and the application is consistent with any other applicable regulations in this Title: 
a.  The special event shall not exceed 30 days during any 12-month period, unless otherwise permitted in this Section. 
b.  The property owner has authorized the special event in writing; and 
c.  The application is submitted at least 30 days prior to the scheduled activity. 
(2)  If an event is of a scale (e.g., large in area or number of persons) or use that may result in extensive potential, even temporary, impacts to the community, the Development Services Director may use his/her discretion and forward the special event permit application to the Planning Commission for their decision. 
(3)  Events involving over 500 people shall also require a site development permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.08.170. 
(4)  Events which do not comply with the regulations contained within this Section shall also require a site development permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.08.170. 
(n)  Application information. The Development Services Director shall prescribe the type and form of information required to process the special event permit. 
(o)  Signs. Temporary signs associated with special events are permitted as provided in Chapter 9.07 and Tables 9.07.1 and 9.07.3. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.05.120. - Landscape water efficiency. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The State Legislature has found that: 
a.  The waters of the State are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands; 
b.  The continuation of California's economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses; 
c.  It is the policy of the State to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource; 
d.  Landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development; 
e.  Landscape design, installation, maintenance, and management can and should be water efficient; and 
f.  Article X, Section 2 of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served, and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use of water. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  Beginning February 1, 2016, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this Section shall apply to the following landscape projects: 
a.  New landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review; 
b.  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscaped area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review; 
c.  New or rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this Section or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix A of the Guidelines; 
d.  New or rehabilitated project using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater capture on site, any lot or parcels within the project that has less than 2,500 square feet of landscape area and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with the treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater capture on site is subject only to Appendix A of the Guidelines. 
(2)  Subsection (d)(2) of the Landscape Water Use Standards of this Section shall apply to: 
a.  All landscaped areas, whether installed prior to or after January 1, 2010; and 
b.  All landscaped areas installed after February 1, 2016, to which Subsection (b)(1) is applicable. 
(3)  This Section does not apply to: 
a.  Registered local, State, or Federal historical sites; 
b.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
c.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
d.  Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
(c)  Implementation procedures. 
(1)  Prior to installation, a landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the City for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this Section. Any landscape documentation package submitted to the City shall comply with the provisions of the Guidelines. 
(2)  The landscape documentation package shall include a certification by a professional appropriately licensed in the State of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this Section and the Guidelines. 
a.  Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations. 
b.  Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the Guidelines and shall be provided to the local water purveyor under procedures determined by the City. 
c.  Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a certification of completion in conjunction with a certificate of use and occupancy or permit final process, as provided in the Guidelines. 
(d)  Landscape water use standards. 
(1)  For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to Subsection (b)(1), the estimated applied water use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the MAWA calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 0.7, except for special landscaped areas where the MAWA is calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 1.0; or the design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the City; as provided in the Guidelines. 
(2)  Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor or as mutually agreed by the local water purveyor and the City. 
(e)  Delegation. The City may delegate to, or enter into a contract with, a local agency to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this Section on behalf of the City. 
(f)  Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to this Section: 
Applied water means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
Budget-based tiered-rate structure means tiered or block rates for irrigation accounts charged by the retail water agency in which the block definition for each customer is derived from lot size or irrigated area and the evapotranspiration requirements of landscaping. 
Ecological restoration project means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
Estimated applied water use means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the Guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system. 
ET adjustment factor or ETAF is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the Guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. 
A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET adjustment factor of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71), which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this Section and the Guidelines, except that the ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0. 
Guidelines refers to the Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by the City Council, and as subsequently amended by resolution of the City Council, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Section. 
Hardscapes means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this Section. 
Irrigation efficiency means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Section are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems. 
Landscaped area means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
Landscape contractor means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
Landscape documentation package means the documents required to be provided to the City for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Guidelines. 
Landscape project means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of "landscaped area," meeting the requirements under Subsection (b). 
Local agency means a local water purveyor or city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is authorized to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this Section. The local agency may be responsible for the enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this Section, including, but not limited to, design review, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of a landscape project. 
Local water purveyor means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service. 
Maximum applied water allowance or MAWA means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in the Guidelines. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)] 
Mined-land reclamation projects means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
New construction means, for the purposes of this Section, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
Non-pervious means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
Pervious means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
Permit means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape. 
Plant factor or plant water use factor is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this Section, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1; the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this Section are derived from the publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species." Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
Recycled water or reclaimed water means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
Reference evapotranspiration or ETo means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in the Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances. 
Rehabilitated landscape means any re-landscaping project that meets the applicability criteria of Subsection (b)(1), where the modified landscape area is greater than 2,500 square feet. 
Smart automatic irrigation controller means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system and which schedules irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
Special landscape area means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and recreational areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface. 
Turf means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinge grass, Zoysia grass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
Valve means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system. 
Water feature means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or storm water retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
(Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 9-9-2009; Ord. No. 16-02, § 4, 2-10-2016)  
Sec. 9.05.130. - Reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish the process for making and evaluating a request for reasonable accommodation. For purposes of this Section, the term "disabled" or "disability" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined by State law. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  Any person who requests reasonable accommodation, because of a disability, in the application of a zoning or building law, policy or procedure, which may act as a barrier to fair housing opportunities, may do so by filing a completed application with the Development Services Director. 
(2)  If the application for which the request is being made also requires some other approval, permit or entitlement, the applicant shall file the request together with the application for such approval, permit or entitlement. 
(c)  Required information. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, and telephone number; 
(2)  Address of the property for which the request is being made; 
(3)  The current actual use of the property; 
(4)  A description of the accommodation requested including reference to the Zoning Code provision, policy or procedure from which modification is being requested; 
(5)  The basis for the claim that the applicant is considered disabled; and 
(6)  A detailed explanation of why the accommodation is reasonable and why the accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a specific dwelling in the City. 
(d)  Procedure. The Development Services Director shall review each application for reasonable accommodation according to the procedures established in Section 9.8.040 Administrative Approvals. 
Written notice of a request for reasonable accommodation shall be given as follows: 
(1)  In the event that there is no approval sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation, the notice shall be mailed to the owners of record of all properties which are immediately adjacent to the property which is the subject of the request. 
(2)  In the event that the request is being made in conjunction with some other approval, permit or entitlement, the notice shall be transmitted along with the notice of the other proceeding. 
(e)  Findings. 
(1)  The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
a.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual with a disability. 
b.  Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability. 
c.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City. 
d.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a City program or law, including but not limited to land use or zoning. 
e.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation will have potentially adverse impact on surrounding uses. 
f.  Whether the physical attributes of the property and structures justify the requested reasonable accommodation. 
g.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation will provide an equivalent level of benefit as the neighbors. 
(2)  In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required above. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 11, 4-27-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-02, § 11, adopted April 27, 2011, enacted provisions intended for use as Section 9.05.120. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Section 9.05.130.  
Sec. 9.05.140. - Marijuana-related businesses. 
(a)  Purpose . In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and businesses within the City, the declared purpose of this Chapter is to prohibit marijuana-related businesses and/or activities as stated in this Chapter. 
(b)  Definitions. In addition to any other definitions contained in the Municipal Code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with any current provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall prevail. 
(1)  Identification card. A document issued by the State Department of Health Services which identifies a person authorized to engage in the medical use of marijuana and the person's designated primary caregiver, if any. 
(2)  Marijuana . For purposes of this Chapter, "marijuana" shall have the same meaning as is defined by Health and Safety Code § 11018 and the term "cannabis" as that term is defined by California Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(f). If the definition under State law is amended, the City's definition shall be as amended. "Marijuana" shall also mean any "cannabinoid" as defined by Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(e), "cannabis concentrate" as defined by Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(g), "edible cannabis product" as defined by Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(s), "manufactured cannabis" as defined by Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(ac), "medical cannabis" as defined by Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(af), and "topical cannabis" as defined by Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(al), as those sections exist as of January 1, 2016 or as amended thereafter. 
(3)  Marijuana business . Any activity, whether or not carried out for commercial gain, which involves cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storage, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, or sale of marijuana or any marijuana-infused products. This definition shall include any of the foregoing activities conducted by or on behalf of a qualified patient or the primary caregiver of a qualified patient. All references in this chapter to "marijuana business," shall be synonymous with "marijuana dispensary," "mobile marijuana dispensary," and "marijuana cultivation site," which are defined in this section. The term "marijuana business" shall not include "personal cultivation of marijuana," as defined in this section. 
(4)  Marijuana cultivation site. Any location, whether indoor or outdoor, where marijuana is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or upon which all or any combination of those activities occurs. The term "marijuana cultivation site" shall not include "personal cultivation of marijuana," as defined in this section. 
(5)  Marijuana dispensary . Any dispensary, facility, cooperative, club, individual, business, group, collective, establishment or other association with a storefront or mobile retail outlet where marijuana, in any form, whether for medical, recreational, or any other purpose, is transferred to any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization, regardless of whether that activity is undertaken on a for-profit or non-profit basis, or any combination thereof, and regardless of whether the activity is for compensation or is gratuitous. 
(6)  Mobile marijuana dispensary. Any marijuana dispensary, facility, cooperative, club, individual, business, group, collective, establishment or other association with or without a storefront or mobile retail outlet, which engages in the transportation or delivery of marijuana or any marijuana-infused products. For purposes of this Chapter, "delivery" shall mean the transfer of marijuana or other marijuana-infused products from a marijuana dispensary or a marijuana testing laboratory to any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization, including, but not limited to, any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer, or salesperson, and shall also include the use by a marijuana dispensary of any technology platform owned and controlled by the dispensary that enables any person or entity to arrange for, or facilitate the transfer of marijuana or any marijuana-infused products. 
(7)  Personal cultivation of marijuana . The possession, planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, or processing of not more than six living marijuana plants and possession of the marijuana produced by the plants by persons 21 years of age or older inside a person's private residence or inside an accessory structure to a person's private residence located upon the grounds of a person's private residence that is fully enclosed and secure as authorized by Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, as may be amended, and subject to the following limitations: (a) not more than six living plants may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a person's single private residence or inside an accessory structure to a person's private residence that is fully enclosed and secure, at one time; and (b) the living plants and any marijuana produced by the plants in excess of 28.5 grams shall be kept in a locked space, and shall not be visible by normal unaided vision from a public place. The term "personal cultivation of marijuana" shall not include the planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, or processing of marijuana plants outdoors upon the grounds of a person's private residence. 
(8)  Physician. An individual who possesses a recognition in good standing to practice medicine or osteopathy issued by the Medical Board of California or the Osteopathic Medical Board of California and who has taken responsibility for an aspect of the medical care, treatment, diagnosis, counseling, or referral of a patient and who has conducted a medical examination of that patient before recording in the patient's medical record the physician's assessment of whether the patient has a serious medical condition and whether the medical use of marijuana is appropriate. 
(9)  Primary caregiver. The individual, designated by a qualified patient or by a person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient or person. 
(10)  Private residence . For purposes of this Chapter, "private residence" shall have the same meaning as is defined by Health and Safety Code section 11362.2(b)(5) (i.e., a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or similar dwelling), as may be amended. 
(11)  Qualified patient. A person who is entitled to the protections of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, but who does not have an identification card issued by the State Department of Health Services. 
(c)  Marijuana businesses prohibited. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, conduct or operate any marijuana business, or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any other capacity, in any marijuana business in the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. Further, it is unlawful for the owner of any property located within the City to in any way authorize or permit use of their property for purposes of operation of any marijuana business. 
(2)  Marijuana dispensaries and marijuana businesses are prohibited land uses in every zoning district within the City. 
(3)  Mobile marijuana dispensaries are prohibited from delivering and/or transporting marijuana to any location in every zoning district in the City, regardless of the location of the primary place of business of the mobile marijuana dispensary or of the location where delivery of marijuana originated. 
(4)  Marijuana cultivation sites are prohibited from operating in every zoning district in the City. It is unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, conduct or operate any marijuana cultivation site, or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any other capacity, in any marijuana cultivation site in the City. 
(5)  No certificate of use and occupancy, zoning clearance, or other permit or entitlement for use shall be legally valid if issued to any marijuana business proposed to operate or to be established in the City. 
(6)  The planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, or processing of marijuana plants outdoors upon the grounds of a person's private residence is prohibited in every zoning district in the City. 
(d)  Public nuisance declared. Operation of any marijuana business within the City in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by all available means. 
(e)  Use or activity prohibited by state or federal law. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to permit or authorize any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited by any state or federal law. 
(f)  Violations. Any owner, operator, manager, employee, independent contractor, associate, or volunteer of a marijuana business who violates, or any such person or entity that permits, or aids in the violation of, any of these provisions regulating marijuana businesses, which shall include, but not be limited to, property owners and/or property managers of the real property where such marijuana business is conducted, shall be subject to all remedies available under Chapter 1.03 of this Code, as well as be subject to any and all available civil or administrative remedies as may be available under local, state, or federal law. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. 
(g)  Regulations non-exclusive. The provisions of this Chapter regulating marijuana businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 16-05, § 3, 10-12-2016; Ord. No. 17-02, §§ 3, 4, 5-24-2017)  
Chapter 9.06 - Parking 
 
Sec. 9.06.010. - Purpose. 
These regulations are established to provide for off-street parking of motor vehicles related to the various land uses in the City. The purpose of these regulations is to ensure properly designed parking areas with adequate numbers of parking spaces in order to reduce traffic congestion, promote business and enhance public safety. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.06.020. - General standards applying to all uses and zoning districts. 
(a)  Modifications to parking facilities. No existing parking facility shall be restriped or modified with respect to layout, aisle width, numbers or sizes of spaces, street access, or any other physical characteristic without prior review and approval by the Development Services Director and the City Engineer. 
(b)  Location of off-street parking. 
(1)  Required parking facilities shall be located on the same building site and conveniently proximate to the uses they serve except as otherwise provided in Sections 9.06.040 and 9.06.090. 
(2)  Property within the ultimate right-of-way of a street, either public or private, shall not be included in provision of the minimum parking requirements. 
(c)  Accessibility. All required off-street parking spaces shall be designed, located, constructed and maintained so as to be fully and independently usable and accessible at all times. 
(d)  Usability. 
(1)  The required off-street parking facilities shall not be used for any purpose which would at any time preclude the use of the area for the parking of motor vehicles unless allowed by a special event permit or temporary use permit. 
(2)  Unless otherwise provided by an approved discretionary permit, no owner or tenant shall lease, rent or otherwise make unavailable to intended users any off-street parking spaces required by this Section. 
(e)  Access to arterial highways. 
(1)  Wherever access from a parking area is to an arterial highway as designated in the General Plan circulation element, parking spaces, driveways and maneuvering areas shall be designed so that motor vehicles must enter the arterial highway while traveling in a forward direction. 
(2)  Vehicular access location, design of the parking lot interface and sight distance parameters at any access to an arterial highway shall require the approval of the City Engineer. 
(f)  Maximum grade. 
(1)  Whenever access is taken from a street, alley or driveway to an off-street parking area serving industrial, commercial or professional uses, public or community facilities, or dwelling units, the driveway or other vehicular accessway shall have a maximum grade of plus six percent (+6%) or minus two percent (-2%), measured from the street, alley or driveway grade along the driveway centerline. 
(2)  The maximum grade in Subsection (f)(1) will generally provide adequate sight distance at street level and prevent vehicles from dragging on extreme grade breaks. Exceptions may be approved by the City Engineer, where physical design prevents such extreme grade breaks and provides safe distance. 
(3)  Off-street parking spaces and all abutting parking aisles shall have a maximum grade of plus or minus two percent ( 2%). Said grade shall be measured across the parking space and the abutting parking aisle in any direction. 
(4)  Exceptions to maximum grades established in this Section may be permitted, on a case-by-case basis, subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer. 
(g)  Parking area notices and directional instructions. 
(1)  Parking area notices and directional instructions lettered on the paved surface of driveways and parking areas are permitted for parking facilities serving business park, commercial and professional uses, community facilities, and multiple family dwelling units. 
(2)  Each parking notice shall not exceed four square feet in area. 
(3)  Such parking notices may contain the name of the owner or occupant of the property and only such words and symbols that are directly related or essential to parking, enforcement or the direction of vehicular traffic within the parking area. 
(h)  Markings. 
(1)  In all parking facilities, individual stalls shall be marked with hairpin lines four inches to six inches wide forming an elongated "U" between 12 inches and 24 inches wide around the centerline of each stall, except that parking facilities serving not more than two dwelling units on a single lot need not be marked. The space widths set forth in this Subsection shall be the overall width of the stall, including the areas required for marking. 
(2)  In all parking facilities the aisles, approach lanes, and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked to expedite traffic movement. Once a parking facility has been marked in accordance with the approved site plan, the markings shall be permanently maintained. 
(3)  Changes. If any changes to existing markings are approved by the City Engineer through any discretionary process, existing markings shall first be ground out or sand blasted prior to re-marking the parking area. Painting over existing markings without first grinding out or sand blasting such that the previous markings are not visible is not permitted. Re-marking of the parking area according to the approved, revised site plan shall be done in accordance with this Section. 
(4)  Paving. All permanent parking spaces, driveways and maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt concrete, cement concrete or other all-weather, non-erodible hard surfacing. Temporary parking spaces, driveways and maneuvering areas may use decomposed granite or other stable, all-weather surfacing, with prior City approval. 
(i)  Lighting. All parking area lighting shall be designed to minimize lighting spillover onto adjacent properties. A lighting plan denoting foot candle distribution may be required for any development proposal. 
(j)  Change or increase in use of property. Whenever the occupancy or use of any property is changed to a different use, or the existing use is altered, enlarged, expanded or intensified, parking to meet the requirements of this Section shall be provided for the new use or occupancy. 
(k)  Fractional parking spaces. Whenever the computation of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this Section results in a fractional parking space, the parking computation shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
(l)  Reciprocal access. When required by the City Engineer, a parking area shall be designed to allow reciprocal access with an adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.06.030. - Accessible parking facilities. 
Public accommodations or facilities, including commercial, professional, business park, public/quasi-public facilities and multifamily dwellings of five or more units, shall provide parking spaces for the physically handicapped in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Design Guidelines outlined in the following provisions: 
(1)  Handicap spaces required. Table 9.06.1 establishes the number of handicap parking spaces required: 
Table 9.06.1 
Accessible Parking Space Requirements 
Total Number of 
Parking Spaces 	Number of Handicap Spaces Required 
1—25 	1 
26—50 	2 
51—75 	3 
76—100 	4 
101—150 	5 
151—200 	6 
201—300 	7 
301—400 	8 
401—500 	9 
501—1,000 	Two percent of total spaces provided 
More than 1,000 	20 plus one percent of total spaces above 1,000 
 
(2)  Accessible parking space size and location. 
a.  Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located as near as practical to a primary entrance. 
b.  The minimum length of each parking space shall be 18 feet. 
c.  If only one space is provided, it shall be 17 feet wide and marked to provide a nine-foot parking area and an eight-foot loading and unloading area. 
d.  When more than one space is provided, in lieu of providing a 17-foot wide space for each parking space, two spaces may be provided within a 26-foot wide area marked to provide a nine-foot parking area on each side of an eight-foot loading/unloading area in the center. 
e.  One handicap van parking space shall be provided for every eight regular handicap spaces. Such van spaces shall be 26 feet in width. 
f.  Arrangement of parking area. In each parking area, a bumper or curb shall be provided and located to prevent encroachment of cars over the required width of walkways. Also, the space shall be so located that a handicapped person is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars other than his/her own. Pedestrian ways which are accessible to the physically handicapped shall be provided from each such parking space to related facilities, including curb cuts or ramps as needed. Ramps shall not encroach into any parking space except where such encroachment into the length of any handicap space does not limit the handicapped person's capability to leave or enter the vehicle. 
g.  Slope of parking space. Surface slopes of parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be the minimum possible, and shall not exceed plus or minus two percent in any direction. 
h.  Identification. Each parking space reserved for the handicapped shall be identified by a permanently affixed reflectorized sign constructed of porcelain on steel, beaded text, or equal, displaying the international symbol of accessibility. The sign shall not be smaller than 70 square inches in area and shall be centered at the interior end of the parking space at a minimum height of 80 inches from the bottom of the sign to the parking space finished grade, or centered on the wall at the interior end of the parking space at a minimum height of 36 inches from the parking space finished grade, ground or sidewalk. 
i.  Pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22511.8(d), a sign shall also be posted, in a conspicuous place, at each entrance to the off-street parking facility. Said sign shall be not less than 17 inches by 22 inches in size, with lettering not less than one inch in height, which clearly and conspicuously states the following: 
"Unauthorized vehicles not displaying the distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons may be towed away at the owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at ________ or by telephoning ________." 
The sign shall also reference Vehicle Code § 22511.8(d). 
j.  The surface of each parking space shall have a surface identification duplicating the symbol of accessibility in blue paint, at least three square feet in area. 
k.  Vertical clearance. Entrances to and vertical clearances within parking structures shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet two inches where required for accessibility to handicap parking spaces. 
l.  Additional requirements. For additional handicap site development requirements, including curbs, ramps and landing requirements, refer to the State regulations for the accommodation of the disabled. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections A. and B. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (1) and (2).  
Sec. 9.06.040. - Alternative parking regulations. 
(a)  Deviations in requirements set forth in this Chapter may be permitted subject to the alternative development standards process described in Section 9.08.050. No such application shall be approved unless the Planning Commission makes the following findings in addition to the standard findings for approval of a site development permit: 
(1)  Applicable off-street parking requirements are excessive or inappropriate due to the nature of the specific land use involved or because of special circumstances applicable to the property; and 
(2)  The proposed off-street parking facilities substantially comply with the intent of these regulations. 
(b)  All applications for an alternative development standard shall apply to the total site requirement and not a specific building within the site regardless of ownership. 
(c)  Deviations shall be for specific land uses. Termination of use may result in revocation of an alternative parking requirement. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections (1)—(3). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (a)—(c).  
Sec. 9.06.050. - Residential parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for all residential uses in compliance with this Subsection, as well as Subsection 9.06.020 General Standards Applying to All Uses and Zoning Districts. 
(b)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each category of residential use shall be as identified in Table 9.06.2. 
(c)  The parking requirements for residential uses shall be in addition to the spaces required for any recreation or community center provided within a residential development. The space requirements for recreation and community centers shall be determined pursuant to [Table] 9.06.3. Through the Alternative Development Standard process described in Section 9.8.050 Alternative Development Standards, the Planning Commission may credit some of the recreation or community center spaces provided toward the satisfaction of the visitor parking requirements for the development if such spaces are in close proximity (i.e., 200 feet) to residences within the development. 
(d)  Residential projects that qualify as affordable housing development projects shall be required to adhere to the following parking requirement: 
Number of Bedrooms 	Required Off-Street 
Parking 
0—1 bedrooms 	1 off-street parking space 
2—3 bedrooms 	2 off-street parking spaces 
4 or more bedrooms 	2.5 off-street parking spaces 
 
Table 9.06.2 
Residential Parking Requirements 
Land Use Type 	Required Off-Street Parking 	Notes and Comments 
Multi-family—Studio 	One covered off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit; and 
0.5 spaces per dwelling unit visitor parking 	
Multi-family—One-bedroom units 	Two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit, at least one space per dwelling unit shall be in a garage or a covered space; and 
0.5 spaces per dwelling unit visitor parking 	
Multi-family—Two-bedroom units 	Two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit, at least one space per dwelling unit shall be in a garage or a covered space; and 
One spaces per dwelling unit visitor parking. 	
Multi-family—Three- or more bedroom units 	Three off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit, at least one space per dwelling unit shall be in a garage or a covered space; and 
1.5 spaces per dwelling unit visitor parking. 	
Senior apartments (age-restricted) 	To be determined through the conditional use permit 	
Single-family dwellings (single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings (duplexes), and townhomes sharing a common wall) 	Two off-street parking spaces in a garage per dwelling unit. For new development projects, those dwellings having less than 18-foot setback from the back of curb or sidewalk, whichever is closest to the garage or carport, shall provide one additional parking space within 200 feet of the dwelling. On-street parking, where permitted, may be used for the additional space. 	All single-family dwellings shall provide a minimum of one on-street parking space within 100 feet of the subject dwelling unit. 
 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-02, § 12, 4-27-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections (1)—(3). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (a)—(c).  
Sec. 9.06.060. - Residential parking standards. 
(a)  Size of parking spaces. 
(1)  Each required covered off-street parking space for single-family dwellings shall be in a garage or carport a minimum of ten feet in width and 20 feet in length of unobstructed area. In garages or carports containing two or more side-by-side parking spaces, the required minimum width may include the exterior walls or supports of the structure, provided minimum unobstructed dimensions of nine feet in width and 18 feet in length are met. 
(2)  Uncovered off-street parking spaces, including driveways to private garages, shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and 20 feet in length. In measuring the length of paving required for uncovered parking spaces, allowance, not to exceed two feet, may be made for vehicular overhang beyond the bumper or tire stop if such overhang does not interfere with screening or pedestrian use. 
(3)  When a side of any space abuts a building, fence, support column or other obstruction which interferes in any way with access to a motor vehicle, the space shall be a minimum of two feet wider than otherwise required by this Section. 
(4)  Uncovered parallel parking spaces adjoining private accessways shall be not less than eight feet in width and 18 feet in length, with a minimum of eight feet separating each pair of such parking spaces. 
(b)  Driveway dimensions. 
(1)  Single-family residence driveways shall be paved to a minimum of 16 feet in width from the access street or alley to the garage. 
(2)  Driveways providing access to garages, carports and uncovered parking areas serving two or more dwelling units shall be paved to a minimum of 20 feet wide, except when a wider width is required for maneuvering area in front of the garages, carports or uncovered parking spaces as illustrated is Figure 9.06.1. 
(3)  All driveways providing access to a garage shall be paved to a minimum of 20 feet in length, unless an automatic roll-up door is provided, in which case the driveway length may be paved to a minimum of 18 feet in length. 
 

Figure 9.06.1: Garage Access 
(c)  Maneuvering areas. Maneuvering areas for access into and out of garages, carports and uncovered parking spaces shall have minimum widths as follows: 
(1)  Garages and carports shall have 28 feet of unobstructed area, measured from the garage or carport entry as illustrated in Figure 9.06.1. 
(2)  Uncovered parking shall have 24 feet of unobstructed area, measured from the outward end of the parking stall. 
(d)  Location of residential parking spaces. 
(1)  Assigned spaces shall be conveniently and safely located on the same site within 200 feet of the dwelling unit they serve. 
(2)  Assigned spaces shall be designated as to the dwelling unit to which they are assigned on all plot plans or site plans submitted for the proposed project. 
(e)  Design of common parking areas. Common off-street parking areas, including multiple garages and carports serving multi-family dwelling units, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The off-street parking area shall be designed so that a vehicle within the parking area will not have to enter a public street to move from one location to any other location within that parking area. 
(2)  Parking and maneuvering areas, including garages and carports, shall be designed so that any vehicle can leave the parking area and enter onto the nearest street traveling in a forward direction. 
(3)  Curbs or tire stops shall be provided at the end of each uncovered parking space along any property line abutting a public walkway, street or alley, except where screening is positioned, to ensure that the motor vehicle will not encroach into the public right-of-way as illustrated in Figure 9.06.2. 
 

Figure 9.06.2: Curbs/Tire Stops 
(f)  Location of driveway on corner lot. When a building site abuts two intersecting streets, the driveway approach shall be located within the half of either street frontage that is farthest from the intersection of the two streets. If one of the intersecting streets is an arterial highway, the driveway approach shall be located on the other street. (Figure 9.06.3) 
   

Figure 9.06.3: Location of Driveway on Corner Lot 
(g)  Screening. Uncovered residential parking facilities containing five or more spaces shall be screened in accordance with the screening requirements of Section 9.05.070. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.06.070. - Non-residential parking requirements. 
The numerical parking requirements for all non-residential uses are identified in Table 9.06.3. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.06.080. - Non-residential parking standards. 
(a)  Location of non-residential parking. Required parking for non-residential uses shall be located: 
(1)  On the same site as the use which the facilities serve; or 
(2)  On an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership as the site necessitating the parking, provided that the shared parking does not conflict with and are in addition to any preestablished parking requirement on that site and that the owner of the site will grand and record a parking easement or other recorded document satisfactory to the City; or 
(3)  On an adjacent lot or parcel of land not under the same ownership as the site necessitating the parking, provided that the shared parking does not conflict with, is in addition to any preestablished parking requirements on that site and that the owner of the site will grant and record a parking easement or other recorded document satisfactory to the City, provided: 
a.  Said lots or parcels would be contiguous, if not separated by an alley; 
b.  Direct vehicular and pedestrian passage between said lots or parcels would be possible if the public right-of-way were vacated; and 
c.  The parking and vehicular access on said lots or parcels can be designed to ensure safe pedestrian movement between the parking and site which the parking facilities serve as determined by the City Engineer. 
(4)  On a remote site, with Planning Commission approval of a parking management plan through an alternative development standard pursuant to Section 9.08.050 to include security measures, pedestrian access between the parking and parent site, means and methods of transportation between the sites, schedule of usage, parking assurances and other issues or concerns deemed necessary by the City Engineer, the Development Services Director and the Planning Commission. 
(5)  Remote or shared employee parking meeting the same requirements of Subsection (4) may be substituted for existing on-site parking if the existing on-site area is converted to another land use approved by the Planning Commission through an alternative development standard pursuant to Section 9.08.050. An analysis approved by the Development Services Director verifying the number of employees to be relocated and that remaining parking supports the proposed new land use and other issues or concerns deemed necessary by the Development Services Director. 
Table 9.06.3 
Non-Residential Parking Requirements 
Land Use Type 	Required Off-Street Parking 	Notes and Comments 
Animal day care 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 	
Animal hospitals and clinics 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area 	
Auto dealerships (vehicle sales and services) 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 500 square feet of gross floor area. 	Excludes areas used exclusively for storage and display of vehicles for sale or lease. 
Auto repair services 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 500 square feet of gross floor area 	Square footage calculation shall not include areas used exclusively for storage or loading of vehicles. 
Bars/taverns, brewery pubs, night clubs, VIP rooms and cocktail lounges (including facilities with dancing, pool/billiard tables, and live entertainment) 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 400 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 8.0 off-street parking spaces per each such use 	
Car washes, except self-operated 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 10 linear feet of wash line, plus queuing capacity equal to 5 times the capacity of the car wash 	In determining capacity, each 20 linear feet of wash line shall equal 1 car length. 
Car washes, self-operated 	5.0 off-street parking spaces per each 2 wash stalls 	A wash stall shall not be counted as a parking space. 
Caretaker residences (temporary and permanent) 	2.0 off-street parking space per residence 	
Child day care centers 	1.0 off-street parking space per every 5 children allowed under the maximum occupancy, but not less than 5.0 off-street parking spaces per each such use. 	
Clubs and lodges (private) 	1 space per 30 square feet of gross floor area for assembly use; and 
1.0 off-street parking space per every 300 square feet of gross floor area (including accessory buildings and facilities, such as day care and other meeting rooms) 	
Commercial recreation (indoor and outdoor) (including bowling lanes, ice and roller rinks, and fitness facilities/gymnasiums) 	For fitness facilities, dance studios, cheer studios, and other similar uses, 1.0 off-street parking space per each 3 students/attendees, plus 1.0 off-street parking space per each instructor, plus 1.0 off-street parking space per each administrative employee 
4.0 off-street parking spaces per bowling lane plus the spaces required for additional uses on the site 
For ice and roller rinks, 1.0 off-street parking space per 200 square feet of rink space plus the spaces required for additional uses on the site. 	For the purposes of fitness facilities, swimming pools and game courts (e.g., basketball, volleyball, racquetball, tennis) shall be counted as a part of the gross floor area. 
Community event space (indoor, public) 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 30 square feet of gross floor area for the main seating areas; and 
1.0 per every 300 square feet of gross floor area where there are no fixed seats 	Includes community centers, reception halls, and auditoriums 
Convenience services (low intensity) 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 	Such as dry cleaners, pet stores, pet grooming, copy and mail services, locksmith, watch repair, bicycle repair, framing, tailor shops, home appliance repair, and similar uses. 
Convenience services (medium intensity) 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area 	Such as convenience markets stores, photography studios, ticket agencies and similar uses. 
Convenience services (high intensity) 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 	Such as laundromats, barber shops, beauty shops, manicure shops. 
Cyber/internet cafes 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 50 square feet of gross floor area. 	
Dancing and live entertainment 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 400 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 8.0 off-street parking spaces per each such use 	
Driving ranges 	1.5 off-street parking spaces per tee, plus the spaces required for additional uses on the site 	
Equestrian facilities (commercial) 	1.0 space per stable stall 	
Family care home 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 3 beds based on maximum occupancy 	
Financial and other service institutions including banks, savings and loan institutions, ticket agencies using window services for patrons within individually developed establishments or office complexes 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area 	
Food stores, grocery stores, supermarkets, and similar uses in shopping centers or individually-developed 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area 	
Furniture and appliance establishments 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area, except areas used exclusively for storage or loading, but not less than 5.0 off-street parking spaces per each such use 	
Gas or fuel dispensing stations 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 2,500 square feet of gross site area, but not less than 8.0 per each such use 	If more than one use on-site, these parking requirements apply to each use. 
General wholesale establishments/warehouse stores 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 500 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 6.0 per each such use 	
Golf courses (regulation or par 3) and country clubs that include clubhouses with bars and banquet facilities 	1.3 off-street parking spaces per gross acre 	
Golf course (miniature) 	2.0 off-street parking spaces per hole, plus the spaces required for additional uses on the site 	
Health-related institutional uses including family care homes, convalescent and nursing homes, adult living facility, assisted care facilities, senior living facilities, emergency shelters, children's homes, and sanitariums, health related institutional uses, transitional housing 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 3 beds based on maximum occupancy 	Development Services Director may allow for a different parking standard if credible evidence is provided that a different parking ratio is appropriate based on the emergency shelter's demonstrated need. 
Hotels and motels 	1.0 off-street parking space per each guest unit, plus 1.0 per each 250 square feet of non-guest unit gross floor area, including office space, conference facilities, banquet rooms, restaurants, kitchens, laundry facilities, fitness facilities, swimming pools, and spas. 	
Kennels 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area 	
Light industrial and light manufacturing 	1.0 off-street parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area; and 
1.0 off-street parking space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for office use; and 
1.0 off-street parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area used exclusively for warehouse/storage use. 	
Medical and dental offices, centers, and clinics, including physical therapy, x-ray facilities, and medical labs, but excluding hospitals 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 150 square feet of gross floor area 	
Museums 	1.0 off-street parking space per 250 square feet of gross floor area 	
Office uses (general) 	1.0 off-street parking spaces per 250 square feet of gross floor area 	
Outdoor amphitheater 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 30 square feet of gross floor area used for the main seating areas; and 
1.0 per every 300 square feet of gross floor area where there are no fixed seats 	
Parks 	Parking requirements determined as part of the CUP. 	
Pool halls and billiard centers 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 400 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 8.0 off-street parking spaces per each such use 	
Public facilities and buildings, including electric, gas, water, telephone, and telegraph facilities not having business offices on the premises 	1.0 off-street parking space per each employee, but not less than 2.0 per each such facility 	
Recycling facilities, large and small collection facilities 	1.0 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 5.0 off-street parking spaces per each such use. 	
Religious, fraternal or service organizations (non-profit) 	1 space per 30 square feet of gross floor area for assembly use; and 
1.0 off-street parking space per every 300 square feet of gross floor area (including accessory buildings and facilities, such as day care and other meeting rooms) 	
Research and development 	1.0 off-street parking space per 400 square feet of gross floor area 	
Restaurants, drive-through, fast food and take out 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus queuing capacity equal to 5 times the capacity of the drive-through line 
Not less than 8.0 per each such use 	In determining capacity, each 20 linear feet of drive-through line shall equal 1 car length. 
Restaurants and cafes, sit down including live entertainment and dancing 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 100 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 8.0 off-street parking spaces per each such use 	
Retail and services (general) in individually-developed establishments or within shopping centers 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 250 square feet of leasable floor area 	
Retail plant nurseries, garden shops, and similar uses with outdoor sales and display areas 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 500 square feet of display and sales area, but not less than 5.0 per each such use 	Calculation of square footage includes both indoor and outdoor, excluding areas used exclusively for the storage or propagation of plants. 
Schools (business, vocational, and professional schools not requiring outdoor facilities) 	1 per student based on maximum occupancy. 	
Schools, elementary and junior (private, religious) 	2.5 per classroom plus 1.0 per every 100 square feet of gross floor area used for assembly purposes such as gymnasiums and cafeterias 	Additional parking may be required as a storage area for drop off and pickup of students. 
Schools, high (private, including auditoriums and stadiums on the site) 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 3 students based on the school's maximum capacity; plus additional requirements for auditoriums and stadiums 	A parking and circulation analysis will be required for each land use. 
Shopping centers 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 	Shopping centers may require additional parking and may be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the Development Services Director if it is determined that the cumulative impact of the uses would require additional parking. 
Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities 	0.5 off-street parking spaces per guest unit plus 1.0 off-street parking spaces for each employee 	
Storage facility (indoor or outdoor) 	1.0 off-street parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 	
Theaters, auditoriums, arenas, and stadiums 	1.0 off-street parking space per each 3 fixed seats or 1 space per 30 square feet of gross floor area where there are no fixed seats; and 1.0 per every 300 square feet of gross floor area 	
Video arcades 	1.0 off-street parking space per 100 square feet of floor area plus the spaces required for additional uses on the site. 	
 
(b)  Size of parking spaces. 
(1)  All covered or uncovered off-street parking spaces, except as otherwise noted in this Section, shall be a minimum clear unobstructed nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. 
(2)  Parking spaces parallel to a curb may be eight feet in width and 18 feet in length, with a minimum of four feet separating each pair of such parking spaces. 
(3)  When a side of any space abuts a building, fence, support column or other obstruction which interferes in any way with access to a motor vehicle, the space shall be a minimum of two feet wider than the standard required width. 
(4)  In measuring the length of paving required for uncovered parking spaces, allowance may be made to accommodate vehicular overhang beyond a continuous, unbroken concrete curb, if such overhang does not interfere with screening or pedestrian use. 
(5)  No compact spaces are permitted. 
(c)  Non-residential parking facility design. 
(1)  Off-street parking facilities shall be designed so that a car within a facility will not have to enter a street to move from one location to any other location within that parking facility. On industrial or office sites, separate noncontiguous parking facilities may be provided with independent entrances for employee and visitor parking, provided the designated use is clearly identified on all plot plans or site plans submitted for the proposed project. 
(2)  Parking and maneuvering areas shall be arranged so that any vehicle can leave the parking area and enter into an adjoining vehicular right-of-way traveling in a forward direction. 
(3)  Dead ends shall include adequate maneuvering areas as illustrated in Figure 9.06.4. 
(4)  No dead-end parking aisles shall serve more than five consecutive stalls for single-loaded aisles and ten, on each side, for double-loaded aisles. 
(5)  Continuous, unbroken concrete curbs shall be provided along any abutment to a pedestrian walkway, access or driveway, street or alley, except where screening is positioned, to ensure that the motor vehicle will not extend into these areas. 
(6)  All paved parking stalls, except parallel spaces, which may use a single line, shall be clearly outlined with double or hairpin lines or special paving techniques on the surface of the parking facility. 
(7)  All parking spaces shall be located so as to be within proximity to the use they are intended to serve. Distribution of parking in multi-tenant centers should be in reasonable proximity to the uses they are intended to serve. 
 

Figure 9.06.4: Dead End Maneuvering Areas 
(d)  Non-residential parking accessways. Parking accessways are those driveways that provide ingress or egress from a street to the parking aisles, and those driveways providing interior circulation between parking aisles. No parking is permitted on an accessway. Accessways shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  All parking facilities taking access from a major, primary or secondary arterial shall have a parking accessway between the arterial and the parking aisles. 
(2)  Parking accessways from arterial highways shall not have parking spaces taking direct access therefrom and shall not be intersected by a parking aisle or another parking accessway for a minimum distance of the following: 
a.  Thirty feet for projects with zero to 200 parking spaces; 
b.  Fifty feet for projects with 201 to 350 spaces; 
c.  Seventy feet for projects with 351 to 450 spaces; and 
d.  Ninety feet for projects with 451 spaces or more. 
All distances shall be measured from the curb face of the ultimate curbline of the adjacent street. 
(3)  Parking accessways from nonarterial highways shall be not less than 20 feet in length from the ultimate curbline of the adjacent street. 
(4)  One-way accessways shall have a minimum width of 15 feet, unless the accessway is a fire lane, which requires a minimum of 20 feet. 
(5)  Two-way accessways shall have a minimum width of 28 feet. 
(e)  Parking aisles. Parking aisles shall have a minimum width of 14 feet. In no case shall the parking aisles for two-way traffic be less than 25 feet in width. 
(f)  Landscaping. Landscaping of parking areas shall be provided in accordance with Subsection 9.05.070(d). 
(g)  Screening. Open parking spaces and parking structures shall be screened in accordance with Section 9.05.070. Screening shall be located adjacent to the inside edge of any required boundary landscaping and the outside edge of the paved parking area when there is no landscaping. 
(h)  Off-street loading. 
(1)  Off-street loading spaces shall be required on the same building site with every building, storage warehouse, auto dealership, wholesale distributor, department store, market, hotel, laundry, dry cleaning, and other similar uses involving the receipt or distribution by vehicle of materials or merchandise incidental to carrying on such activity. 
(2)  Each off-street loading space shall be sufficient to permit the standing, loading, and unloading of vehicles to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys and shall not be a part of the off-street parking area required for each particular use. 
(3)  The loading area shall be screened from public view. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 7—9, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, § 8, 3-25-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § 13, 4-27-2011)  
Sec. 9.06.090. - Joint use/shared parking. 
(a)  General. Parking facilities may be provided jointly subject to the satisfaction of the requirements of this Section and approval of a site development permit pursuant to Section 9.08.170, and, when an inadequate supply of required parking is provided on site, an alternative development standard pursuant to Section 9.08.050. The joint use/shared parking plan shall include: 
(1)  Written verification from the involved property owners and tenants acknowledging acceptance of and compliance with the requirements of the joint use/shared parking plan; 
(2)  A proposed means of providing notice of the joint use/shared parking plan to all future property owners, tenants and other users; 
(3)  A proposed means to amend the agreement to include future users/tenants or changes based upon participant modifications to uses; 
(4)  A site plan showing all parking spaces, building square footage and tenant spaces within the complex or area participating; 
(5)  A joint use/shared parking matrix with the following information: 
a.  The number of parking stalls available on-site (parking supply); 
b.  Project building and tenant addresses; 
c.  Gross square footage of all buildings and tenant spaces; 
d.  The name, type of use and the days and hours of operation for each tenant; 
e.  The number of parking stalls required for each tenant based on each tenant's gross square footage and type of use; 
f.  The hourly parking demand for all tenants on: 
1.  Weekdays (Monday through Friday); 
2.  Saturdays; and 
3.  Sundays. 
g.  A comparison between hourly parking demand and the parking supply to show that demand will not exceed parking supply. 
(b)  Joint usage where there is an overall deficiency in the number of spaces provided. Parking facilities for adjoining uses within shopping centers for which the hours of parking demand are substantially different from each other may be provided jointly. Such joint usage shall be subject to: 
(1)  The granting of an alternative development standard by the City; and 
(2)  The satisfaction of the following conditions: 
a.  Absence of conflicts. Sufficient evidence as identified and documented in a parking study shall be submitted demonstrating that no substantial conflict in the principal hours or periods of peak demands of the structures or uses for which the joint use is proposed will exist. 
b.  Allocation of spaces. The number of parking spaces which may be allocated to the requirements for each structure or use involved shall not exceed the number of spaces reasonably anticipated to be available during the differing hours of operation. 
c.  Location. The parking facilities designated for joint use shall be contiguous to all the structures and uses served and not more than 200 feet from each shared use. A pedestrian pathway is required to provide a means for pedestrian linkage between immediately adjacent land uses and uses within the parking facility. 
d.  Deed recorded agreements. The city may require a written agreement, approved by the City Attorney as to form and content, to be executed by all parties concerned and filed in the office of the County Recorder. Such agreement shall be a covenant running with the land or other enforceable restriction and shall assure the continued availability of the number of spaces designated for joint use at the periods of time indicated. 
(c)  Joint usage where there is no overall deficiency in the number of spaces provided. If two or more adjoining uses are under common ownership, or if the ownership is not common and the respective owners thereof have acquired recordable easements appurtenant for off-street parking approved by the City Attorney as to form and content, such buildings or uses collectively may provide the required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(d)  Mixed land use developments (shared parking). Shared parking may be considered in determining the specific number of parking spaces that can be used to serve two or more individual land uses without conflict or encroachment. Any program that would use a shared parking concept may be granted by the Planning Commission through the alternative development standards process if it determines in any individual use that the following findings can be satisfied: 
(1)  Variations in the peak accumulations of parking vehicles as the result of different activity patterns of mixed land use will not result in a deficiency of parking spaces (by hour, by day, by season). 
(2)  There is a relationship among the land uses that result in two or more land use activities with a single vehicle trip to the development. 
In preparing a traffic/parking study for consideration by the Planning Commission, a methodology acceptable to the Development Services Director and City Engineer is to be used. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.06.100. - Visibility at intersections/driveways. 
(a)  Intersection visibility. On a corner lot of any intersection in any zoning district, no fence, wall, hedge, or other barrier shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow above a height of 36 inches so as to: 
(1)  Materially impede vision in the triangular area on the parkway side of the curb, at the intersection of streets as illustrated in Figure 9.06.5; or 
(2)  Be in conflict with the vehicular sight distance requirements of the current edition of the California Department of Transportation Highway Design Manual. 
(b)  Driveway visibility. In any zoning district, no fence, wall, hedge, or other barrier shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow above a height of 36 inches so as to materially impede vision in the triangular area on the parkway side of the curb, located on both sides of a driveway entrances as shown in Figure 9.06.5. 
   

Figure 9.06.5 Intersection/Driveway Visibility 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Chapter 9.07 - Signs 
 
Sec. 9.07.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to establish guidelines and standards for the regulation of signs, sign structures and sign programs, so as to assure adequate identification of businesses and other activities, as well as to maintain and improve the quality of the visual environment within the City. The procedures and regulations of this Section are enacted to: 
(1)  Encourage the effective use of signs and graphics as a means of identification and communication in the community; 
(2)  Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the ability of the City to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(3)  Permit such signs that will not, by reason of their size, location, construction, or manner of display, endanger the public safety of individuals, confuse, mislead, or distract the vision necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise endanger public health, safety and morals; 
(4)  Provide procedures and standards to control the location, size, type, number, and all other matters pertaining to signs within the City; and 
(5)  Provide consistency among signs within an integrated commercial center. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.020. - Applicability. 
(a)  Signs shall only be erected or maintained in compliance with this Section. The number and area of signs as outlined in this Section are intended to be maximum standards which do not necessarily ensure architectural compatibility. Therefore, the review and approval of sign permits and sign programs in compliance with this Section shall consider a sign's relationship to the overall appearance of the site and the surrounding community, in addition to the standards of this Section. 
(b)  These sign regulations are not intended to restrict, limit or control the content or message of signs. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections (1) and (2). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (a) and (b).  
Sec. 9.07.030. - Sign permit required. 
Signs shall only be constructed, displayed or altered with a sign permit approval unless otherwise exempt as described in Section 9.07.060. Sign permits shall not be issued until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued for the business/establishment for which the sign is intended. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.040. - Sign program. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the sign program is to: 
(1)  Assure coordination and compatibility between all signs within an integrated center, including, but not limited to retail centers and business parks. 
(2)  Prevent visual clutter caused by signs excessive in size and number. 
(3)  Ensure that signs are compatible with the desired image of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(4)  Encourage uniqueness and individuality in signage within the established criteria. 
(b)  Applicability. A sign program is a coordinated program of signs which is required for all integrated centers; including individual buildings with multiple tenants, building complexes, commercial centers or business parks. For all integrated centers, no permit shall be issued for an individual sign unless and until a sign program for the site on which the sign will be erected has been submitted and approved by the Planning Commission in conformance with this Section and Section 9.08.160. 
(c)  Sign program requirements. A sign program shall consist of the following: 
(1)  A copy of an approved site plan showing location of buildings, building elevations, parking areas, driveways, landscaped areas, and adjacent streets. 
(2)  An accurate indication on the site plan and building elevations of the location of all existing and proposed signs requiring a permit. 
(3)  Computation of the total number of signs, sign area for individual signs, total sign area and dimensions of signs for each existing and proposed sign type. 
(4)  For each existing or proposed sign, the following shall be specified: 
a.  Location of each sign on the buildings and property; 
b.  Sign dimensions; 
c.  Color scheme; 
d.  Lettering or graphic style; 
e.  Sign copy dimensions; 
f.  Sign type; 
g.  Any sign copy limitations; 
h.  Lighting, if any; 
i.  Materials; 
j.  Landscaping quantities, types, sizes, and planter area dimensions if signs are to be located within landscaped planters; and 
k.  Line of sight dimensions for any proposed monument signs. 
(5)  The sign program may contain such other restrictions as the owners of the property within the sign program area may reasonably request to be adopted by the City. 
(d)  Consent. The sign program application shall be signed by all property owners or their authorized representatives. 
(e)  Existing signs and sign programs. 
(1)  Unless completed sooner, each sign program in the City shall be replaced with a sign program that is consistent with the sign regulations and standards of this Title within five years of the approval of this Title. 
(2)  When any new or amended sign program is submitted for a property on which existing signs are located, all such existing signs not in compliance with the proposed sign program shall be considered nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Section 9.07.130. 
(f)  Binding effect. After approval of a sign program, no sign requiring a permit shall be erected, constructed, installed, displayed, altered, placed or maintained except in accordance with such program. The sign program may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this Title. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a program and any other provision of this Section, the sign program provisions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.050. - Approval process. 
The Development Services Director or Planning Commission may approve and/or modify a sign program or sign program amendment as described in Section 9.08.160. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.060. - Exempt signs. 
The following signs shall not require sign permit/sign program approval nor shall the area of the following signs be included in the maximum sign area permitted for any site or use: 
(1)  One "open" or "closed" window sign less than two square feet in area. This sign may also include hours of operation. 
(2)  Interior signs located within the interior of buildings when such signs are not visible from outside the subject building. 
(3)  A United States, California or City flag. The flag itself shall not exceed ten feet in length or eight feet in height. The height of the flag pole shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(4)  One temporary residential "open house" sign not exceeding three square feet in area on the particular premises that is for sale, lease, or rent, and posted only when a salesperson is present. 
(5)  Directional safety signs, such as "Stop," "Yield," and similar signs, the face of which meet California Department of Transportation standards and bear no commercial message of any sort. 
(6)  Trespassing and property alarm signs less than two square feet in area. 
(7)  Neighborhood watch signs in residential neighborhoods with the approval of the City Engineer and Orange County Fire Authority. 
(8)  Any official government sign, public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance. 
(9)  Temporary banner signs which are 24 square feet or less in the park zoning district provided said banner signs are part of a City-approved temporary banner sign program. 
(10)  Signs identified in Tables 9.07.1 through 9.07.6 as not requiring a permit if they meet the applicable standards outlined in the tables. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 11-06, § 2, 9-14-2011)  
Sec. 9.07.070. - Prohibited signs. 
All signs that are not expressly permitted under this Section or exempt from regulation in accordance with Section 9.07.060 shall be prohibited in the City. Such signs include: 
(1)  Signs on public property, including but not limited to, any building, wall, bridge, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, street sign, traffic sign, utility pole, wire box or related equipment, except those serving a public purpose and approved by a government agency. 
(2)  Signs in public rights-of-way except those needed for traffic safety regulation, City signs and directional signs related to hospitals or affiliated facilities, as approved by the City. 
(3)  Any off-site or outdoor advertising sign or structures placed for the purpose of advertising a business not on the property upon which the sign is placed. 
(4)  Banners, pennants, and balloons, unless specifically provided by this Title. 
(5)  Flags, kites, wind blown and blow-up signs and characters or other similar advertising devices or displays. 
(6)  Signs that revolve, rotate, move, flash, reflect, blink, or appear to do any of the foregoing, including searchlights, and animated signs shall be prohibited unless required by law or utilized by a proper government agency, with the exception of approved time and temperature displays. 
(7)  Flood, laser, or search lights are not permitted unless the event involves over 500 people and is approved as part of a special event through the site development permit process in Section 9.08.170. 
(8)  Electronic message board signs, except those that meet the requirements identified in Section 9.07.080. 
(9)  Signs which constitute a nuisance or hazard due to their intensity of light. 
(10)  Audible signs or other advertising devices. 
(11)  Animals or human beings, live or simulated, designed or used so as to attract attention to the premises. 
(12)  Can signs and cabinet signs. 
(13)  Formed plastic or injection molded plastic signs. 
(14)  Acrylic faced letters or similar material adhered to a window. 
(15)  Roof signs. 
(16)  Abandoned signs. 
(17)  Vehicle signs, including signs attached by any means to automobiles, trucks, trailers, or other vehicles on private or public property for the purpose of advertising, identifying, or providing direction to a use or activity not related to the lawful use of the vehicle for rendering service or delivering merchandise, that remain on a parked vehicle for four or more hours. 
(18)  Neon signs/bands in which the neon tubing is exposed and clearly visible, unless approved through a sign program in the commercial-general (CG) zoning district only. 
(19)  Portable signs, including human directional signs and sign "twisters". 
(20)  A-frame signs, with the exception that restaurants be permitted one A-frame sign to place inside their patio area or by their front door. 
(21)  Free-standing pole signs. 
(22)  Signs that create safety hazards as determined by the Development Services Director, Chief of Police, Orange County Fire Authority, or City Engineer. 
(23)  Signs painted on fences, roofs or other structures, except as expressly permitted within this Chapter. 
(24)  Billboards. 
(25)  Signs advertising or displaying any unlawful act, business or purpose. 
(26)  Commercial/business park signs facing residential areas unless approved through a sign program. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.080. - Electronic message board signs. 
Electronic message board signs are only permitted at high schools or colleges with a minimum size of 25 acres pursuant to the following regulations: 
(1)  Electronic message board signs require a site development permit pursuant to Section 9.08.040. 
(2)  Electronic message board signs shall be limited to one per educational institution. 
(3)  The maximum permitted sign area for the electronic message board shall be 36 square feet of sign copy. 
(4)  The maximum permitted sign height for the electronic message board sign area shall be three feet. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued for an electronic message board sign, which constitutes a hazard to the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon a street or freeway. The following conditions shall apply to all electronic message board signs: 
a.  The electronic message display shall have no illumination which is continuous motion or which appears to be in continuous motion. 
b.  Fixed/permanent sign copy on each face of an electronic message board sign shall be limited to the identification of the educational institution. The fixed/permanent sign copy and the display message shall be limited to major events associated with the educational institution and shall not contain material that is commercial, political or sexual in nature. Time and temperature readings are allowed. 
c.  The fixed/permanent sign copy shall not flash, shall consist of one color, and shall not advertise off-site businesses or organizations. 
d.  The display message shall not change at a rate faster than one message every five seconds. 
e.  The intensity of illumination shall not change. 
f.  Burned out lights shall be replaced promptly. 
g.  The electronic message board shall not be allowed to operate in a faulty manner. 
h.  Misspelled messages shall be corrected promptly. 
i.  All electronic signs shall conform to the electrical code of the City. 
(6)  No electronic message board sign shall be located within 25 feet of any interior side property line and shall have a minimum separation of 100 feet from a residential zoning district or use. 
(7)  No portion of an electronic message board sign shall project into any right-of-way. 
(8)  Neither the fixed/permanent sign copy nor the display message of the proposed electronic message board sign shall adversely affect the character, liveability, or quality of life of the residential community it will be adjacent to or located in. 
(9)  The proposed design of the electronic message board sign shall be compatible in design with the architectural theme or character of the educational institution it will serve and surrounding areas. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.090. - Permitted signs by zoning district. 
This Section specifies the criteria for: 
(1)  Signs permitted in residential zoning districts; 
(2)  Signs permitted in commercial and business park zoning districts; and 
(3)  Signs permitted in all other zoning districts. 
Signs shall be permitted in the City in accordance with the standards contained in Tables 9.07.1 through 9.07.6. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.100. - Measurement of sign area and height. 
The following regulations shall control the measurement of sign area and sign height: 
(1)  Height of a sign. The height of a sign shall be computed by measuring the vertical distance from the midpoint, or average ground level, along the base of the sign structure, excluding any berming, to the highest point of the structure as illustrated in Figure 9.07.1. Sign height for monument signs shall be measured from ground level, even when the sign structure itself is not located at ground level. 
(2)  Measurement of sign area for signs with no distinct border or boundary. Sign area shall be calculated by computing the area consisting of not more than eight continuous, perpendicular straight lines, which contains all of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display on such sign as illustrated in Figure 9.07.2. 
(3)  Measurement of sign area for signs with a distinct border or boundary. For signs with a distinct border or boundary, the sign area shall be computed by measuring the entire area enclosing the sign copy, emblem or character as described in Subsection (2). Background or borders containing no copy, emblems, or characters shall also be included in the calculation of sign area. The combined area of sign copy and sign background/border shall be no more than two times the area of the sign copy as illustrated in Figure 9.07.3. 
(4)  Double-sided sign. The sign area of signs which have two identical faces, arranged back to back in parallel planes, shall be computed for one side only, provided that the two sign faces are no more than 18 inches apart. 
(5)  Multiple-sided sign. Signs which have more than one side and are not double-sided signs have a sign area as computed for all sides, cumulatively. 
(6)  Including sign structure or support. Where a sign base, structure, support or other feature such as berms is designed in such a manner to make the sign more noticeable or appear larger (such as backlighting of an entire awning), as determined by the Development Services Director or Planning Commission, the area of the structure or support shall be included in the sign height and sign area, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections A.—F. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (1)—(6).  
Sec. 9.07.110. - Sign design, construction, and maintenance. 
All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code and the electrical code of the City at all times. 
(2)  Unless otherwise specified by a sign program, all permanent wall signage shall consist of individual channel letters. 
(3)  Except for banners, flags, window signs and other temporary signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this Section, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
(4)  All signs shall be maintained by the tenant or property owner in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this Chapter, at all times. Damaged signs or signs in disrepair are subject to this requirement. 
   

Figure 9.07.1: Sign Height 
   

Figure 9.07.2: Measurement of Sign Area with no Background or Border 
> 
   

Figure 9.07.3: Measurement of Sign Area with Backgrounds or Borders 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.120. - Abatement of illegal and abandoned signs. 
The following provisions shall control the regulation of abandoned signs: 
(1)  Any illegal or abandoned sign, either temporary or permanent, shall be removed by the property owner within ten days after notice from the Development Services Director. Any sign not removed within ten days after such notice, may be summarily abated by the Code Enforcement Officer if no appeal has been made of the Development Services Director's decision pursuant to this Title. Said signs shall be retained by the City for a period of not less than three working days. Thereafter, any unclaimed signs may be discarded. 
(2)  The reasonable cost of such removal shall be assessed against the sign owner. The cost of removal shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  Legal, conforming structural supports for abandoned signs may remain, if installed with a blank sign face and supporting structures are maintained. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.07.130. - Legal nonconforming signs. 
(a)  A legal nonconforming sign is any permanent sign that was legally established and maintained in conformance with the provisions of all applicable laws in effect at the time of original installation but that does not comply with the provisions of this Section. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming sign or replaced by the same or similar nonconforming sign. 
(2)  Structurally or electrically expanded or altered unless such alteration is designed to and does bring the sign into full compliance with all current provisions of this Section. 
(3)  Relocated to another site on the same property or another property in the City. 
(4)  Reestablished after discontinuation of use for 90 days in a one-year period. 
(5)  Reestablished after damage or destruction of more than 50 percent of the value or structure/mass of the sign prior to said damage or destruction. 
Table 9.07.1 
Temporary Signs Permitted in Residential Districts 
Class 	Type 	Permit 

Required 	Maximum 

Number 	Maximum 

Area 	Maximum 

Height 	Additional 

Standards 
1. Real Estate—Residence for Sale/Rent (Single-Family) 	Monument (temporary) 	No 	One sign per residence 	Six sq. ft. (including riders) 	Standard: Four ft. 	Placement shall be permitted on private property only. 
2. Real Estate—Residence for Sale/Rent (Multi-Family) 	Monument (temporary) 	Yes 	One sign per residential project 	20 sq. ft. (including riders) 	Standard: Five ft. 	(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only with consent of property owner. 
(b) Sign shall not advertise vacancies in tenancy. 
3. Open House Identification (on-site) 	Monument (temporary) 	No 	One sign per site 	Four sq. ft. 	Four ft. 	(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only with consent of property owner. 
(b) One flag not exceeding two ft. × two ft. shall be permitted per site. 
4. Open House Directional (off-site) 	Monument (temporary) 	No 	Minimum necessary to locate home 
One sign per intersection 	Four sq. ft. 	Four ft. 	(a) Open house directional signs may be displayed only between 8:00 a.m. and dusk. 
(b) Open house directional signs may be placed only on private property with the consent of the property owner. 
5. Individual Garage/Yard Sale Identification (on-site) 	Wall, monument, or window (temporary) 	No 	One sign per garage sale residence 	Four sq. ft. 	Four ft. 	(a) Sign shall be removed on or immediately following date of event. 
(b) Placement shall be permitted on private property only with consent of property owner. 
6. Individual Garage/Yard Sale Identification (off-site) 	Monument (temporary) 	No 	Minimum necessary to locate home 
One sign per intersection 	Four sq. ft. 	Four ft. 	(a) Garage sale directional signs may be displayed only between 6:00 a.m. and dusk. 
(b) Sign shall be removed on or immediately following date of event. 
(c) Placement shall be permitted on private property only with consent of property owner. 
7. Any other sign described in Table 9.07.6. 
 
Table 9.07.2 
Permanent Signs Permitted in Residential Districts 
Class 	Type 	Permit 

Required 	Maximum 

Number 	Maximum 

Area 	Maximum 

Height 	Additional 

Standards 
1. Community/Neighborhood Project Identification (single-family detached, single-family attached, condominiums) 	Wall or monument (permanent) 	Yes 	Subject to Planning Commission review and approval of a sign program 	(a) Copy limited to community, neighborhood, or project and/or street address. 
(b) Placement shall be permitted on private property only with consent of property owner. 
2. Apartment Complex Project Identification 	Wall or monument (permanent) 	Yes 	Subject to Planning Commission review and approval of a Sign Program 	(a) Copy limited to apartment complex name and street address 
(b) Placement shall be permitted on private property only. 
3. Project Directory 	Wall or monument (permanent) 	Yes 	One sign per site, or minimum number necessary to provide adequate unit addresses and information 	24 sq. ft. 	Six ft. 	(a) Copy limited to name of project and description of buildings, unit addresses and supporting information. 
(b) Placement shall be permitted on private property only with consent of property owner. 
4. Sales/Rental/Leasing Office Identification 	Wall (permanent) 	No 	One sign per development 	Six sq. ft. 	No standard 	(a) Copy limited to name of project, identification of office and street address. 
(b) Placement shall be permitted on private property only with consent of property owner. 
5. Subdivision and Model Home Identification and Directional 	Any new residential subdivision or development is subject to Planning Commission review and approval of a sign program. The sign program shall include all requests for permanent and temporary signs. 	None 
6. Ancillary (neighborhood watch, skateboarding prohibited, etc.) 	Wall, monument, or window 	No 	Signs shall follow City Police Department specifications 	None 
7. Any other sign described in Table 9.07.6. 
 
Table 9.07.3 
Temporary Signs Permitted in Commercial and Business Park Districts 
Class 	Type 	Permit 

Required 	Maximum 

Number 	Maximum 

Area 	Maximum 

Height 	Additional 

Standards 
1. Promotional Banner 	Wall banner (temporary) 	Yes 	One sign per business or tenant 	24 sq. ft. 	Shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 	(a) Temporary banners shall be allowed for a maximum period of ten days subject to the approval of a temporary banner permit. 
(b) A maximum of three temporary banner permits shall be issued to the same business or tenant at the same location in any calendar year. 
(c) A copy of the City-approved temporary banner permit shall be kept on site at all times and the City banner seal must be on the banner. 
(d) Temporary banners shall be contained within the lineal frontage of the leased space. 
(e) An alternative location may be considered by the Development Services Director in unique circumstances applicable to the property. 
2. Window Sign (Seasonal) 	Window (temporary) 	No 	No numerical limit 	25 percent of total window area not to exceed 50 sq. ft. in size for any building 	Shall not exceed height of highest window 	(a) Seasonal window decorations are permitted for a maximum period of 16 weeks per year (total) and shall not advertise products or pricing. 
(b) All signs must be well-maintained and in good repair at all times. 
3. Special Event Signs 	Flags, banners and small balloon strings, etc. (temporary) 	Special event 
permit 	As determined by the special event permit 	As determined by the special event permit 	As determined by the special event permit 	(a) Shall be permitted subject to review and approval of a special event permit. 
(b) Maximum time period established in Section 9.05.110. 
4. A-frame Signs (applicable to restaurants only) 	A-frame sign 	No 	One sign per restaurant 	Six sq. ft. 	Three ft. 	(a) Signage shall be placed in the patio area or by the front door only. 
(b) Signage shall only advertise the daily specials. 
5. Any other sign described in Table 9.07.6. 
 
Table 9.07.4 
Permanent Signs Permitted in Commercial Districts 
Class 	Type 	Permit 

Required 	Maximum 

Number 	Maximum 

Area 	Maximum 

Height 	Additional 

Standards 
1. Freestanding Commercial Building, Business Identification (single-tenant) 	Wall, monument, or hanging (permanent) 	Yes 	Wall: one sign per building elevation for a maximum of three signs 
Monument: one sign per street frontage 	Wall: one sq. ft. of sign area per lineal foot of building frontage not to exceed 200 sq. ft. 
Monument: 50 sq. ft. 	Wall: shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 
Monument: Five ft. 	(a) Maximum sign area is the aggregate of all permanent signs per street frontage. 
(b) Signs shall not be located closer than two feet from any edge of the building. 
(c) Hanging signs must have a minimum vertical clearance of seven ft. 
(d) Signage shall not be permitted for subtenants unless specifically permitted by an approved sign program. 
2. Commercial Center 
 (a) Center Identification (for centers with ten or more tenants) 	Wall or monument (permanent) 	Yes 	Wall: one sign per building elevation for a maximum of three signs 
Monument: one sign per street frontage 	Wall: one sq. ft. of sign area per lineal foot of building frontage not to exceed 200 sq. ft. 
Monument: 80 sq. ft. per sign 	Wall: shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 
Monument: Six ft. 	For commercial centers (a) and (b): 
(a) Center identification signs shall include no more than four tenants per side at the discretion of the property owner. 
(b) Centers that qualify for an additional center identification sign shall not be required to include the same four tenants as the first sign. 
(c) Monument signs shall not be located within 100 ft. of any other monument sign. 
(d) Signs shall not be located closer than two feet from any edge of the building. 
(e) Copy shall include the name and address(es) of commercial center. 
(f) Signage shall not be permitted for subtenants unless specifically permitted by an approved sign program. 
 (b) Center Identification (for centers with less than ten tenants) 	Wall or monument (permanent) 	Yes 	Wall: one sign per building elevation for a maximum of three signs 
Monument: one sign per street frontage 	Wall: one sq. ft. of sign area per lineal foot of building frontage not to exceed 200 sq. ft. 	Wall: shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 
Monument: Five ft. 	(a) Signage shall not be permitted for subtenants unless specifically permitted by an approved sign program. 
 (c) Freestanding Building Individual Tenant Identification (within a commercial center) 	Wall (permanent) 	Yes 	Wall: one sign per building elevation for a maximum of three signs 	Wall: one sq. ft. of sign area per lineal foot of tenant frontage not to exceed 100 sq. ft. per primary tenant 	Wall: shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 	(a) The combined area of all signs shall not exceed one sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage. 
(b) Signs shall not be located closer than two feet from any edge of the building. 
(c) Monument signs shall not be located within 100 ft. of any other monument sign. 
(d) Signage shall not be permitted for subtenants unless specifically permitted by an approved sign program. 
(e) Restaurants may be permitted one sign per elevation, not to exceed four signs total. 
(d) Individual Tenant Identification 	Wall, or hanging (permanent) 	Yes 	One sign per building elevation for a maximum of three signs 	One sq. ft. of sign area per lineal foot of tenant frontage not to exceed an aggregate total of 100 sq. ft. per primary tenant 	Shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 	(a) Signs shall be aligned evenly along facade unless architectural design dictates otherwise. 
(b) Signs shall not be located closer than two feet from any edge of the building. 
(c) Hanging signs shall have a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet. 
(d) Signage shall not be permitted for subtenants unless specifically permitted by an approved sign program. 
(e) Business Directory 
(1) Pedestrian Oriented 	Wall (permanent) 	Yes 	Two 	Ten sq. ft. 	Wall: Three ft. 	(a) Copy limited to name and location of on-site activities 
(2) Vehicle-Oriented 	Monument (permanent) 	Yes 	Minimum number necessary to provide adequate information and direction 	25 sq. ft. 	Five ft. 	(a) Copy limited to name and location of on-site activities 
(b) Monument shall only be located within landscaped planters internal to the center. 
(c) Monument signs shall not be located within 100 ft. of any other monument sign. 
(d) Placement shall be permitted on private property only with consent of property owner. 
3. Gas and Fuel Dispensing Station Identification and Pricing Information 	Wall or monument (permanent) 	Yes 	One monument sign per street frontage not to exceed two per site 	Wall: One sq. ft. of sign area per building frontage regardless of the number of uses. 
Monument: 50 sq. ft. 	Wall: Shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 
Monument: Five ft. 	(a) The total area for all signs on the premises shall not exceed 300 sq. ft. 
(b) Banners, flags, pennants, and similar advertising devices/advertising displays are prohibited on any service station building site. 
(c) Price signs are allowed in accordance with State regulations. 
4. Movie Theater Identification and Marquee Sign 	Wall, Monument, or marquee (permanent) 	Yes 	As determined by sign program 	All movie theater signage requires the approval of the Planning Commission. 
5. Drive Thru Restaurant Menu Board 	Wall or monument (permanent) 	Yes 	Wall: one sign per building 
Monument: two signs per drive thru aisle 	30 sq. ft. 	Wall: shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 
Monument: Five ft. 	Menu boards shall not be visible from a public right-of-way. 
6. Any other sign described in Table 9.07.6. 
 
Table 9.07.5 
Permanent Signs Permitted in Business Park District 
Class 	Type 	Permit 

Required 	Maximum 

Number 	Maximum 

Area 	Maximum 

Height 	Additional 

Standards 
1. Center or Project Identification (multi-tenant office building and/or multi-building office complex) 	Monument 	Yes 	One sign per street frontage 	50 sq. ft. per sign 	Five ft. 	(a) Shall contain the name and/or logo of the center of project and street address. May also contain tenant names 
(b) Center or project identification sign permitted in addition to multi-tenant office business identification signs 
(c) Signage shall not be permitted for subtenants unless specifically permitted by an approved Sign Program 
2. Office Business Identification (three stories or less) 	Wall (permanent) 	Yes 	One sign per building elevation for a maximum of three signs on ground floor. Two signs per building elevation for second floor 	One sq. ft. of sign area per lineal ft. of tenant frontage not to exceed an aggregate total of 100 sq. ft. per primary tenant 	Shall not exceed the eave line or parapet of the building 	(a) Shall be permitted in addition to center or project identification sign 
(b) Signs shall not be located closer than two feet from any edge of the building 
(c) One sign shall be centered on the elevation or shall be placed on the opposite end of the building 
(d) Signage shall not be permitted for subtenants unless specifically permitted by an approved Sign Program 
3. Any other sign described in Table 9.07.6. 
 
Table 9.07.6 
Signs Permitted in All Districts 
Class 	Type 	Permit 

Required 	Maximum 

Number 	Maximum 

Area 	Maximum 

Height 	Additional 

Standards 
1. Real Estate—Commercial or Business Park Leasing or Sales (for residential real estate signs, please see signs permitted in residential districts) 	Wall or monument (temporary) 	Yes 	One sign per street frontage 	16 sq. ft. 	Monument: Five ft. 	(a) Copy shall pertain only to the sale, rent or lease of the building or property. 
(b) For alternative sign, see future facility sign. 
(c) Shall be located within a landscaped planter at least 25 feet from any permanent sign. 
(d) Shall be removed within ten days in the event that the building or center is 100 percent occupied or leased. 
(e) Permit shall not be valid for longer than 364 days within any calendar year. 
(f) Real estate signage may be permitted for buildings with no street frontage provided the building is part of an integrated commercial center. Such signage shall adhere to the same standards within this sign class. 
2. Temporary Signs for Businesses Impacted by Construction Projects, Road Widenings, and Remodels 	Monument or fence (temporary) 	Yes 	One sign per street frontage per impacted business 	16 sq. ft. 	Monument: Five ft. 
Fence: shall not exceed top of construction fence 	(a) Copy limited to business name, project name, and street address. Copy must include 24-hour emergency contact information, including phone numbers. 
(b) May be erected when construction begins. 
(c) Shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
(d) Sign must be constructed professionally and shall not be hand-painted or hand-drawn. 
(e) Sign program must be provided indicating all temporary signage proposed. 
3. Future Facility 	Wall or monument (temporary) 	Yes 	One per building or street frontage 	50 sq. ft. 	Monument: Eight ft. 	(a) Buildings that are already constructed and which are granted a change in use may be issued a future facility sign permit after issuance of a building permit. 
(b) Sign shall be removed prior to occupancy of 50 percent of the building on the subject site or within six months of the first occupancy, whichever comes first. 
(c) Copy may include sales or leasing information in lieu of real estate sign. May also contain name of architect or engineer. 
4. Directional 	Wall or monument (permanent) 	No 	Minimum number necessary to provide adequate information and direction 	Six sq. ft. 	Wall: shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building. 
Monument: Four ft. 	(a) Copy limited to information, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," and other similar activities. 
(b) Signs shall be designed to be viewed on-site by pedestrians and/or motorists. 
5. Campaign Sign 	Temporary 	No 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	Locational requirements: 
 (1) Shall not be posted and left behind in the public right-of-way or upon any City property. 
 (2) Shall not be affixed to any traffic signal, utility box, or traffic control device. 
 (3) Shall be placed so that the top of the sign is not above the eave or parapet of the building. 
 (4) Shall be placed so that the edge of the sign is at least two feet from the edge of the curb of street where there is no curb. 
 (5) Shall not impede pedestrian walkways, hinder disabled access or constitute a hazard to or endanger persons using sidewalks. 
 (6) Shall not be located in any area which the City Engineer, acting pursuant to generally accepted engineering standards, determines that such sign would constitute a safety or traffic hazard. 
 (7) Shall not be placed upon the property of another without the approval of the owner of said property. Signs placed upon the property of another shall be removed by the person or organization responsible for the sign promptly upon the request of the property owner. 
Design requirements: 
 (1) Shall not be animated, revolve, rotate, move mechanically, flash, reflect, or blink. 
 (2) Shall not have flags, kites, valances, pennants, flood, laser or search lights, or other similar attraction devices. 
 (3) Shall display the name, address and telephone number of the person or organization responsible for the sign. 
						Removal requirements: 
 (1) Shall be removed on or before three days after the election to which the sign pertains. 
 (2) In addition to all other remedies available to the City pursuant to this Chapter, the Municipal Code, or other applicable law, any sign illegally posted and left behind on City property or in the public right-of-way may be removed and stored by the City (a) following the expiration of four hours after providing oral, telephonic, or written notice to the person or organization responsible for the sign and such sign has not been voluntarily removed by the responsible person or organization; or (b) immediately, (i) if such sign was previously removed by the City from City property or the public right-of-way, and it is thereafter replaced on City property or the public right-of-way; or (ii) if the name, address and telephone number of the person or organization responsible for the sign is not displayed on the sign and the City is not otherwise able to determine the person or organization responsible for the sign; or (iii) if the sign has been posted and left behind in a manner that constitutes an immediate threat to public safety or is determined to be a traffic hazard. If any such sign so removed is not claimed and retrieved by the responsible person or organization within 30 days, the City may discard the sign. 
6. Public or Institutional Facility Identification 	Wall or monument(permanent) 	Yes 	Wall; one sign per building elevation for a maximum of three signs. 
Monument: one per street frontage 	Wall: one sq. ft. per lineal foot of tenant frontage not to exceed an aggregate total of 100 sq. ft. per public facility. 
Monument: 50 sq. ft. per sign. 	Wall or canopy: shall not exceed eave line or parapet of the building. 
Monument: Five ft. 	(a) Signs shall not be located closer than two feet from any edge of the building. 
7. Travel Directory Sign 	Subject to Planning Commission review and approval of a Sign Program. 	None 
8. Public right-of-way signs for public facilities 	Subject to Encroachment Permit review and approval of the City Engineer. 	None 
9. Community facility banner 	Banner sign (temporary) 	Yes 	As determined by the Development Services Director. 	24 sq. ft. 	Six ft. 	(a) Community facility banners are permitted primarily for advertising for registration for community facility events. 
(b) Temporary banners shall be allowed for a maximum period of ten days subject to the approval of a temporary banner permit. 
(c) A maximum of three temporary banner permits shall be issued to the same business or tenant at the same location in any calendar year. 
(d) A copy of the City-approved temporary banner permit shall be kept on-site at all times and the City banner seal must be on the banner. 
(e) Appropriate locations shall be determined by the Development Services Director. 
 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 10, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, § 9, 3-25-2009; Ord. No. 14-01, § 3, 4-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections (1) and (2). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (a) and (b).  
Chapter 9.08 - Administration 
 
Sec. 9.08.010. - Consistency with the General Plan. 
(a)  Consistency requirements. The State Government Code requires that all City zoning codes, zone changes, subdivisions, and public works projects be consistent with the City's General Plan. No public or private development project shall be approved which is inconsistent with the City's General Plan. This Section sets forth procedures for determining the consistency of proposed projects with the General Plan. 
(b)  Procedures for determining consistency. 
(1)  The Development Services Director shall make a preliminary finding whether a proposed zone change, subdivision, or other land use or development application is consistent with the General Plan. This finding shall be considered by the applicable decision-making authority when the proposal is scheduled for normal development application processing for approval or denial. The appropriate decision-making authority shall make a final determination of General Plan consistency prior to or concurrent with approval or denial of the application in question. 
(2)  In all cases, if the final decision-making authority finds that a proposal is not consistent with the General Plan, the proposal shall be denied. 
(3)  Determinations regarding General Plan consistency may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.08.100. 
(c)  Criteria for determining consistency. The Development Services Director or the applicable decision-making authority shall utilize the following criteria in determining whether a proposed project is consistent with the General Plan: 
(1)  The proposal is compatible with the goals, policies, programs, and land uses of applicable elements of the General Plan. In order to satisfy this criterion, a proposal must meet the overall intent of such goals and policies. 
(2)  The base zoning district required to accommodate the proposal is consistent with the applicable General Plan land use designation shown on the General Plan land use policy map. Such zoning consistency shall be determined by consulting the zoning consistency matrix (Table 9.03.1) which depicts which zoning districts are consistent with the various General Plan designations. 
(3)  For residential projects, the number of project dwelling units is consistent with the density allowed by the General Plan land use designation. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.020. - Maximum density and floor area ratio (FAR). 
The maximum residential density for a specific property is designated on the General Plan Land Use Policy Map. The actual density, net dwelling units and floor area ratio (FAR) may be less than the maximum designated on the General Plan in order to meet the development standards of Chapter 9.03 and other applicable regulations. The City Council has the final authority, through the administration of this Title, to determine the appropriate density and FAR for each site. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.030. - General procedures. 
All development proposals may be subject to one or more development application processing procedures contained in this Chapter. The exact application processing procedures that apply to a specific project will be determined by the Development Services Director based on the project characteristics. Table 9.08.1 outlines the primary types of development applications and review procedures. 
Table 9.08.1
Application Types, Review Bodies and Responsibilities 
	Planning 
Director 	Planning Commission 	City Council 
Type of 
Application 	Authority to Approve 
or Deny 	Authority to Approve 
or Deny 	Advisory to City 
Council Only 	Public Hearing 
Required 	Final Authority/ 
Public Hearing 
Required 
Accessory dwelling unit 	X 				
Alternative development standards 		X 		X 	
Amendment of the Zoning Code text 1 and change of zone district 			X 	X 	X 
Annexation 			X 	X 	X 
Appeal 		X 4 		X 4 	X 4 
Conditional use permit 		X 		X 	
Development agreement 			X 	X 	X 
Home occupation permit 	X 				
Landscape plan review 	X 				
Lot line adjustment 	X 				
Tentative parcel map 		X 		X 	
Final parcel map 					X 5 
Sign permit 	X 				
Sign program 		X 			
Site development permit 	X 2 	X 3 			
Special event permit 	X 				
Specific plan 			X 	X 	X 
Temporary use permit 	X 				
Tentative tract map 		X 		X 	
Final tract map 					X 5 
Variance 		X 		X 	
 
Notes: 
1. May be submitted by city staff, Planning Commission or City Council only. 
2. When an application for a site development permit proposes a building addition that would increase by ten percent or less the gross square feet of non-residential building area approved on the original site development permit, up to a maximum of 6,500 square feet, or which involves temporary uses and structures and not performed in conjunction with another discretionary permit review that requires action by the Planning Commission. 
3. When an application for a site development permit proposes a building addition that would increase by more than ten percent of the gross square feet approved on the original site development permit non-residential building area, or any increase above 6,500 square feet, and/or performed in conjunction with another discretionary permit review that requires action by the Planning Commission. A site development permit alone does not require a public hearing. 
4. The Planning Commission is board of appeals for Development Services Director decisions, and its decision on the appeal is final. A Planning Commission public hearing is required only when the original application required a public hearing. The City Council is board of appeals for Planning Commission decisions, and its decision on the appeal is final. 
5. No public hearing required. Consent calendar item on City Council agenda. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 16-03, § 4, 4-13-2016; Ord. No. 18-01, § 12, 2-14-2018)  
Sec. 9.08.040. - Administrative approvals. 
(a)  Authority of the Development Services Director. The Development Services Director has the authority to approve or deny the following applications, subject to specific findings and procedures, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Amateur radio antennas in compliance with the provisions of Section 9.4.020(g); 
(2)  Building additions not to exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the non-residential building area approved on the original site development permit, up to a maximum of 6,500 square feet, or involves temporary uses and structures. A finding of consistency with the existing building architectural style, materials, colors, and other provisions of the Code shall be made; 
(3)  Changed plan—Minor. An applicant may initiate a request for a modification of an approved development application upon the submittal of the applicable form, materials, and fees. Minor modifications must be granted in writing by the Development Services Director prior to the issuance of a building permit for any changed plans. To grant the request, the Development Services Director must find that the requested modification is substantially in compliance with the original approval plans, and conditions shall be limited to the following: 
a.  A modification that involves ten percent or less of the building area or project site area, up to a maximum of 6,500 square feet; or 
b.  A modification that involves minor changes in color, material, signage, design, landscape material, or parking or driveway orientation; or 
c.  A modification that involves minor design changes that represent improvements to previous engineering, site design, or building practices provided the request does not change the character of the project or result in negative impacts to adjoining properties, drainage facilities, or rights-of-way. 
All modifications that do not meet the criteria in Subsections a., b., and c. above shall be considered major changes and shall be subject to the same review procedures established for the original development review application. 
(4)  Color changes, windows, and door relocation and/or additions that are compatible with the existing building architectural style; 
(5)  Exterior lighting as permitted in individual zoning districts in compliance with the provisions of Section 9.05.080; 
(6)  Fences exceeding six feet in height in compliance with the provisions of Section 9.04.070; 
(7)  Home occupation permit applications which comply with the provisions of Section 9.05.230; 
(8)  Outdoor display of merchandise and product display for an existing building that complies with the provisions under Sections 9.04.110 and 9.05.110; 
(9)  Outdoor storage as permitted in individual zoning districts in compliance with the provisions under Section 9.04.110; 
(10)  Roof eaves and gables on accessory structures in excess of 12 inches, measured from the vertical side of the unit, in compliance with Section 9.04.020; and 
(11)  Sign permit applications in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 9.07; and 
(12)  Any other items delegated to the Development Services Director for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 09-03, § 10, 3-25-2009; Ord. No. 16-03, § 5, 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 9.08.050. - Alternative development standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The development standards of this Title may be modified by the Planning Commission to permit development on property that is constrained due to lot size, shape, location, access restrictions, or other constraints. alternative development standards are intended to be used only when deviations from the standards in this Code are truly minor and no potential negative impact associated with the health, safety, and welfare of adjacent persons or properties will occur. 
(b)  Applicability. Once an alternative development standard has been approved for a project, another alternative development standard of the same type (e.g., parking requirements, height, setbacks) may not be granted. More specifically, if one alternative development standard is granted for a certain standard, any future change to that same standard that is not in conformance with the requirements of this Zoning Code shall require a variance. 
Additionally, after the first certificate of use and occupancy of an individual residential dwelling unit has been issued, the site development standards contained within this Title shall apply to that dwelling unit and shall only be modified subject to the variance procedure contained in Section 9.08.210. No alternative development standard may be granted for any residential dwelling unit after the first certificate of use and occupancy has been issued. 
(c)  Decision-making authority. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for an alternative development standard pursuant to the following limitations: 
(1)  Reduction by not more than ten percent of the required lot area, minimum floor area, and setback standard identified in the Code. Where ten percent is less than one foot, up to a one foot variation from the original standard may be allowed. 
Notwithstanding, nothing in this provision prevents the Development Services Director from having the discretion to approve minor deviations of up to 20 percent encroachment within the rear setback area of residential developments. 
(2)  Increases in the height of both retaining and non-retaining side or rear yard fences, walls, or hedges by not more than one foot over the maximum permitted height. No alternative development standard may be granted for any fence, wall, or hedge that is located in the required front yard setback. 
(3)  Increases in non-residential building height for architectural features by not more than ten feet in excess of the permitted building height. 
(4)  Variations from landscaping and screening requirements if the project design or improvement is in substantial compliance with the intent of Sections 9.05.070 and 9.08.140. 
(5)  Variations from sign standards and regulations if the sign is in substantial compliance with the intent of Chapter 9.07. 
(6)  Variations from the parking standards and regulations by not more than ten percent of the standard outlined in the Chapter 9.06. 
(d)  Alternative development standard process. Figure 9.08.1 illustrates the process described below: 
(1)  An application shall be filed with the Development Services Director. 
(2)  The Development Services Director shall review the application and shall determine whether the application is complete and whether the proposal qualifies as an alternative development standard within 30 days of the application date. If the application does not qualify as an alternative development standard request, the Development Services Director shall notify the applicant, and the application is considered withdrawn. 
(3)  If the application qualifies as an alternative development standard request and is deemed complete, the Development Services Department and other relevant City departments shall evaluate the request, and a public hearing with the Planning Commission shall be held pursuant to the public hearing procedures established in Section 9.08.150. 
(4)  Written notice of the alternative development standard request shall be provided to owners of adjacent and abutting properties at least ten days prior to the public hearing as contained in Section 9.08.150. 
(5)  Appeal of the Planning Commission's decision may be made pursuant to Section 9.08.100. 
(e)  Findings required. Approval of an alternative development standard shall require the following findings by the Planning Commission: 
(1)  That the proposed alternative development standard will better serve the public interest by the establishment of the proposed alternative development standard; 
(2)  That the proposed alternative development standard will be consistent with the objectives, policies and general land uses and programs specified in the City's General Plan; 
(3)  That the proposed alternative development standard is consistent with other provisions of this Title; 
(4)  That the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed alternative development standard will not create unusual noise, traffic or other conditions or situations that may be objectionable, detrimental, or incompatible with other permitted uses in the vicinity; and 
(5)  That the proposed alternative development standard will not result in conditions or circumstances contrary to the public health and safety and the general welfare. 
(f)  Consistency of working drawings with approved plans. Alternative development standard approval shall pertain only to those plans reviewed and approved with the alternative development standard. Further, all plans approved with an alternative development standard shall be considered an integral part of the alternative development standard approval. The Development Services Director shall ensure that any final working drawings for grading or construction authorized by an alternative development standard approval are consistent with said previously-reviewed plans prior to release of working drawings for plan check. The Development Services Director may approve minor variations from previously-reviewed plans if he/she determines that the original plan concepts are being carried out. If the Development Services Director does not make such a determination, the subject working drawings shall be referred to the decision-making authority for review and action. 
  
 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 08-03, § 6, 8-27-2008)  
Sec. 9.08.060. - Amendment of the General Plan. 
(a)  Authority. Government Code § 65358 allows for amendments and modifications to the City's General Plan. 
(b)  Initiation of amendment. General Plan amendment may be initiated in any one of the following manners as described in Figure 9.08.2: 
(1)  Upon application by a property owner or owners of any parcel subject to the General Plan. 
(2)  The City Council, Planning Commission, or City Manager may also initiate consideration of a proposed General Plan amendment. 
(c)  Frequency of General Plan amendment. Pursuant to Government Code § 65358, no mandatory element of the General Plan may be amended more frequently than four times during any calendar year. Subject to that limitation, an amendment may be made at any time and may include more than one change to the General Plan. 
(d)  Proceedings. Applications for a General Plan amendment shall be processed in accordance with the standard processing provisions of this Chapter and as depicted in Figure 9.08.2. The following additional standards also apply: 
(1)  Planning Commission recommendation. The Planning Commission recommendation to City Council on all General Plan text and/or map amendment applications shall be in the form of an adopted Resolution recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the application. 
(2)  Major modifications. If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to the General Plan amendment not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for consideration. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 45 days of receiving the City Council's request shall be considered a Planning Commission recommendation for approval and the City Council may act without their recommendation. 
(e)  Required findings for General Plan amendment. In acting to approve an amendment to the General Plan, the City Council shall be required to make the following findings: 
(1)  That the proposed General Plan amendment is consistent with all other goals, policies, programs, and land uses of applicable elements of the General Plan; 
(2)  That the proposed General Plan amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties or the surrounding environment; 
(3)  That the proposed General Plan amendment promotes public health, safety, and general welfare and serves the goals and purposes of this Title; and 
(4)  That the proposed Amendment will not conflict with provisions of this Title, including the City's subdivision regulations. 
(f)  Action/adoption. Adoption of the General Plan amendment shall be by Resolution of the City Council and shall constitute final action and approval of the amendment. 
 
Figure 9.08.2 Process for Amendment of the General Plan 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.070. - Zoning code map amendment/change of zone district. 
(a)  Purpose. Government Code § 65853 allows changes to the zoning district on any parcel(s) within the City. This Section identifies the process required for changes to the official zoning map. 
(b)  Initiation of amendment. Amendments to the official zoning map may be initiated by any of the following as described in Figure 9.08.3: 
(1)  For a given parcel, by the recorded owner of that parcel or the owner's authorized agent; or 
(2)  The City Council, Planning Commission, City Manager, or other interested parties may also initiate consideration of a proposed change of a zoning district. 
(c)  Proceedings. Applications for a Zoning Code map amendment shall be processed in accordance with the standard processing provisions of this Chapter and the process illustrated in Figure 9.08.3. 
(1)  Applications for zone changes may be filed with the Development Services Department. The Development Services Director shall prescribe the form of application and the supporting information required to initiate the Zoning Code map amendment. 
(2)  Once an application is received by the Development Services Department, the application will be reviewed for completeness. If the Development Services Director finds the application to be complete, then the application shall be processed per the process described in Figure 9.08.3. If the application is found to be incomplete, the Development Services Director will notify the applicant in writing within 30 days what additional information is required, and the application will not be processed until that information is received by the Development Services Department. 
(3)  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the application. The Planning Commission recommendation to City Council on all Zoning Code map amendment applications shall be in the form of an adopted Resolution recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the application. All Planning Commission Resolutions regarding a Zoning Code map amendment shall be forwarded to the City Council. 
(4)  The City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the application and the Planning Commission's Resolution. The City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application. If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for consideration. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 45 days of receiving the City Council's request shall be considered a Planning Commission recommendation for approval and the City Council may act without their recommendation. 
   

Figure 9.08.3 Process for Zoning Code Map Amend./Change of Zoning District 
(d)  Required findings. In acting to approve an amendment to the Zoning Code map, the City Council shall be required to make the following findings: 
(1)  That the proposed Zoning Code map amendment is consistent with the goals, policies, programs, and land uses of applicable elements of the General Plan; 
(2)  That the proposed Zoning Code map amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties or the surrounding environment; and 
(3)  That the proposed Zoning Code map amendment promotes public health, safety, and general welfare and serves the goals and purposes of this Title. 
(e)  Adoption. Zoning Code map amendments shall be adopted by Ordinance of the City Council, which constitutes final action. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2—4, 11-14-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-07, § 4, adopted November 14, 2007, changed the title of § 9.08.070 from "Zoning ordinance map amendment/change of zone district" to "Zoning code map amendment/change of zone district."  
Sec. 9.08.080. - Zoning code text amendment. 
(a)  Purpose. Government Code § 65853 allows amendments to any provisions of this Title, including the adoption of new regulations or deletion of existing regulations. 
(b)  Initiation of amendment. Amendments to the provisions of this Title may be initiated in any one of the following manners as described in Figure 9.08.4: 
(1)  Upon direction of the City Council or Planning Commission; or 
(2)  Upon recommendation of the City Manager. 
(c)  Proceedings. 
(1)  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Section 9.08.150 to consider the amendment. The Planning Commission recommendation to City Council on all Zoning Code text amendment applications shall be in the form of an adopted Resolution recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the application. 
(2)  The City Council shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Section 9.08.150 to consider the application and the Planning Commission's Resolution. The City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application. If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for consideration. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 45 days of receiving the City Council's request shall be considered a Planning Commission recommendation for approval and the City Council may act without their recommendation. 
   

Figure 9.08.04 Process for Zoning Text Amendment 
(d)  Required findings for Zoning Code text amendment. In acting to approve an amendment to the Zoning Code text, the City Council shall be required to make the following findings: 
(1)  That the proposed Zoning Code text amendment is consistent with the goals, policies, programs, and land uses of applicable elements of the General Plan; 
(2)  That the proposed Zoning Code text amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties or the surrounding environment; and 
(3)  That the proposed Zoning Code text amendment promotes public health, safety, and general welfare and serves the goals and purposes of this Title. 
(e)  Adoption. Zoning Code text amendments shall be adopted by Ordinance of the City Council, which constitutes final action. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 4, 11-14-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-07, § 4, adopted November 14, 2007, changed the title of § 9.08.080 from "Zoning ordinance text amendment" to "Zoning code text amendment."  
Sec. 9.08.090. - Annexation and pre-zoning. 
(a)  Procedure. 
(1)  Prior to City Council adoption of a Resolution of intention to annex uninhabited territory or a Resolution of consent to commence annexation of inhabited territory proceedings, the City Council shall request a report from the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider the desirability of annexing the territory and the zoning (prezoning prior to annexation) to be placed thereon in the event of annexation to the City. Upon completion of such consideration, the Planning Commission shall, after holding a public hearing, make its report and recommendation to the City Council (Figure 9.08.5). 
(2)  Upon receipt of the Planning Commission report, the City Council may accept in whole or in part or reject, modify or amend any recommendation as to pre-zoning classification and the Resolution of Intention or Resolution of Consent shall specify the proposed pre-zoning classification for the territory as the City Council determines. The City Council shall include any such pre-zone classification consideration within any notice of hearing concerning the annexation of the property involved, and a hearing on the matter of the proposed pre-zoning classification shall be held in conjunction with any public hearing required by law to be held by the City Council in connection with the annexation proceeding. 
(3)  Concurrently with final annexation of the territory, the City Council may, by Ordinance, classify the property for zoning purposes in accordance with its determination made in Subsection (a)(2). 
(b)  Temporary classification. In the event the City Council does not determine or adopt a zoning classification for the territory to be annexed as provided in Subsections (a)(2) and (3), the territory shall be classified in the future planned community (FPC) zone until a change is initiated and adopted. 
   

Figure 9.08.5 Process for Annexation and Pre-Zoning 
(c)  Pre-zoning prior to annexation procedures. 
(1)  Introduction. The City, by Ordinance, may pre-zone certain contiguous areas outside the City which, in the opinion of the City Council, bear relationship to the General Plan and sphere of influence. When pre-zoning maps of properties outside the incorporated area have been adopted by Ordinance, any such territory, upon becoming a part of the City, shall possess the classification indicated on the detailed pre-zoning map. Such pre-zoning maps shall then become a part of the official zoning map of the City, and the subject properties shall thereafter be subject to all the provisions of this Title. 
(2)  Decision-making authority. The City Council may amend the official zoning map to pre-zone certain contiguous areas outside the City which, in the opinion of the City Council bear relationship to the General Plan and sphere of influence, prior to annexation by adoption of an amending Ordinance in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section. 
(3)  Initiation of application. Consideration of pre-zoning certain contiguous areas outside the City prior to annexation, may be initiated for a given parcel by the City Council or by the record owner of that parcel or the owner's authorized agent. 
Applications for pre-zoning may be filed with the Development Services Director. The Development Services Director shall prescribe the form of application and the supporting information required to initiate both environmental review (pursuant to Section 9.08.220) and the pre-zoning application review. Once an application is received by the Development Services Director, the application will be reviewed for completeness. 
If the Development Services Director finds the application to be complete, then the application shall be processed in accordance to the procedure described herein. If the application is found to be incomplete, the Development Services Director will notify the applicant in writing within 30 days what additional information is required, and the application will not be processed until that information is received by the Development Services Director. 
Pre-zoning applications shall be considered only if found consistent with the City's General Plan in accordance with Section 9.08.010 and Table 9.03.1 zoning consistency matrix found in Chapter 9.03. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.100. - Appeal of decision. 
(a)  Introduction and purpose. With the exception of the City Council, all decisions by City commissions, boards, committees, staff, or other City bodies regulated by this Title where authority has been granted to take a final action or decision regulated by this Chapter are subject to appeal. This Section describes the appeals process. 
(b)  Who may initiate an appeal. An applicant, any resident of the City, any owner of real property in the City, or a tenant or leaseholder of property which is located adjacent to/or within 300 feet of the property boundaries of the application being appealed, or an individual or entity that may be affected by the decision on the application may file an appeal. The filing of a valid appeal shall stay all further actions/decisions on the matter being appealed. 
(c)  Time period for submission of appeal. An appeal shall be filed in writing within 15 calendar days following an action or decision by a City commission, board, committees, staff or other City body other than the City Council. No appeal shall be accepted after the appeal period has expired. 
(d)  Required documents. Each appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Development Services Director. Each appeal shall be accompanied by the applicable appeal fee and such other documents and information as the Development Services Director deems necessary to adequately explain and to provide proper notification of the appeal. Each appeal shall set forth specifically and in detail the grounds for the appeal. The Board of Appeals may refuse to consider issues not raised in the written appeal. 
(e)  Board of appeals. 
(1)  The Planning Commission shall constitute the Board of Appeals for decisions by the Development Services Director. The Planning Commission's decisions on such appeals shall be final. 
(2)  The City Council shall constitute the Board of Appeals for decisions by the Planning Commission. Only matters originally heard by the Planning Commission shall be appealable to the City Council. Appeals heard and decided by the Planning Commission are not appealable to the City Council. 
(f)  Process. Figure 9.08.6 illustrates the process described below: 
(1)  Each petitioner for an appeal shall submit information deemed necessary to complete the review and consideration of the appeal as described in Subsection 9.08.100(d). The Development Services Director shall prescribe the type and form of information required and shall ensure that it is of sufficient detail to allow adequate analysis of each appeal. 
(2)  Once an appeal is received by the Development Services Director, the appeal application will be reviewed for completeness. 
(3)  If the Development Services Director finds the application to be complete, then the application will be processed no later than 45 days after the Development Services Director has accepted the appeal as complete according to the procedure described in Figure 9.08.6. 
If the application is found to be incomplete, the Development Services Director will notify the applicant in writing within 30 days what additional information is required, and the appeal will not be processed until that information is received by the Development Services Director. 
   

Figure 9.08.6 Process for Appeals 
(4)  Once the appeal has been accepted as complete, the Development Services Director shall forward to the Board of Appeals all documents and information on file pertinent to the appeal, together with the minutes or official action of the approving authority, and a report on the basis of the decision and the appropriateness of the appeal. 
(5)  The Board of Appeals shall consider the appeal at an appropriate meeting or public hearing as described in Subsection 9.08.100(g). 
(6)  The action of the Board of Appeals shall be one or more of the following in compliance with the same procedures and requirements applicable to the approving authority: 
a.  Approve or disapprove the application; 
b.  Add, modify, or delete conditions; 
c.  Approve a modified application; or 
d.  Refer the application back to the approving authority with directions for action by the approving authority or for recommendations or reports to the Board of Appeals. 
(g)  Public hearing requirements. The appeal of an approving authority's determination that required a public hearing shall also require a public hearing. Notice and schedule requirements for an appeal hearing shall be identical as those for the original hearing. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.110. - Conditional use permit. 
(a)  Introduction. Chapter 9.03 contains listings of land uses that are permitted within the different zoning districts upon approval of a conditional use permit. Such uses require approval of a conditional use permit for their establishment because, although deemed consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning district, they typically have characteristics that require special regulation in order to avoid or minimize potential adverse impacts on surrounding properties. 
(b)  Listings of conditional uses. Only those uses listed in the zoning district regulations of Chapter 9.03 as conditional uses or those uses added to such listing as described in Section 9.03.050 may be approved within a given zoning district by means of a conditional use permit. 
(c)  Decision-making authority. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve, deny, or approve with conditions those applications for a conditional use permit as specified in Subsection 9.01.030(e). 
(d)  Initiation of application. Applications for conditional use permits may be filed with the Development Services Department by a recorded owner of the property in question or by the owner's authorized agent. The Development Services Director shall prescribe the form of application and the supporting information required to initiate both environmental review (pursuant to Section 9.08.220) and the conditional use permit application review. 
(e)  Conditional use permit process. Conditional use permit applications shall be processed in accordance with the procedure depicted in Figure 9.08.7. Once an application is received by the Development Services Director, the application will be reviewed for completeness. If the Development Services Director finds the application to be complete, then the application shall be processed in accordance with the process illustrated in Figure 9.08.7. If the application is found to be incomplete, the Development Services Director will notify the applicant in writing within 30 days what additional information is required, and the application will not be processed until that information is received by the Development Services Department. 
(f)  Findings and conditions of approval. 
(1)  The following findings must be made prior to approval of a conditional use permit: 
a.  That the use proposed conditional use permit will be consistent with the objectives, policies and general land uses and programs specified in the City's General Plan; 
b.  That the proposed conditional use permit is consistent with the provisions of this Title; 
c.  That the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed conditional use permit will not create unusual noise, traffic or other conditions or situations that may be objectionable, detrimental, or incompatible with other permitted uses in the vicinity; and 
d.  That the proposed conditional use permit will not result in conditions or circumstances contrary to the public health and safety and the general welfare. 
(2)  In order to mitigate the possible adverse impact of a proposed project on surrounding properties and to ensure overall consistency of the use with the Zoning Code and the General Plan, specific conditions may be imposed on any conditional use permit approval. 
(g)  Establishment of use. Conditional use permits, when approved, authorize the establishment and operation of a particular land use at a particular location. The project must be established at the approved location within one year of the final approval of the conditional use permit unless extended by the Planning Commission or City Council for up to one additional year. Additional conditions may be imposed on a conditional use permit in conjunction with a time extension. Such establishment shall consist of the satisfaction of all relevant conditional use permit conditions of approval and one of the following three actions: 
(1)  The issuance of a building permit for new construction (if said permit expires, approval of conditional use permit shall become null and void); 
(2)  The issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the establishment of a comparable project in an existing structure; or 
(3)  The commencement of operation of the comparable project in cases where no construction or existing structure is involved. 
If the preceding requirements are not met within one year of final conditional use permit approval unless otherwise extended by the Planning Commission or City Council, the conditional use permit shall be null and void. 
(h)  Consistency of working drawings with approved plans. A conditional use permit approval shall pertain only to those plans reviewed and approved with the conditional use permit. Further, all plans approved with a conditional use permit shall be considered an integral part of the conditional use permit approval. The Development Services Director shall ensure that any final working drawings for grading or construction authorized by a conditional use permit approval are consistent with said previously-reviewed plans prior to release of working drawings for plan check. The Development Services Director may approve minor variations from previously-reviewed plans if he/she determines that the original plan concepts are being carried out. If the Development Services Director does not make such a determination, the subject working drawings shall be referred to the decision-making authority for review and action. 
The Planning Commission may extend the time period for meeting the preceding requirements for establishment of the use up to one additional year. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to action on such a time extension. 
Additional conditions may be imposed on a conditional use permit in conjunction with a time extension. However, such new conditions may only be imposed following a public hearing to receive testimony on the proposed additional conditions. 
(i)  Discontinuance of conditional use. Whenever any use of land, building or premises established under a conditional use permit is discontinued for a cumulative period of 90 days within a one-year period, it shall be unlawful to reestablish such use unless a new conditional use permit is approved in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
(j)  Appeals. Decisions on conditional use permit applications may be appealed to the City Council by the applicant or other interested party in accordance with Section 9.08.100. 
(k)  Revocation. A conditional use permit may be revoked or modified (including the imposition of additional conditions) by the approving body upon finding by said authority that the conditions of approval of the conditional use permit have not been met or that the land use is being operated in violation of other provisions of this Title. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 9.08.150 prior to action on revocation or modification. The Development Services Director may schedule such a hearing upon his or her preliminary finding of noncompliance with any of the preceding requirements. 
   

Figure 9.08.7 Process for Conditional Use Permit 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2—4, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.120. - Density bonus process. 
Density bonus applications shall be processed per the following requirements and Figure 9.08.8. 
(1)  Application requirements. 
a.  At the time a developer of a proposed housing development seeks a density bonus and an additional regulatory concession per Government Code § 65915, the developer must file a density bonus application with the Development Services Department. 
b.  The density bonus application shall require the following information in addition to the requirements for a public hearing as contained in Section 9.08.150: 
1.  Identification of the kind and number of the targeted units as set forth in Government Code § 65915 under which the proposed housing development qualifies for a density bonus and an additional regulatory concession. The developer shall identify the location of the targeted units. 
2.  The location, acreage, and maximum number of base units allowed under the zoning district and General Plan land use designation. 
3.  Identification of the additional regulatory concession that is requested by the developer and a list of any alternative regulatory concessions that would provide, in the developer's opinion, incentives of equivalent financial value to the concession requested. 
4.  The specific financial information and data relied upon by the developer that establishes the monetary value of the regulatory concessions requested by the developer and a concise statement of how such value was calculated. A clear statement of how the requested additional concession is necessary to make the proposed housing development economically feasible, sufficiently detailed to enable City staff to examine the conclusions reached by the developer. 
5.  Such other pertinent information as the Development Services Director may require to enable the City to adequately analyze the economic feasibility of the proposed housing development with respect to the requested additional concession and other concessions that may be made available. 
(2)  Density bonus application process. 
a.  Applications shall be filed with the Development Services Director. 
b.  Once an application is received by the Development Services Director, the application will be reviewed for completeness. 
1.  If the Development Services Director finds the application to be complete, then the application shall be processed and determinations made at the same time that the underlying housing development application or applications are processed. 
   

Figure 9.08.8 Process for Density Bonus 
2.  If the application is found to be incomplete, the Development Services Director will notify the applicant in writing within 30 days what additional information is required, and the application will not be processed until that information is received by the Director. 
c.  All density bonus applications shall be considered by the Planning Commission at a noticed public hearing. The Planning Commission shall, by Resolution, recommend to the City Council that the application be approved, conditionally approved, approved with changes to the regulatory concessions/incentives, or denied. 
d.  All density bonus applications shall be considered by the City Council at a noticed public hearing. The City Council shall, by resolution, determine all matters with respect to the granting of a density bonus, an additional regulatory concession, or direct financial incentive. The Council shall approve, conditionally approve, approve with changes to the regulatory concessions/incentives, or deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections A. and B. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (1) and (2).  
Sec. 9.08.130. - Development agreement. 
(a)  Introduction. Development agreements are authorized pursuant to Government Code §§ 65864 et seq. as a means of providing both the City and property owners with assurances that development projects can be completed under the terms, conditions, and regulations in effect at the time that authority to proceed with a project is granted. 
(b)  Authority to apply. Pursuant to Government Code § 65865, the City may enter into a development agreement with a property owner or any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of such property. Applications shall be filed with the Development Services Director and all required application fees shall be paid. 
(c)  Agreement contents. 
(1)  All draft and final development agreements shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
a.  The duration of the agreement. 
b.  The permitted uses of the property. 
c.  The density or intensity of permitted uses. 
d.  The maximum height and size of proposed buildings. 
e.  Provisions for reservation or dedication of lands for public purpose. 
f.  Any other information determined by the City to be necessary. 
(2)  The development agreement may also contain the following information: 
a.  Conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided such conditions, terms, provisions, and requirements do not prevent development of land for the purposes and level of use set forth in the agreement. 
b.  Requirements that construction be commenced within a specified time period, and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time frame. 
(d)  Proceedings. 
(1)  Upon receiving a development agreement application, the Development Services Director shall make a determination as to whether the application is complete. If deemed incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant for further information. If deemed complete, the Development Services Director shall review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to complete the agreement. 
(2)  The Development Services Director shall prepare a report outlining facts and recommendations relative to the application. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and City Council and the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing on the application. 
(3)  A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.08.150. 
(4)  At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and may receive evidence as to how or why the proposed development agreement is consistent with the overall objectives of the General Plan and development policies of the City. The Planning Commission shall adopt a Resolution making a recommendation to the City Council. 
(5)  A public hearing before the City Council shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.08.150. 
(6)  At the public hearing, the City Council shall review the application and proposal and may receive evidence as to how or why the proposed development agreement is consistent with the overall objectives the General Plan and development policies of the City. 
(7)  Within 21 days following the close of the public hearing, the City Council shall act to approve, approve in modified form, or deny the application. 
(e)  Findings and decision. 
(1)  Findings required. When acting to approve a development agreement application, or approved in modified form, the City Council shall be required to make the following findings: 
a.  That the agreement is consistent with the goals, policies, general land uses, and programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
b.  That the agreement is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district in which the real property is located; 
c.  That the agreement is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare, and good land use practice; and 
d.  That the agreement will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Adoption by Ordinance. If the City Council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of an Ordinance. After the Ordinance approving the development agreement takes effect, the City may enter into the agreement. 
(f)  Amendment or cancellation. 
(1)  Initiation of amendment or cancellation. Either the City or other parties to a development agreement may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of an agreement approved. 
(2)  Procedure. The procedure for proposing and adopting an amendment to or canceling in whole or in part a development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement as set forth in Subsections (d) and (e). However, when the City initiates the proposed change, at least 30 days prior to the hearing to consider the amendment or cancellation, the City shall give notice to the parties to the agreement of the City's intention to initiate such proceedings. 
(3)  Recordation required. Within ten days after the City enters into a development agreement, the City Clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder. If the parties to the agreement, or their successors in interest, amend or cancel the agreement by mutual consent as provided in Government Code § 65868, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in Government Code § 65865.1 for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder. 
(g)  Periodic review. 
(1)  Time for and initiation of review. The City shall review the development agreement at least once every 12 months from the date of approval. 
(2)  Notice of periodic review. The Development Services Director shall begin the review proceedings by giving notice to the property owner that the City intends to undertake a periodic review of the development agreement. The Director shall give the notice at least ten days in advance of the time at which the matter will be considered by the City. 
(3)  Delegation to Development Services Director. The periodic review provided for in this Subsection shall be conducted by the Development Services Director unless the Development Services Director chooses to pass the matter to the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission decides upon the matter, a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.08.150 shall be held. 
(4)  Burden on property owner. During the annual review of the development agreement, whether administratively through the Development Services Director or through a public hearing before the Planning Commission, the property owner must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue shall be upon the property owner. 
(5)  Findings. The City shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the property owner has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. 
(6)  Procedures upon findings. 
a.  If the City finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period shall be concluded. 
b.  If the City finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the City may modify or terminate the agreement. 
c.  In the course of a public hearing to consider a modification or termination, the City Council may refer the matter back to the Development Services Director or Planning Commission for further proceedings or require a report and recommendation from the Development Services Director or Planning Commission. The City Council may impose conditions to its action as it sees necessary to protect the interests of the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.140. - Landscape plan review. 
(a)  Purpose. This Section establishes a process to encourage high quality landscape design and improvements in the City pursuant to Section 9.05.070. 
(b)  Modification from minimum landscape standards. The Planning Commission may authorize modification to any of the design and improvement standards in this Section pursuant to Section 9.08.050. Such modifications may be granted if the Planning Commission finds that the proposed design or improvement is in substantial compliance with the purpose and intent of this Section. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The minimum standards of this Section shall apply to all new construction, expansion, renovation, conversion, and alteration of existing uses or structures in all zoning districts and land uses. 
(2)  Landscaping requirements shall be provided at the time of commencement of the use of the land or construction of the building, or at the time of renovation, conversion, alteration, or expansion by adding floor area, dwelling units, or rooms to a structure. 
(d)  Landscape plan process. Detailed landscape and irrigation plans shall be required for all development subject to the provisions of Section 9.05.070. Such plans shall be submitted to and approved by the Development Services Director and City Engineer prior to the issuance of building permits. The submittal, review, revision, and approval of all required landscape and irrigation plans shall be in compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  All required landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect. 
(2)  Detailed landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted for review, and approved, by the Development Services Director and City Engineer prior to the issuance of grading permits or building permits, whichever occurs first. 
(3)  Detailed landscape and irrigation plans shall be in substantial compliance with the approved conceptual landscape and irrigation plans. 
(4)  Any modification to an approved detailed landscape or irrigation plan must first be approved by the Development Services Director and City Engineer prior to the installation of the subject landscaping or irrigation. 
(5)  The City Engineer shall be notified at least two workdays prior to commencing the proposed use. Failure to obtain inspection prior to commencing use shall void the permit. 
(e)  Consistency of working drawings with approved plans. A landscape plan approval shall pertain only to those plans reviewed and approved with the landscape plan. Further, all plans approved with a landscape plan shall be considered an integral part of the landscape plan approval. The Development Services Director shall ensure that any final working drawings for grading or construction authorized by a landscape plan approval are consistent with said previously-reviewed plans prior to release of working drawings for plan check. The Development Services Director may approve minor variations from previously-reviewed plans if he/she determines that the original plan concepts are being carried out. If the Development Services Director does not make such a determination, the subject working drawings shall be referred to the decision-making authority for review and action. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.150. - Public hearing procedures. 
(a)  Introduction. Whenever a public hearing is required by provisions of this Title, at least one of the following procedures set forth in Subsections (b), (c), and (d) shall be followed, unless another code, Ordinance, or regulation requires additional public notification requirements. 
(b)  Posting of notice. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and a general description of the area affected and the place where further information on the application may be obtained shall be given at least ten calendar days before the hearing by posting at three public places in the City. Said public places shall be as designated by City Council Resolution. 
(c)  Mailing. Notice containing the information specified in Subsection (b) shall also be given by mail or delivered to the applicant and to any other person who has filed a written request with the City for such notice. 
In addition, in cases where the public hearing concerns a specific parcel or parcels of land, such notice shall be mailed or delivered to the owner(s) of the parcel(s) in question (if different from the applicant) and to all other owners of real property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, within 300 feet of the boundaries, whether public or private. 
(d)  Publication. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and a general description of the area affected and the place where further information on the application may be obtained shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least ten calendar days before the hearing. 
(e)  Alternative publication. Pursuant to Government Code § 65091, in the event that the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed pursuant to Subsection (c) is greater than 1,000, the City may instead provide notice at least ten calendar days before the public hearing by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in a local newspaper. 
(f)  Additional notification. In addition to the preceding methods, the City may give notice of a public hearing by such other methods as it may deem necessary, such as the posting of notices on or near property affected by the subject application or expanding the area of notification beyond 300 feet from the project boundaries to include those areas that may be affected by a development application. 
(g)  Conduct of public hearing. Prior to action on the application, the decision-making body shall hold the public hearing and take testimony in accordance with procedures adopted by said body. The decision-making authority may continue a public hearing to a subsequent meeting provided action on the application is taken within the time periods specified in this Title. If a duly-noticed public hearing is continued from one public meeting to a specific subsequent public meeting, no additional public notice shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.160. - Sign programs. 
(a)  Introduction. The sign regulations in the City are set forth in the Chapter 9.07. A sign program shall be required for all signs located within an integrated center, including individual buildings, building complexes, commercial centers or business parks, and which are not specifically exempt in Chapter 9.07. Said sign program shall be approved prior to the placing, erecting, moving, reconstructing, altering, or displaying of any sign, whether permanent or temporary,. 
(b)  Sign program process. The sign program process is depicted in Figure 9.08.9. 
(1)  Applications for a sign program or sign program amendment shall be filed with the Development Services Director. 
(2)  The Development Services Director shall review the proposed sign program or sign program amendment for consistency with any applicable sign regulations established within Chapter 9.07. 
(3)  If the proposed sign program or sign program amendment is found to be consistent with the requirements of Chapter 9.07, the Development Services Director shall approve the sign program or sign program amendment, or may forward the sign program or sign program amendment to the Planning Commission. If the sign program or sign program amendment is forwarded to the Planning Commission, no public hearing is required, and the Planning Commission's decision is final, unless appealed to the City Council as outlined in Section 9.08.100. 
(4)  If the sign program or sign program amendment is inconsistent with the requirements of Chapter 9.07, the sign program or sign program amendment application must be processed according to Section 9.08.050 (Figure 9.08.1). 
(c)  Findings required. The Development Services Director or Planning Commission may approve and/or modify a sign program as described in this Section in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if the following findings are made: 
(1)  The sign program or sign program amendment is permitted within the zoning district and complies with all applicable provisions of Chapter 9.07 and any other applicable standards. 
(2)  The sign program or sign program amendment is in proper proportion to the structure or site on which it is located and, as an identification device, does not excessively compete for the public's attention. 
(3)  The signs' materials, color, texture, size, shape, height, and placement are harmonious with the design of the structure, property, and neighborhood of which it is a part. 
(4)  The signs' illumination is at the lowest reasonable level as determined by the Development Services Director or Planning Commission, which ensures adequate identification and readability, and is directed solely at the sign or is internal to the sign. 
(5)  The signs are not detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, or welfare. 
(d)  Consistency of working drawings with approved plans. A sign program approval shall pertain only to those plans reviewed and approved with the sign program. Further, all plans approved with a sign program shall be considered an integral part of the sign program approval. The Development Services Director shall ensure that any final working drawings for grading or construction authorized by a sign program approval are consistent with said previously-reviewed plans prior to release of working drawings for plan check. The Development Services Director may approve minor variations from previously-reviewed plans if he/she determines that the original plan concepts are being carried out. If the Development Services Director does not make such a determination, the subject working drawings shall be referred to the decision-making authority for review and action. 
   

Figure 9.08.9 Process for Sign Program or Sign Program Amdmt. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.170. - Site development permit. 
(a)  Introduction. This Section establishes a process to promote superior aesthetics, design compatibility, and high quality site planning. The site development permit process provides for the effective and efficient review of development proposals to ensure compatible and enhanced site and building design throughout the community. Through the site development permit the City can achieve excellence and innovation in the design of development projects. 
(b)  Site development permit required. 
(1)  When no other discretionary permit is required, a site development permit shall be required for all new residential development projects, and non-residential development projects involving new construction, reconstruction, building additions (see Section 9.08.040(a)(2)), or structural or site modifications as defined herein. 
(2)  Modifications: Any person holding a permit granted under this Title may request a changed plan or amendment to that permit. For the purpose of this Section, the modification of a permit may include modification of the terms of the permit itself, project design, or the waiver or alteration of conditions imposed in the granting of the permit. 
(3)  If the Development Services Director determines that a proposed project action is not in substantial conformance with the original approval, the Development Services Director shall notify the property owner of the requirement to submit a site development permit application for consideration and action by the same approving authority as the original permit. 
(4)  The Development Services Director may require that a site development permit be filed for any proposal determined by the Director not to be in clear compliance with General Plan policies and/or this Title as described in Section 9.08.010. 
(c)  Initiation of application. Applications for site development permits may be filed with the Development Services Department by a recorded owner of the property in question or by the owner's authorized agent. The Development Services Director shall prescribe the form of application and the supporting information required to initiate both environmental review (pursuant to Section 9.08.220) and the site development permit application review. 
(d)  Site development permit process. 
(1)  Application for site development permits shall be processed in accordance with Table 9.08.1 and the procedure depicted in Figure 9.08.10. Once an application is received by the Development Services Director, the application will be reviewed for completeness. If the Development Services Director finds the application to be complete, then the application shall be processed in accordance with the process illustrated in Figure 9.08.10. If the application is found to be incomplete, the Development Services Director will notify the applicant in writing within 30 days what additional information is required, and the application will not be processed until that information is received by the Development Services Department. 
(2)  When a site development permit is required in the absence of any other discretionary permit, the Development Services Director or the Planning Commission shall, review and take action upon the application in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  Decision by the Development Services Director. When an application for a site development permit proposes a building addition that would increase by 10 percent or less the gross square feet of non-residential building area approved on the original site development permit, up to a maximum of 6,500 square feet, or which involves temporary uses and structures, the Development Services Director shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the project. All decisions of the Development Services Director are subject to appeal to the Planning Commission, pursuant to Section 9.08.100. The Development Services Director may refer any application for a site development permit to the Planning Commission for consideration. 
b.  Decision by the Planning Commission. When an application for a site development permit proposes a building addition that would increase by more than ten percent of the gross square feet approved on the original site development permit of non-residential building area, or any increase above 6,500 square feet, or any new residential development, the application must be reviewed by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the project. Decisions of the Planning Commission are subject to appeal to the City Council, pursuant to Section 9.08.100. No public hearing is required. 
c.  If a site development permit proposes a development standard different than those identified by this Title for the proposed use or zoning district, such site development permit shall always require a public hearing before the Planning Commission and findings be made pursuant to Section 9.08.050 (Alternative Development Standards). 
d.  If an application for a site development permit proposes a use not specifically identified as permitted by this Title, such site development permit shall be considered by the Planning Commission as described in Section 9.03.050 (Use Determination). 
e.  If a site development permit is processed in conjunction with a conditional use permit, alternative development standard, variance, or other discretionary permit, additional findings may be required. 
(3)  If a site development permit application is submitted in conjunction with another discretionary permit, the Development Services Director shall conduct the review and shall make a recommendation to the Planning Commission. 
(e)  Findings and conditions of approval. 
(1)  The following findings must be made prior to approval of a site development permit: 
a.  In acting to approve a site development permit, the Development Services Director or Planning Commission shall be required to make the following findings: 
b.  That the proposed site development permit will be consistent with the objectives, policies and general land uses and programs specified in the City's General Plan; 
c.  That the proposed site development permit is consistent with the provisions of this Title; 
d.  That the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed site development permit will not create unusual noise, traffic or other conditions or situations that may be objectionable, detrimental, or incompatible with other permitted uses in the vicinity; and 
e.  That the proposed site development permit will not result in conditions or circumstances contrary to the public health and safety and the general welfare. 
(2)  In order to mitigate the possible adverse impact of a proposed project on surrounding properties and to ensure overall consistency of the development project with the Zoning Code and the General Plan, specific conditions may be imposed on any site development permit approval. 
(f)  Establishment of development. Site development permits, when approved, authorize new construction, reconstruction, building additions, or structural or site modifications at a particular location. Projects approved by site development permits must be established at the approved location within the time frame set by the approval authority. Time extensions to establish development may be granted by the Planning Commission. Site development permits shall expire and become null and void if any of the following activities do not occur within the timeframes established by the permit: 
(1)  The issuance of a building permit for new construction (if said building permit expires, approval of site development permit shall become null and void); 
(2)  The issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the establishment of the approved development; or 
(3)  The commencement of operation of the use in cases where no construction or existing structure is involved. 
(g)  Consistency of working drawings with approved plans. A site development permit approval shall pertain only to those plans reviewed and approved with the site development permit. Further, all plans approved with a site development permit shall be considered an integral part of the site development permit approval. The Development Services Director shall ensure that any final working drawings for grading or construction authorized by a site development permit approval are consistent with said previously-reviewed plans prior to release of working drawings for plan check. The Development Services Director may approve minor variations from previously-reviewed plans if he/she determines that the original plan concepts are being carried out. If the Development Services Director does not make such a determination, the subject working drawings shall be referred to the decision-making authority for review and action. 
The Planning Commission may extend the time period for meeting the preceding requirements for establishment of development. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to action on such a time extension. Additional conditions may be imposed on a site development permit in conjunction with a time extension. However, such new conditions may only be imposed following a public hearing to receive testimony on the proposed additional conditions. 
 
Figure 9.8.10 
Process for Site Development Permit 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 16-03, § 3, 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 9.08.180. - Special event permit. 
(a)  Introduction. The permit process for special events are established to allow certain events to take place for limited, defined periods at locations throughout the City, provided the uses are regulated so as to avoid adverse impacts on the communities in which they locate and are subject to the regulations established within Section 9.05.110. To ensure the mitigation of any adverse impact, even though temporary, a special event shall not be held unless the necessary permit has been obtained from the Development Services Department and received clearances from the necessary City departments and other appropriate agencies (e.g., Orange County Fire Authority, Alcoholic Beverage Control, Orange County Health Care Agency, etc.). 
(b)  Special event permit process. 
(1)  An application for a special event permit may be initiated by any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application. The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested interest may also initiate an application. The Development Services Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance of any application. 
(2)  Events involving over 500 people may also require a site development permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.08.180. An application shall be filed pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.08.040. 
(3)  An application for a special event permit shall be submitted no less than 30 days prior to the proposed first day of the event. 
(4)  The special event may not commence until an indemnification agreement is signed by the applicant and submitted to the Development Services Director. The applicant shall also submit any other insurance requirements deemed necessary by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.190. - Specific plan. 
(a)  Introduction. The specific plan provides a means to establish more specific land use regulations and design standards for properties requiring special attention and treatment (see Government Code §§ 65450—65457). A specific plan serves as a policy and regulatory document, with policy direction and project development concepts consistent with the General Plan. 
(b)  Specific plan initiation. The City Council shall identify those portions of the City where a specific plan is appropriate to meet the purposes of this specific plan designation. At the discretion of the City Council, specific plans may be prepared by the City or by persons representing affected property owners (Figure 9.08.11). 
(c)  Specific plan requirements. 
(1)  Relationship to other adopted regulations. Specific plans may either supplement or supersede all land use regulations applicable to the subject property, including all previously adopted ordinances, standards, and guidelines. In the event an inconsistency or conflict exists between standards adopted within a specific plan and comparable provisions of this Title, adopted infrastructure master plans, or development standards, the standards and regulations made part of the specific plan shall prevail. 
(2)  Scope of a specific plan. Each specific plan shall identify specific land uses, standards, and criteria necessary for the development, maintenance, and use of the subject property in compliance with the policies and programs of the General Plan. Each specific plan shall clearly specify how and to what extent the plan is to improve upon, supplement, or supersede any adopted ordinance, regulations, and standards. Where not otherwise specifically referenced and addressed by a specific plan, all adopted ordinances, regulations, standards, and guidelines of the City shall apply. 
(3)  Content. 
a.  In addition to the minimum content requirements specified in Government Code § 65451, the following shall be included in all specific plans: 
1.  Statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the General Plan. 
2.  Policies for development and standards for regulating development within the plan area. 
3.  The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the plan. 
4.  General site design standards and guidelines for all developments. 
5.  The location of and types of streets. 
6.  Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve developments within the plan area. 
7.  Landscaping and parking lot treatments. 
8.  Proposed conservation, open space and/or recreation areas, if any. 
9.  Any other programs, guidelines or standards appropriate for the area covered by the plan. 
(4)  If the land use regulations of the specific plan allow a site development permit or specific plan to authorize a development standard different than those identified by this Title for the proposed use or zoning district, such site development permit or specific plan shall always require a public hearing before the Planning Commission and findings be made pursuant to Section 9.08.050. 
(d)  Proceedings. Except as provided below, specific plan applications shall be processed in accordance with the standard processing provisions of this Chapter (Figure 9.08.11): 
(1)  Planning Commission recommendation. The Planning Commission recommendation to City Council on all specific plan applications shall be in the form of an adopted Resolution recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the application. 
   

Figure 9.08.11 Process for Specific Plan 
(2)  Following receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council may approve the specific plan with or without modifications by adopting an Ordinance. The City Council may also deny the application. 
(3)  Modifications. If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to the specific plan not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for consideration. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 45 days of receiving the City Council's request shall provide the City Council with the authority to act without the recommendation. 
(e)  Findings required. The City Council shall be required to make the following findings in acting to approve a specific plan and any amendment thereto: 
(1)  The proposed specific plan is consistent with and provides for the orderly, systematic, and specific implementation of the General Plan. 
(2)  The land use and development regulations within the specific plan are comparable in breadth and depth to similar zoning regulations contained in this title. 
(f)  Specific plan amendment. Any specific plan may be amended by the same procedure as the specific plan (or portion thereof) is adopted. The City may initiate amendments to any portion of a specific plan. The following changes to a specific plan shall require a specific plan amendment: 
(1)  Changes to the text or maps other than the addition of information that does not change the effect of any regulation. 
(2)  Changes in any specific plan boundary. 
(3)  Increase or decrease in the specified density for any area. 
(4)  Changes in standards or regulations, including landscaping and design standards. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.200. - Subdivisions. 
All subdivision plans, including but not limited to, tentative tract maps and tentative parcel maps, shall adhere to the requirements and regulations established within Section 10.11.180, Chapter 9.10 and the Subdivision Map Act established in Government Code §§ 66410 et seq. 
The Planning Commission shall consider all subdivisions, including tentative tract maps and tentative parcel maps, for discretionary review through a public hearing, pursuant to Section 9.08.150. The City Council shall approve the final tract map or final parcel map once all conditions have been met. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.210. - Variance. 
(a)  Introduction. This Section provides for the consideration of variances and exceptions to the regulations of this Title. 
(b)  Variance to regulations. 
(1)  Variances may be approved only when the City determines that, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of this Title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity under identical zoning classification. 
(2)  Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. 
(3)  A variance shall not be granted to authorize a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized in the zoning district (Chapter 9.03) governing the parcel. 
(c)  Decision-making authority. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve, deny, or approve with conditions the variance application as shown in Figure 9.08.12. Application for a variance shall be filed with the Development Services Department. The Development Services Director shall prescribe the form of application and the supporting information required to initiate the variance application review. If the application is found to be incomplete, the Development Services Department will notify the applicant in writing within 30 days what additional information is required, and the application will not be processed until that information is received by the Development Services Department. 
(d)  Findings required. No variance shall be approved unless the decision-making authority makes all of the following findings: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings such that the strict application of this Title would deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. Economic hardship is not an appropriate special circumstance for making this finding. 
(2)  That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zoning district in which such property is situated. 
(3)  That the variance will not result in development which is otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of this Title. 
(4)  That the variance will not result in development which is inconsistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the General Plan. 
(5)  That the variance will be consistent with the objectives, policies and general land uses and programs specified in the City's General Plan; 
(6)  That the variance is consistent with the provisions of this Title; 
(7)  That the variance will not create unusual noise, traffic or other conditions or situations that may be objectionable, detrimental, or incompatible with other permitted uses in the vicinity; and 
(8)  That the variance will not result in conditions or circumstances contrary to the public health and safety and the general welfare. 
(e)  Appeals. Decisions on variance applications may be appealed by the applicant or other interested party to the City Council in accordance with Section 9.08.100. 
(f)  Expiration of variance. If construction (or other entitlement) authorized by an approved variance has not been commenced within one year of variance approval, the variance shall be null and void. 
(g)  Consistency of working drawings with approved plans. A variance approval shall pertain only to those plans reviewed and approved with the variance. Further, all plans approved with a variance shall be considered an integral part of the variance approval. The Development Services Director shall ensure that any final working drawings for grading or construction authorized by a variance approval are consistent with said previously-reviewed plans prior to release of working drawings for plan check. The Development Services Director may approve minor variations from previously-reviewed plans if he/she determines that the original plan concepts are being carried out. If the Development Services Director does not make such a determination, the subject working drawings shall be referred to the decision-making authority for review and action. 
(h)  Revocation. A variance may be revoked or modified, including the imposition of additional conditions, by the approving body upon a finding that the conditions of approval of the variance have not been met or that the land use is being operated in violation of other provisions of this Title. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 9.08.150 prior to action on revocation or modification. The Development Services Director may schedule such a hearing upon his/her preliminary finding of noncompliance with any of the preceding requirements. 
   

Figure 9.08.12 Process for Variance 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, §§ 2, 3, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.220. - Environmental review procedures. 
All land use and development review applications referenced in this Chapter (such as zone changes, conditional use permits, subdivisions, etc.) and all public works and other public projects shall undergo environmental review as an integral part of the process for such applications prior to consideration by the decision-making authority. Environmental review shall be carried out in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act, State Environmental Impact Report Guidelines, City's Environmental Guidelines, and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.08.230. - Certificate of use and occupancy. 
(a)  Introduction. The certificate of use and occupancy approves residential and non-residential properties and structures to occupy a structure or lot with a specific use. 
(b)  Applicability/requirements. No vacant land in any zoning district established under the provisions of this Title shall hereafter be occupied or used, and no building hereafter erected, structurally altered or moved in any such zoning district shall be occupied or used until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued by the Development Services Director and Building Official. 
(c)  Certificate of use and occupancy process. The applicant shall submit a signed certificate of use and occupancy application to the Building Department. 
The Development Services Director and Building Official will review the application for completeness and shall either approve or deny the application within 30 days. 
Decisions of the Development Services Director and the Building Official may be appealed to the Planning Commission within 15 days pursuant to Section 9.06.100. 
(d)  Findings required for a certificate of use and occupancy. Prior to approval of a certificate of use and occupancy, the Development Services Director shall make findings that the proposed use is able to meet the general requirements contained within this Title. 
(e)  Issuance. Signature of the Development Services Director and the Building Official on the completed certificate of use and occupancy shall signify issuance of the permit. Such permit shall only become valid after the designated 15-day appeal period has expired. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Chapter 9.09 - Fees 
 
Sec. 9.09.010. - Establishment of fees. 
By resolution, the City Council shall establish fees necessary to implement the provisions and standards of this Title. As part of such resolution, the City Council shall establish the amount of fees and guidelines for the collection of such fees. From time to time, these fees may be updated by the City Council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.09.020. - Fees required by City. 
(a)  Each applicant shall pay applicable fees concurrently with the filing of the following applications: 
(1)  Tentative tract maps and parcel maps; 
(2)  Construction plans, building plans, building improvements, building additions; 
(3)  Final maps, parcel maps, lot line adjustments, easement modifications, license agreements, certificates of compliance, and records of survey; 
(4)  Administrative approvals; 
(5)  Zone changes; 
(6)  Building and grading permits; 
(7)  Conditional use permits; 
(8)  Variances; 
(9)  Signs; 
(10)  Appeals; 
(11)  General Plan amendments; 
(12)  Environmental impact reports; 
(13)  Site plans/site development permits; 
(14)  Specific plans and feature plans; 
(15)  Certificates of occupancy; 
(16)  Certificates of use; 
(17)  Street names and street signs; 
(18)  Development agreements; 
(19)  Address changes; 
(20)  Use determinations; 
(21)  Special event permits; 
(22)  Home-based occupation permits; and 
(23)  Any other application requiring a fee as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  In addition, each developer shall pay, if applicable: 
(1)  Map and plan check fees at time of filing map; 
(2)  Inspection fees prior to approval of plans or issuance of certificates; 
(3)  Applicable infrastructure and service fees per Section 9.09.030 prior to issuance of building permit; and 
(4)  Any other applicable fees as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), adopted April 11, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as Subsections (1) and (2). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Subsections (a) and (b).  
Sec. 9.09.030. - Fees required by other agencies. 
The fees required by an outside agency shall be paid to that agency in accordance with the regulations of that agency. Proof of payment of certain fees may be required prior to issuance of final approval or permits for a project depending on conditions placed on the project during project processing and/or environmental review. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.09.040. - Payment of fees. 
Unless specifically waived or deferred by resolution of the City Council, all the fees authorized by the provisions of this Section shall be paid prior to the granting of any approval, the issuance of any permit, or the taking of any other action requiring the payment of such fees. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.09.050. - Deposits. 
Any person making an application for any improvement or development process requiring a deposit shall be required to make a security deposit pursuant to the terms and conditions established by the City Council by Resolution or Ordinance. Proof of payment of the deposit will be required prior to processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.09.060. - Refund of fees. 
If an application is withdrawn prior to the advertising of a public hearing, the applicant may be entitled to a partial refund depending upon the amount of deposits paid by the applicant, and the amount of staff time and other reimbursable costs expended by the City processing the application up to the point of its withdrawal. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.09.070. - Bonds. 
The following bonds shall be required, where applicable: 
(1)  Faithful performance bonds; 
(2)  Labor and materials bonds; 
(3)  Development obligation bonds; 
(4)  Maintenance warranty bonds; 
(5)  Monumentation bond; 
(6)  Grading and drainage bond; and 
(7)  Any other applicable bonds. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.09.080. - Surety devices in lieu of bonds. 
The City may require a letter of credit, cash bond, or certificate of deposit on forms approved by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Chapter 9.10 - Subdivision Code 
 
Sec. 9.10.010. - General provisions. 
(a)  Title. This Chapter may be cited as the Rancho Santa Margarita Subdivision Code. 
(b)  Purposes. 
(1)  The purpose of this Chapter is to provide regulations and control of the design and improvement of subdivisions in the City, in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code §§ 66410 et seq.). 
(2)  Other purposes of this Chapter are: 
a.  To implement the General Plan; 
b.  To provide regulations and controls, within the law, over the use of land in the City for the health, safety and welfare of present and future residents of the City; and 
c.  To provide a procedure for lot line adjustments in the City. 
(c)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall offer to sell or lease, contract to sell or lease, sell or lease, finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final tract map is required by this Chapter, until such map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for record by the County Recorder. 
(2)  No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by this Chapter until such map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for record by the County Recorder. 
(3)  No permit to develop any real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this Chapter shall be granted by any officer or employee of the City or by the Planning Commission or the City Council unless a certificate of compliance has been issued and recorded for the property to be developed in accordance with Section 9.10.150. 
(d)  Development Services Director. The Development Services Director shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. 
(e)  Subdivision manual. The Development Services Director shall formulate such rules, procedures and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer this Chapter. Such rules, procedures and interpretations shall be made available to the public at a cost sufficient to pay for printing. 
(f)  Processing and filing fees. Fees to cover the costs incurred by the City in processing maps, plans and requests filed pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter shall be paid to the City in compliance with the fee resolution adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.020. - Definitions. 
(a)  Map Act prevails. The definitions in the Subdivision Map Act shall govern the meaning of words in this Chapter, except as follows: 
Terms used in this Chapter 	Equivalent terms in 
Subdivision Map Act 
Final tract map 	Final map 
Tract map 	Final map 
Final parcel map 	Parcel map 
Tentative tract map 	Tentative map 
Tentative parcel map 	Tentative map 
 
(b)  Zoning Code, Grading Code—Map Act definitions apply. Unless otherwise defined in this Chapter, words and phrases used in this Chapter shall be deemed to have the same meaning as applied to them in this Title, Chapter 10.12 and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(c)  Subdivision Code definitions. 
(1)  Master plan of drainage. Refers to an engineering report outlining the drainage facilities needed for the proper development of a specific increment of the City, and duly adopted by the City Council. 
(2)  Vehicular access rights. Refers to the right of persons to gain entry or exit with a vehicle to or from a street or driveway to or from abutting land. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.030. - Types of maps permitted. 
(a)  Tentative tract maps. A tentative tract map is a preliminary map that is used whenever a parcel or a number of contiguous parcels of land is proposed to be subdivided for the purpose of creating five or more lots, five or more condominium units, the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, or a community apartment project containing five or more apartment units, except as otherwise specified by Subsection (b) or (e). 
(b)  Tentative parcel maps. A tentative parcel map is a preliminary map that is used whenever a parcel or contiguous parcels of land is proposed to be subdivided for the purpose of creating fewer than five lots, fewer than five condominium units, or a community apartment project containing fewer than five apartment units, or where: 
(1)  The land before division contains fewer than five acres, each parcel proposed to be created by the subdivision will abut upon a maintained public street or highway, and all dedications and improvements required by City standards have been previously complied with; 
(2)  Each parcel proposed to be created by the subdivision will have a gross area of 20 acres or more and vehicular access rights for a continuous width of not less than 20 feet to a maintained public street or highway; 
(3)  The parcel of land proposed to be subdivided is within a tract of land zoned for commercial or industrial uses and abuts a street or highway which have been approved by the City as to alignment and width and to which it has a right of vehicular access for a minimum continuous width of not less than 28 feet; or 
(4)  Each parcel proposed to be created by the subdivision will have a gross area of not less than 40 acres or not less than one quarter of a quarter Section. 
(c)  Final tract maps. A subdivision may be created by the recordation of a final tract map that is in substantial conformance with all or a portion of the approved tentative tract map. It shall be filed in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Subdivision Map Act and the City's procedures. 
(d)  Final parcel maps. 
(1)  A subdivision may be created by the recordation of a final parcel map that is in substantial conformance with an approved tentative parcel map or with a portion of an approved tentative parcel map which complies with the provisions of Subsection (b)(3). A final parcel map may also be recorded on portions of a tentative parcel map when such portions comply with the specifications of Subsections 9.10.030 (b)(2), (3) or (4). It shall be filed in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Subdivision Map Act and the City's procedures. 
(2)  A final parcel map shall be based upon a field survey except that a parcel map may be compiled from record data when the City Engineer determines that the subdivision does not require a field survey, provided the map complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(e)  Exceptions. Certain types of land divisions and transactions may be completed without complying with the entire tentative and final tract or parcel map procedure, as specified. 
(1)  A request for determination as to the status of any parcel of land created as a result of a lease or conveyance specified by Subsections a. through h. may be submitted in compliance with the certificate of compliance procedure as stated in Section 9.10.150. Neither a tentative or final tract or parcel map is necessary for the following: 
a.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks; 
b.  Mineral, oil or gas leases; 
c.  Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the State; 
d.  Leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes; 
e.  Subdivisions in which every parcel has a gross area of 60 acres or more; 
f.  Lot line adjustments; 
g.  Conveyances of land for rights-of-way to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such a public utility; however, in any of these instances a tentative and final tract or parcel map may be required if the Development Services Director determines that a map is necessary for purposes of public health and safety or for the general welfare; 
h.  Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands is a party. 
(2)  A final map is not required when waived pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.10.130. 
(3)  A request for certificate of compliance may require a tentative map, as specified by the Development Services Director. 
(f)  Vesting tentative maps. A vesting tentative map is a map which confers a vested right to proceed with development for a specified time after recordation. 
(1)  A vesting tentative map is at the option of the subdivider and shall not be a prerequisite to any proposed subdivision or application for development. 
(2)  A vesting tentative map shall be identified on the submittal as a "vesting tentative map." 
(3)  A vesting tentative map is limited to development of the property per the applicable regulations in existence at the time of approval of the vesting tentative map or per Subsection (4). 
(4)  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning code in effect at that time, the inconsistency shall be noted on the vesting tentative map, and the vesting tentative map shall be processed subject to the provisions of Subsection 9.10.050(h). 
(5)  A vesting tentative map shall be processed in the same manner as a tentative map. However, previously approved tentative maps which were not approved as vesting tentative maps may be so approved only if refiled and processed in compliance with all requirements herein. 
(6)  The provisions of Subsection 9.10.050(l) shall apply to an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map. 
(7)  The vested right for a recorded subdivision map shall be for a period of one year beyond the recording date of the final map or parcel map, and shall confer on such maps all rights described in Government Code §§ 66498.1 through 66498.8. Where several final maps or parcel maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one-year time period shall begin when the final map or parcel map for that phase is recorded. Prior to the expiration of the initial one-year period, the developer may apply for a one-year extension of the period of the vested right. 
(8)  The provisions of Subsection 9.10.050(k) shall apply to an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map. 
(9)  Fees for the filing and processing of vesting tentative maps shall be the same as the fees established for the filing and processing of tentative maps. However, the City Council may establish by resolution an additional fee to cover additional costs incurred by the processing of vesting tentative maps including extensions of time. 
(10)  Fees for development permits (e.g., building and grading permits) filed per an approved vesting tentative map or a recorded vesting final/parcel map shall be the fees in effect at the time of issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.040. - Requirements for filing tentative maps. 
(a)  Types of maps covered. This Section pertains to tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps. 
(b)  Form and contents. Tentative maps shall conform with such requirements as to form and contents as may be specified in the City's procedures. 
(c)  Who may file. Any property owner who proposes to subdivide his/her property may file a tentative map. Any person who proposes to subdivide property that is legally owned by another person may file a tentative map for such property with the written consent of the legal owner of record. 
(d)  Certification of ownership and irrevocable offers of dedication. 
(1)  Each tentative map shall be signed by the property owner or owners of record, and shall be accompanied by the legal description of the real property proposed for subdivision. 
(2)  When any portion of a tentative map includes property that is owned by a public agency, the certification of ownership need not include the signatures for such ownerships, provided such portions are clearly identified on the map. 
(3)  When any portion of a tentative map includes property on which an irrevocable offer of dedication has been made to a public agency, such portion shall be clearly identified on the tentative map. 
(4)  Any agency to which an irrevocable offer of dedication has been made shall sign the final tract/parcel map which includes the area over which the irrevocable offer has been made. 
(e)  Title report. Tentative maps shall be accompanied by a preliminary title report which discloses all possessory interests and interests of record in the land being subdivided when determined to be necessary by the Development Services Director. 
(f)  Environmental documents. Tentative maps shall be accompanied by appropriate environmental documents in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(g)  Soils report. 
(1)  Unless the requirement is waived by the Director pursuant to Subsection (2) or deferred pursuant to Subsection (3), tentative maps shall be accompanied by a preliminary soils report based upon adequate test borings and prepared by a registered civil engineer. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils report on each proposed lot in the subdivision containing any such soils problem shall accompany the tentative map. Such reports shall include recommended corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage. 
(2)  The Development Services Director may waive the preliminary soils report required by Subsection (1) for tentative tract maps where he/she determines that it is unnecessary because the City already has sufficient information as to the qualities of the soils in the proposed subdivision and for tentative parcel maps. 
(3)  The Development Services Director may defer the requirement for a preliminary soils report until the submission of a final tract or parcel map. 
(h)  Additional information. 
(1)  Tentative maps shall be accompanied by such additional information as may be specified by the Development Services Director. The Development Services Director shall have the authority to include among such requirements geologic, seismic and hydrology reports; aerial photographs and transparent overlays; grading, site development and landscaping plans, including building setback lines; evidence from the proposed sewering agency and water supplier with respect to their capacity of serving the proposed subdivision; fire protection and fuel modification reports; and any other information reasonably relevant to proposed subdivisions. 
(2)  The Development Services Director may require supplementary information, depending upon the type of map involved, the scope of the proposed subdivision, and the anticipated environmental impacts of the subdivision. 
(3)  The Development Services Director may require the submission of additional information after the filing of tentative maps as necessary. 
(i)  Filing. Tentative maps submitted for approval shall be filed with the Development Services Director, who shall accept such maps only when he/she determines that the requirements for filing a tentative map established by this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act have been satisfied. The date the tentative map is filed shall be the date that the Development Services Director determines that the application is complete and can be accepted for processing. If the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing within 30 days of the date the processing fees were collected of that fact and of the matters necessary to complete the application. Each tract and parcel map shall be identified by a number prominently displayed on the face of the map issued by the County Surveyor. The time for processing tentative maps, as set forth in Subdivision Map Act §§ 66452, 66452.1 and 66452.2 begins when the application is deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.050. - Tentative map process. 
(a)  Types of maps covered. This Section pertains to processing tentative tract maps and tentative parcel maps after it has been filed and deemed complete. 
(b)  Copies to concerned agencies. 
(1)  Where a local agency has filed a territorial map with the Development Services Director pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, the Development Services Director shall forward a copy of any filed tentative map which is located wholly or partially within the territory outlined on the territorial map to said local agency within three days of the date the tentative map is filed. 
(2)  When the State Department of Transportation has filed with the City Council a map of territory within one mile on either or both sides of any State highway routing pursuant to the Government Code, the Development Services Director shall forward a copy of any filed tentative map which is located wholly or partially within the territory outlined on the territorial map to the district office of the Department of Transportation within three days of the date the tentative map is filed. 
(3)  Within three days of the date a tentative map is filed, the Development Services Director shall give notice of the filing to the governing boards of the school district or districts within which the proposed subdivision is located pursuant to the Government Code. 
(c)  Time for action. The Planning Commission shall act upon a tentative map within the time specified in the Subdivision Map Act unless: 
(1)  An extension of time for action is mutually consented to by the subdivider and the Planning Commission, in which case the map shall be acted upon within the time agreed upon, or 
(2)  The subdivider withdraws the map. 
(d)  Reports and recommendations. Reports and recommendations on tentative maps shall be in writing and shall be served on the subdivider at least three days prior to the date that action on the map is scheduled, providing that a subdivider: 
(1)  May waive this requirement, and 
(2)  May consent to the receipt by the Planning Commission of additional recommendations; and provided further that a subdivider shall be deemed to have so consented unless the subdivider specifically objects to the form and timeliness of such additional recommendations prior to the time the Planning Commission takes action on the tentative maps. 
(e)  Review of tentative maps. Each tentative map shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, which shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove it. 
(f)  Substitution of revised maps. A revised tentative map may be submitted at any time prior to action on the map by the Planning Commission. The time for action on a tentative map specified in Subsection (c). shall recommence upon the acceptance by the Development Services Director of a revised tentative map. 
(g)  Meetings and hearings. 
(1)  The Planning Commission shall act on tentative maps at regularly scheduled meetings when the matter has been duly placed upon the Commission's agenda. The Development Services Director may set any map for public hearing before the Planning Commission when it has been determined that it would be in the public interest to do so. The Planning Commission shall conduct its meetings in the same manner as public hearings, and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to address the Planning Commission on any matter pertaining to a proposed subdivision without regard to whether the matter is identified as a public hearing. 
(2)  Where approval of a tentative map will constitute a substantial or significant deprivation of the property rights of other landowners, notice shall be given to all persons shown in the latest equalized assessment roll as owning property within 300 feet of the property proposed to be subdivided by the procedures established in Section 9.08.150. 
(h)  Zoning conformance. 
(1)  The Planning Commission shall not approve or conditionally approve a tentative map which does not conform with the applicable zoning district except as provided in Subsection (2). 
(2)  A tentative map may be approved when it conforms with zoning which has been recommended for adoption by the Planning Commission on the condition that the zoning must become effective prior to recordation of the final tract or parcel map. 
(3)  A tentative map shall not be approved if it is apparent that any proposed parcel cannot be developed to its intended use without the modification of site development standards. 
(i)  Findings required. A tentative parcel map or tentative tract map shall be approved or conditionally approved only if the Planning Commission makes the following findings: 
(1)  That the proposed map is consistent with the General Plan; 
(2)  That the design and improvement of the proposed subdivision is consistent with the General Plan; 
(3)  That the site is physically suitable for the proposed type of development; 
(4)  That the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act have been satisfied; 
(5)  That the site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
(6)  That the design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements are not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantial and avoidable injury to fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
(7)  That the design of the subdivision and the type of improvements proposed are not likely to cause serious public health problems; 
(8)  That the design of the subdivision and the type of improvements proposed will not conflict with easements of record or established by court judgment acquired by the public at large for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision; or, if such easements exist, that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public; and 
(9)  That the design and improvement of the proposed subdivision are suitable for the uses proposed and the subdivision can be developed in compliance with the applicable zoning regulations pursuant to Subsection (h). 
(j)  Additional findings required. 
(1)  The Planning Commission shall determine whether the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing community sewer system, where such a system exists, would result in or add to a violation of existing requirements prescribed by the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board. In the event it is determined that the proposed waste discharge would result in or add to such a violation, the Planning Commission shall disapprove the tentative map unless there are extenuating or overriding considerations, in which case these shall be stated. 
(2)  In the event a subdivision fronting upon a public waterway, river or stream or upon a lake or reservoir owned in part or entirely by a public agency does not provide public access to such public resources through the subdivision itself in accordance with the requirements of Subsections 9.10.060(u) and (v), the Planning Commission shall find that reasonable public access to the resource in question is otherwise available within a reasonable distance from the subdivision. If this finding cannot be made, the map shall be disapproved. 
(3)  If the Planning Commission approves or conditionally approves a tentative map which deviates from any standard of design as allowed by Section 9.10.060(y), the Planning Commission shall make a finding or findings that each such deviation has been individually considered and found to be justified based upon specific special circumstances which apply. 
(k)  Modification of maps and conditions of approval. 
(1)  Upon the request of the subdivider, approved tentative maps may be modified and conditions of approval may be modified or deleted by the Planning Commission. In all cases, the Development Services Director shall attempt to notify any third parties who have previously indicated an interest in the matter of the Planning Commission's scheduled consideration of the modification. Mandatory and automatic extensions of time as are provided for in the Subdivision Map Act are not affected by this provision. 
(2)  If the Development Services Director determines that the proposed modification is a minor modification of no significant effect and it complies with the spirit and intent of the original approving action, he/she may approve the modification without further compliance with this Chapter. 
(l)  Period of validity; extension. 
(1)  An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire 36 months after its approval or conditional approval, unless prior to the expiration date a subdivider requests an extension of time to record said map. 
(2)  The Planning Commission may grant an extension of time for the map to be recorded for a period or periods not exceeding a total of five years beyond the original date of expiration. In cases where the Development Services Director determines that a request for an extension of time to record involves no new significant environmental effects in addition to those considered during the original approval and that there have been no changes in the underlying zoning regulations applicable to the subject site that are inconsistent with the approved map, he/she may grant an extension of time for the map to be recorded for a period not exceeding five years beyond the original date of expiration without submitting the matter to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  An extension may be granted only where it will not result in conditions or circumstances contrary to the public health and safety and the general welfare. 
(4)  Mandatory and automatic extensions of time as are provided for in the Subdivision Map Act are not affected by this provision. 
(m)  Appeal of tentative map to city council. 
(1)  Any interested person may appeal to the City Council from any action of the Planning Commission by filing an appeal with the Development Services Director within ten days of the action. 
(2)  The appeal shall identify the action being appealed, specify why the appellant is dissatisfied with the action, and suggest alternative action. 
(3)  The Development Services Director shall bring the matter before the City Council for hearing within 30 days after the date of filing the appeal. The subdivider, the appellant, and other interested property owners, shall be given at least ten days notice of the City Council's hearing as provided in Government Code § 65090. 
(4)  The City Council may affirm, reverse or modify any recommendations or rulings of the Planning Commission and may make such findings as it deems appropriate. The City Council need not limit its review to those specific conditions being appealed, but may review the whole action taken by the Planning Commission. 
(5)  An appeal, once filed, may be withdrawn by the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.060. - Standards of design. 
(a)  Conformance with standards of design. Subdivisions shall be designed in conformance with the following standards of design. Deviations from these standards may be requested pursuant to Subsection (y). 
(b)  Compliance with grading and excavation code. No tentative tract map or parcel map shall be approved for property on which a violation of the provisions of the Chapter 10.12 exist, including work performed not in accordance with approved grading plans, unless conditioned to require such violation to be corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer prior to recordation. 
(c)  Boundary lines. 
(1)  Tentative map boundaries shall be drawn so as to include all of the area of all abutting parcels which are owned by the same property owner and proposed for boundary alteration. However, when any land is proposed to be divided in such a way that the subdivision will include a portion of such land, any portion with a contiguous gross area of five acres or more which is not proposed to be included within the subdivision may be identified by reference on the tentative map. 
(2)  A portion of a tentative parcel map may be designated as a remainder for the purpose of an exception to the survey requirements, in compliance with the following provisions: 
a.  Any remainder shall have a gross area of five acres or more. 
b.  Any remainder so designated shall not be considered to be a building site. 
c.  Any remainder so designated shall not be improved with any building or structure that is subject to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code. 
(3)  Whenever a parcel of real property lies partially within the City and partially within an unincorporated area or another city, any proposal to subdivide such real property shall be consistent with existing City boundaries. No lot or parcel, except proposed public or private street rights-of way, shall be partially within the City and partially within an unincorporated area or other city. Any portion of such real property lying within the City, an unincorporated area or other city, shall be included on the tentative map for the purpose of showing the remainder parcel, but any approving action on the tentative map by the City shall not be construed as approval of any design or improvements shown within the other city or unincorporated area. 
(4)  Regardless of its size, no portion of any property shown on the latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units shall be excluded from within the boundaries of a subdivision for the purpose of avoiding dedication or improvement of any street, drainage or flood control facility. 
(d)  Lots/parcels. 
(1)  Each lot or parcel being created by a subdivision shall be either numbered or lettered. If it is numbered, it must comply with the requirements of a building site as defined in this Title. 
(2)  Lettered lots or parcels may not be used as building sites and need not comply with the requirements of a building site. 
(3)  Lettered lots other than streets shall be labeled as to their intended use. 
(4)  A numbered lot which is platted so that it is in more than one zoning district shall comply with area and width requirements of the zoning district having the greater requirements. 
(e)  Arterial highways. If an existing or proposed arterial highway or transportation corridor as shown in the circulation element of the General Plan is located so that any portion of such highway lies within or adjacent to a subdivision, the highway or corridor shall be shown on the map in a width and in an alignment corresponding to the master plan of arterial highways, and the highway or corridor shall be designed in accordance with the applicable specific plan to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(f)  Private streets. Private streets shall be permitted, pursuant to conditions as specified by the City, only when the City finds that the occupants of the subdivision will be better served and the welfare of the general public will not be impaired thereby. 
(g)  Restricted access to highways. Subdivisions shall be designed so as to limit vehicular access to highways shown on the master plan of arterial highways. 
(h)  Street widths. Subdivisions shall be designed in conformance with the City standards, except: 
(1)  Streets in residential zoning districts requiring a building site area of 15,000 square feet or more and where no sidewalks are to be installed, shall have a right-of-way that will provide a parkway width of at least four feet. 
(2)  Private streets serving four or fewer parcels as access to a public street shall provide for a minimum pavement width of 16 feet within a minimum twenty-foot-wide right-of-way. 
(3)  Private streets serving five parcels or more as access to a public street shall provide for a minimum pavement width of 28 feet within a minimum 40-foot-wide right-of-way. 
(4)  Streets in a subdivision which provides an approved alternate pedestrian circulation system shall have a right-of-way that will provide a minimum parkway width of at least four feet. 
(i)  Curved local street and highway radii. The centerline radii of curves on local streets or highways shall be not less than: 
(1)  One thousand five hundred and fifty feet on highways shown on the master plan of arterial highways as major arterial highways; 
(2)  One thousand four hundred feet on highways shown on the master plan of arterial highways as primary or secondary arterial highways; 
(3)  Five hundred fifty feet on collector streets; 
(4)  Two hundred fifty feet on local streets. 
(j)  Local street lengths. Local streets shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length without a significant change in alignment. 
(k)  Local street and highway corner cutoffs and corner radii. All local street and highway corner cutoffs and corner radii shall be designed in conformance with the City's regulations. 
(l)  Sidewalks and pedestrian ways. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be designed in accordance with the City's regulations and located as follows: 
a.  Along both sides of arterial highways. 
b.  Along all commercial and industrial frontage; 
c.  Along both sides of collector streets; 
d.  Along residential frontage where the required minimum building site area is less than 15,000 square feet and the lots have access to the street, except in those instances where an alternate pedestrian circulation system is proposed; 
e.  Along all streets leading directly to a school, a designated school bus stop or a park; 
f.  Where the sidewalk will provide a continuation or link between other sidewalks. 
(2)  Additional pedestrian ways not abutting a street shall be provided when necessary for access to schools, recreation and other public areas. These pedestrian ways shall not be less than six feet in width. 
(3)  In areas required for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. 
(m)  Bicycle, riding and hiking trails. Where the County Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan (for street bicycles) or the master plan of regional riding and hiking trails (for mountain bicycles, hikers, and equestrians) or any officially adopted specific or precise plan designates such trails as lying wholly or partially within any proposed subdivision, the necessary right-of-way for such trails shall be shown on the map in compliance with such adopted plans, and shall be designed in accordance with the Orange County Highway Design Manual and the Riding and Hiking Trails Design Manual. 
(n)  Street lighting. Street lighting shall be provided along, and at the intersections of all arterial highways and local streets in accordance with the illumination levels specified in the City standards except as otherwise approved by the Development Services Director. 
(o)  Underground utility lines. 
(1)  Utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting and cable television, shall be required to be placed underground within any new, revised or reactivated residential subdivision. The subdivider is responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities. For the purpose of this Subsection, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surfacemounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal bases and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed aboveground within the street right-of-way where sufficient right-of-way width exists so as not to pose a serious hazard to pedestrian traffic. If approved by the Development Services Director, utility lines, the main purpose of which is to provide service to customers outside of the original boundaries of the subdivision, and those utility lines which were in service in the area covered by the tentative tract or tentative parcel map prior to the filing of the tentative map may be placed aboveground. 
(2)  Required underground utility lines may be located in street or alley rights-of-way or along any lot line. 
(3)  Overhead utility lines shall be located at the rear of lots or parcels where practical. The poles supporting such overhead lines shall not be installed within any street, alleyway, drainage easement or flood control channel. 
(4)  Above ground installation of utilities shall be permitted on a temporary basis when such utilities are required during construction; provided, however, that such utilities shall be removed or placed underground prior to the final exoneration of street improvement bonds. 
(p)  Sewers. All lots intended for development shall be connected to a sanitary sewer system. 
(q)  Drainage and erosion control. 
(1)  Tentative maps shall illustrate the existing and proposed manner in which water drains onto, across and off of the land being subdivided, including the facilities and easements necessary to accommodate the drainage. 
(2)  In the event a subdivider unnaturally concentrates or diverts surface water running onto adjacent land, the map shall illustrate the manner in which such water will be accepted and disposed of. 
(3)  If an existing or proposed flood control channel, as shown on an officially adopted flood control plan, is located so that any portion of it lies within (or adjacent to) a subdivision, the channel shall be illustrated on the map as a lettered lot in a width and in an alignment corresponding to the flood control plan. 
(4)  Where any lot is designed in such a manner that it will not drain with a minimum one percent grade directly to a street or common drainage facility, it shall be designed in a manner that will conform to the following criteria: 
a.  Lots shall be designed in such a manner that man-made slopes are not subject to sheet flow or concentrated runoff from either the same or an adjacent lot. 
b.  All water flowing down man-made slopes, except that falling on each slope, shall be constrained within an approved drainage device. 
c.  All water flowing from one lot to or across another lot shall be within an approved drainage device located within a properly executed easement, where appropriate. 
(r)  Man-made slopes. 
(1)  Man-made slopes shall be designed so that they can be conveniently maintained so as to minimize erosion, slope failure and unsightly conditions. 
(2)  This Section does not apply to man-made slopes five feet in height or less. 
(3)  All man-made slopes shall be shown on tentative maps and shall be classified, labeled and designed as follows: 
a.  Type "A". Those proposed to be maintained by a public agency or by a group, such as a homeowner's association, and which are located either adjacent to an arterial highway or within a park, greenbelt, or other public or common open space area. 
b.  Type "B". Those proposed to be maintained by a group, such as a homeowners' association, and which are located within or adjacent to individual owners and which are not within a park, greenbelt, or other public or common open space area. 
c.  Type "C". Those proposed to be maintained by individuals and which are located within individual lots in such a manner that they are inappropriate for maintenance by a group such as a homeowner's association. 
(4)  Man-made slopes shall be designed to resemble natural terrain where feasible, with a minimum of long, flat, inclined plane surfaces and acute angles. 
(5)  Man-made slopes shall be no steeper than allowed by Chapter 10.12. 
(6)  The maximum height of man-made slopes steeper than five feet horizontal to one foot vertical shall be as follows: 
a.  Type "A" and type "B". No maximum. 
b.  Type "C". Twenty feet. 
(7)  Man-made slopes shall not be constructed one on top of another or combined in such a manner so that they exceed the maximum heights specified in Subsection (6). However, this limitation shall not apply to adjacent slopes on land abutting the subdivision, provided there is a visual and physical break of at least ten usable feet, exclusive of drainage facilities, between the top of the lower slope and the toe of the upper slope. 
(8)  Lettered lots shall not include type "C" slopes, unless such slopes will be directly visible from the probable building pad on the lot. 
(9)  Automatic irrigation systems shall be incorporated into the design of type "A" and type "B" slopes. An irrigation system connected to the water system serving the main use of the lot shall be incorporated into the design of type "C" slopes. 
(10)  The design of man-made slopes shall include landscaping in accordance with the requirements of Subsection (t). 
(s)  Parks. Local parks shall be shown on the tentative map as required by Chapter 9.11 and in a manner consistent with the General Plan. 
(t)  Landscaping and screening. The design of the areas listed below shall include appropriate landscaping for aesthetic, noise suppression, fire protection and/or erosion control purposes: 
(1)  Man-made slopes greater than five feet in height; 
(2)  Common areas; 
(3)  Roadway medians and parkway areas; 
(4)  Lots containing existing significant trees or other plants proposed to be preserved; 
(5)  Fuel modification areas; 
(6)  Other open space areas. 
(u)  Rivers and streams. 
(1)  Any proposed subdivision fronting upon a public waterway, river or stream shall be designed so as to provide reasonable public access by fee or easement from a public highway to and along that portion of the bank of the river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed subdivision. The extent, width and character of the public easement shall be reasonably defined to achieve reasonable public use of the public waterway, river or stream consistent with public safety. 
(2)  The governmental entity to which the access route will be offered for dedication shall be indicated on the map. 
(3)  In determining what is reasonable public access, the following factors shall be considered: 
a.  That access may be for a foot trail, bicycle trail or horse trail; 
b.  The size of the subdivision; 
c.  The type of riverbank and the various appropriate recreation, educational and scientific uses, including, but not limited to, swimming, boating, diving, fishing, water skiing, scientific collection and teaching. 
d.  The likelihood of trespass on private property and reasonable means of avoiding such trespass. 
(v)  Lakes and reservoirs. 
(1)  Any proposed subdivision fronting upon any lake or reservoir which is owned in part or entirely by a public agency shall be designed so as to provide reasonable public access by fee or easement from a public highway to the water of the lake or reservoir upon which the subdivision borders, either within the subdivision or a reasonable distance from the subdivision. The extent width and character of the public easement shall be defined to achieve reasonable public use of the lake or reservoir consistent with public safety. 
(2)  The governmental entity to which the access route will be offered for dedication shall be indicated on the map. 
(3)  In determining what is reasonable public access, the following factors shall be considered: 
a.  That access may be for a highway, foot trail, bike trail or horse trail; 
b.  The size of the subdivision; 
c.  The type of shoreline and the various appropriate recreational, educational and scientific uses, including, but not limited to, swimming, diving, boating, fishing, waterskiing, scientific collection and teaching; 
d.  The likelihood of trespass on private property and reasonable means of avoiding such trespass. 
(w)  Fire protection. 
(1)  Any subdivision proposed to be located in an area shown in the safety element of the General Plan to be a State designated high or extreme fire hazard area or an Orange County designated special fire protection area shall provide appropriate fire protection by means of firebreaks, fuel modification programs, access roads, sufficient water supply, landscaping and open spaces, and such other methods that the Fire Chief has determined will insure the public health, safety and welfare of the future occupants of the subdivision and the adjacent area. 
(2)  The design of any required fuel modification program shall include landscape architectural planning encompassing visual quality standards, watershed impact and erosion control, and wildlife impact and other design features described in the fire hazard reduction design criteria. Said program shall include provisions for landscape architectural construction observation, inspection and maintenance. 
(3)  The cost of the design and implementation of any fuel modification program shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. 
(4)  A method or procedure for assuring continued maintenance of any required fuel modification program shall be provided by the subdivider and approved by the Fire Chief and the Development Services Director. 
(x)  Dangerous areas to be removed or controlled. 
(1)  Areas proposed to be subdivided which are known to be dangerous by reason of geological conditions, unstable subsurface conditions, groundwater or seepage conditions, flood hazard, or any other dangerous conditions, shall be approved for subdivision only when the Planning Commission finds that such conditions or hazards are to be removed or that appropriate measures or controls will be applied which will assure adequate protection to the subject property and to surrounding uses and improvements. 
(2)  Areas proposed for subdivision in a floodplain, shall provide for flood protection meeting the criteria set forth in Chapter 10.11 for all building sites. 
(y)  Deviations from standards of design. 
(1)  The Planning Commission may approve tentative maps which deviate from the standards of design contained in the following Subsections: 
a.  9.10.060(d) Lots/parcels; 
b.  9.10.060(e) Arterial highways; 
c.  9.10.060(g) Restricted access to highways; 
d.  9.10.060(h) Street widths; 
e.  9.10.060(i) Curved local street and highway radii; 
f.  9.10.060(k) Local street and highway corner cutoffs and corner radii; 
g.  9.10.060(l) Sidewalks and pedestrian ways; 
h.  9.10.060(m) Bicycle and equestrian trails; 
i.  9.10.060(n) Street lighting; 
j.  9.10.060(o) Underground utility lines; 
k.  9.10.060(r) Man-made slopes; 
l.  9.10.060(t) Landscaping and screening; 
m.  9.10.060(w) Fire protection; 
(2)  The deviations from the standards of design contained in Sections listed in Subsection (1) shall be identified by a note on the face of the tentative map, and the subdivider shall submit evidence of justification for each deviation. 
(3)  Special circumstances which may be cited to justify a deviation from the standards of design listed in Subsection (1) include, but are not limited to, the character of the community, alternative means of pedestrian circulation, environmental considerations, physical constraints, existing nearby uses and a limited amount of ultimate traffic. 
(4)  The Planning Commission shall take specific action on each requested deviation. Deviations not specifically approved shall be considered to be disapproved. 
(z)  Floodplain. Areas proposed for subdivision in floodplains, as defined by Chapter 10.11, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with Chapter 10.11; 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage, with their structural supports designed to withstand hydrodynamic loading; 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other development proposed within the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.070. - Dedication. 
(a)  Required dedication for public use or benefit. The Planning Commission may require the dedication to the public, to the City or to such other public agency as may be appropriate of real property or interest therein both on or off site required for public use or benefit, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Local streets, arterial highways, and transportation corridors; 
(2)  Alleys; 
(3)  Trails, paths, and pedestrian ways; 
(4)  Flood-control facilities; 
(5)  Parks; 
(6)  Easements for landscaping maintenance; 
(7)  Public utility easements; 
(8)  Public transit facilities; 
(9)  Other public easements; 
(10)  Accessways to lakes, reservoirs, rivers, or streams as provided in Sections 9.10.060(u) and 9.10.060(v). 
(b)  Transfer of ownership required for private use or benefit. The Planning Commission may require that the items listed in Subsection (a) be deeded for private use or benefit to a homeowners association or other responsible body. 
(c)  Vehicular access rights to arterial highways and local streets. Whenever specified by the Planning Commission, offers of dedication of arterial highways shall include the release and relinquishment of vehicular access rights to and from such arterial highways from any property shown within a final tract or parcel map abutting thereon. When the City finds that there is a particular circulation problem on a local street, release and relinquishment of access rights to and from said street may be required. 
(d)  School sites. The subdivider submitting a tentative tract map may be required to dedicate land for the school facilities necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in the Subdivision Map Act. Whenever the Planning Commission imposes such a dedication requirement, it may concurrently approve an alternate tentative map, to be effective in the event the school district affected does not offer to enter into a binding commitment within 30 days to accept the dedication. A dedication pursuant to this Section shall only be required at the request of a school district made within 20 working days of the notice given pursuant to Subsection 9.10.050(b). 
(e)  Method of dedication. Dedications and offers of dedication shall be made by a certificate on the final tract or parcel map. Separate instruments may be used with the approval of the Development Services Director, when permitted by law and when the subdivider intends to dedicate or offer for dedication real property prior to the approval of a final tract or parcel map. 
(f)  Exceptions. Dedications required by Subsection (a) shall not be required for any remainder parcel that is sufficient as to size and shape to be further divided in compliance with applicable zoning regulations provided the Planning Commission determines that such dedications and improvements are not necessary immediately for public use or benefit and that the property owner will not be excused from a requirement to dedicate and install necessary improvements at a later date. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.080. - Improvements, monumentation and security. 
(a)  Improvements required. 
(1)  The Subdivider shall grade and improve or agree to grade and improve all land shown on the final tract or parcel map for those dedications listed in Subsection 9.10.070(a) in compliance with the requirements of the approved tentative map in such a manner and with such improvements as are necessary for the general use of the lot or parcel owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final tract or parcel map. 
(2)  The subdivider may be required to improve or agree to improve those dedications which are necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan. 
(b)  Subdivisions of four or fewer parcels. 
(1)  Required improvements shall be noticed by a certificate on the final parcel map or the instrument evidencing waiver of the parcel map. Except as otherwise specified in Subsection (3), the certificate shall include a requirement for fulfillment of such improvements prior to issuance of any building permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel, or for installation of the improvements at such earlier time as provided in the agreement. 
(2)  The agreement required by Subsection (e) shall be entered into prior to the City Engineer's approval of the parcel map for recordation, or prior to granting a waiver of the parcel map. Except as otherwise specified in Subsection (3), the agreement shall provide for installation of the improvements prior to the granting of any building permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel, or for the installation of the improvements at such earlier time as provided in the agreement. 
(3)  The requirements for installation of the improvements prior to issuance of building permits may be omitted from a parcel map when such a requirement is not a condition of approval of the parcel map or waiver of parcel map. 
(c)  Standards. Improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards of design contained in Section 9.10.060, the City standards, and any other applicable standards adopted by the City Council. 
(d)  Improvement plans. All improvement plans of improvements to be installed within or supplemental to the final tract or parcel map must be approved by the appropriate agency prior to approval of the final tract or parcel map. 
(e)  Agreements in lieu of improvements. If any improvements are not completed satisfactorily or any monuments not set before the final tract or parcel map is approved, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City whereby, in consideration of the approval by the City of the final tract or parcel map, the subdivider agrees to perform and to furnish the equipment and material necessary to complete the required work within the time specified in the agreement. Such agreement shall be accompanied by security as provided in Subsections (g) and (i). 
(f)  Plan checking, engineering and inspection fees. Subdividers submitting detailed plans and specifications for approval required by Subsection (d) shall pay plan checking, engineering, and inspection fees as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(g)  Improvement security. Security in the form specified by Subdivision Map Act shall be furnished with every improvement agreement. The amount of the security shall be as follows: 
(1)  If bonds are furnished by one of the authorized corporate sureties: 
a.  A performance bond in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement. 
b.  A labor and material bond in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement. 
(2)  If money, instruments of credit or negotiable bonds are furnished, 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement. Said money, instruments of credit or negotiable bond shall apply to both faithful performance and payment to the contractor, subcontractors, laborers, materialmen and other persons employed in the performance of the agreement. 
(h)  Release of security. The Development Services Director is authorized to release security in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(i)  Monumentation. 
(1)  Monuments shall be set for each tract and parcel map in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and in accordance with the rules and procedures approved by the City Engineer. 
(2)  The agreement referred to in Subsection (e) shall be accompanied by security in the sum not less than the cost of setting such monuments. 
(j)  Extension of time. The Development Services Director is authorized to grant an extension of time to the agreement specified in Subsection (e), if in his/her opinion a delay in the completion of the improvements is justified and the delay will not cause substantial inconvenience to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.090. - Fees in lieu of dedication or improvement. 
(a)  Local park fees. Local park fees shall be paid as required by the Chapter 9.11. 
(b)  Drainage and sewer facilities fees. 
(1)  The City Council may, from time to time after a public hearing and written notice to the owners of property therein, adopt master plans of drainage and sewer facilities for various areas of the City. Such plans shall contain an estimate of the total costs of constructing the local drainage and sewer facilities required by the plan and a map of the area showing its boundaries and the location of the planned facilities. 
(2)  Upon filing of a final tract or parcel map and as a condition of approval of said final tract or parcel map, a drainage and sewer fee shall be paid in the amount set forth in the legislative action adopting and establishing a master plan of drainage and sewer facilities, if any, within which any portions of the subdivision may lie. Such charges and fees collected as a condition of subdivision approval shall hereinafter be referred to as drainage and sewer fees. In the event local drainage and sewer facilities are being constructed by the subdivider in conjunction with the subdivider's improvements, an agreement to construct said local drainage and sewer facilities may be accepted in lieu of part or all payment of drainage and sewer fees. 
(3)  The funds derived from the drainage and sewer fees shall be used for purposes of defraying the cost of designing and constructing planned local drainage and sewer facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters from the local drainage and sewer area described in such master plan of drainage and sewer facilities. 
(4)  The City Council, in adopting a master plan of drainage and sewer facilities, shall find and determine that the subdivision and development of property will require construction of the facilities described in said master plan and that the drainage and sewer fees are fairly apportioned within the local drainage and sewer area, both on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for subdivision and on the need for local drainage and sewer facilities within such area which would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a per-acre basis. 
(5)  The fee as to any property proposed for subdivision within an area covered by a master plan of drainage and sewer facilities shall not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the total estimated cost of all facilities within such area would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a per-acre basis. 
(6)  Drainage and sewer fees required by this Section shall be paid into a local drainage and sewer facilities fund. A separate fund shall be established for each local drainage area. Moneys in such funds shall be expended for design and construction engineering and administrative services for those local drainage and sewer facilities within the planned local drainage and sewer area from which the fees comprising the fund were collected. 
(7)  At the discretion of the City Council, rights-of-way dedication, actual construction and design by a duly registered civil engineer, and payment of plan check, engineering and inspection fees for the improvement of local drainage and sewer facilities described in a duly adopted master plan of drainage and sewer facilities may be accepted in lieu of the payment of drainage and sewer fees. 
(8)  Moneys may be advanced by the City from its General Fund or other sources to pay the cost of local drainage and sewer facilities within a local drainage and sewer area having a duly adopted master plan of drainage and sewer facilities, and subsequently such moneys advanced may be reimbursed from the local drainage and sewer facilities fund for the local drainage and sewer area in which the drainage and sewer facilities described in the master plan were constructed. 
(9)  When required for the implementation of a duly adopted master plan of drainage and sewer facilities so as to provide adequate drainage for a subdivision, an agreement may be entered into between the subdivider and City whereby the subdivider may advance funds for local drainage and sewer facilities within a local drainage and sewer area, provided that the sole security for payment of funds or other consideration advanced shall be moneys subsequently accruing to a local drainage and sewer facilities fund for said local drainage and sewer area in which the facilities are constructed. Reimbursement shall be for the amount advanced only and shall not include interest or other charges. 
(10)  After completion of the facilities and the payment of all claims from any planned local drainage and sewer facilities fund, the City Council shall determine by resolution the amount of surplus, if any, remaining in any of such funds. Any such surplus shall be used, in such amounts as the City Council may determine, for one or more of the following purposes: 
a.  For transfer to the General Fund of the City, provided that the amount of such transfer shall not exceed five percent of the total amount expended from the particular fund; 
b.  For the construction of additional or modified facilities within the particular drainage or sewer area; or 
c.  As a refund in the manner provided in Subsection (11). 
(11)  Any surplus remaining in a planned local drainage and sewer facilities fund shall be refunded as follows: 
a.  There shall be refunded to the current owners of property for which a fee was previously collected the balance of such moneys in the same proportion which each individual fee collected bears to the total of all individual fees collected from the particular drainage or sewer area. 
b.  Where property for which a fee was previously collected has subsequently been divided into more than one lot, each current owner of a lot shall share in the refund payable to the owners of the property for which a fee was previously collected in the same proportion which the area of each individual lot bears to the total area of the property for which a fee was previously collected. 
c.  There shall be transferred to the General Fund of the City any remaining portion of the surplus which has not been paid to or claimed by the persons entitled thereto within two years from the date either of the completion of the improvements or the adoption by the City Council of a resolution declaring a surplus, whichever is later to occur. 
(c)  Major thoroughfare and bridge fees. 
(1)  A subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, or a building permit applicant, as a condition of issuance of a building permit, shall pay a fee as hereinafter established to defray the costs of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways and canyons, or constructing major thoroughfares. 
(2)  Definitions: 
Area of benefit means a specified area wherein it has been determined that the real property located therein will benefit from the construction of a major thoroughfare or bridge project. 
Bridge facilities means those locations identified in the transportation or flood control provisions of the circulation element or other element of the General Plan as requiring a bridge to span a waterway, a railway, freeway, or canyon. 
Construction as used in this Section includes preliminary studies, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, and actual construction. 
Major thoroughfare means those roads designated as transportation corridors and major, primary, secondary, or commuter highways on the master plan of arterial highways or the circulation element of the General Plan. The primary purpose of such roads is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the State highway system. 
(3)  The provisions herein for payment of a fee shall apply only if the major thoroughfare or bridge facility has been included in an element of the General Plan adopted by the City Council at least 30 days prior to the filing of a map or application for a building permit and on land located within the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(4)  Payment of fees shall not be required unless any major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a widening or reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(5)  Payment of fees shall not be required unless any planned bridge facility is a new bridge serving the area or an addition to an existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(6)  Action to establish an area of benefit may be initiated by the City Council upon its own motion or upon the recommendation of the Development Services Director. The proposal will be forwarded to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendations at a regular, adjourned or special meeting. The Planning Commission's comments and recommendations and the Development Services Director report, shall be transmitted to the City Council. The City Council shall set a public hearing for each proposed area benefited. Notice of the time and place of said hearing including preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated costs and the method of fee apportionment shall be given in the following manner: 
a.  If there are 100 or fewer property owners within the proposed area of benefit, notice shall be given at least ten calendar days before the hearing by first class mail addressed to each property owner within the boundary of the proposed area of benefit. 
b.  If there are more than 100 property owners within the proposed area of benefit, notice shall be given at least ten calendar days before the hearing by the following: 
1.  Notice published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the proposed area of benefit. 
2.  Notices posted throughout the proposed area of benefit with at least three notices posted at arterial highway intersections within the proposed area of benefit. 
3.  Notices sent by first-class mail to all Municipal Advisory Committees and known homeowners associations within the proposed area of benefit. 
4.  Notice by first-class mail to any person who has filed a written request there for with the Development Services Director. Such request shall apply for the calendar year in which it is filed. 
(7)  The following are additional procedures: 
a.  The City Council shall consider testimony, written protests, and other evidence. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may, unless a majority written protest is filed and not withdrawn as specified in Subsection c., determine to establish an area of benefit. If established, the City Council shall adopt a resolution describing the boundaries of the area of benefit, setting forth the cost, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment. A certified copy of such resolution shall be recorded with the City Clerk; 
b.  Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions thereof. Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this Section, the City Council shall make provisions for payment of the share of improvement cost apportioned to such lands from other sources. 
c.  Written protest will be received by the City Clerk at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. If written protests are filed by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented by the protests to less than one-half of the area to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the City Council shall not, for one year from the filing of said written protests, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this Section. Any protests may be withdrawn by the owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. 
d.  If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this Section to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the City Council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement so protested against. Such proceedings shall be commenced by a new notice and public hearing as set forth in Subsection (6). 
e.  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City Council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of an improvement or portion of improvements so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited are in favor of going forward with such improvement or portion thereof. 
(8)  Fees paid pursuant to this Section shall be deposited in a planned major thoroughfare and bridge fees fund, established for each planned bridge facility project or each planned major thoroughfare project. If the area of benefit is one in which more than one bridge or major thoroughfare is required to be constructed, a separate fund may be established covering all of the bridge projects or major thoroughfares in the area of benefit. If the area of benefit encompasses one or more bridges and one or more thoroughfares and all lands within the area of benefit are subject to the same proportionate fee for all bridges and thoroughfares, a single fund may be established to account for fees paid. Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the improvements serving the area to be benefited and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the City for the costs of constructing the improvement. 
(9)  The City Council may approve the acceptance of considerations in lieu of the payment of fees established herein. 
(10)  The City Council may approve the advancement of money from the General Fund or other applicable fund to pay the costs of constructing the improvements covered herein and may reimburse that fund for such advances from planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare funds established pursuant to this Section. 
(11)  If the subdivider, as a condition of approval of the subdivision, is required or desires to construct a bridge or major thoroughfare, the City Council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider. Such agreement may provide for payments to the subdivider from the bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund covering that specific project to reimburse the subdivider for costs not allocated to the subdivider's property in the resolution establishing the area of benefit. If the bridge or major thoroughfare fund covers more than one project, reimbursements shall be made on a pro-rata basis reflecting the actual or estimated costs of the projects covered by the fund. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.100. - Taxes and assessments. 
(a)  Certificate from Treasurer-Tax Collector. Prior to the filing of a final tract map with the City Council, the subdivider shall cause to be issued and filed by and with the Treasurer-Tax Collector a certificate stating that, according to the records of such office, there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid State, County, municipal or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable. As to taxes or special assessments which are a lien but not yet payable, the subdivider shall cause to be issued and filed with the Treasurer-Tax Collector a certificate giving his estimate of the amount of taxes and special assessments which are a lien but not yet payable. 
(b)  Security. Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments which are a lien but not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider executes and files with the Treasurer-Tax Collector security conditioned upon the payment of all State, County, municipal and local taxes and the current installment of principal and interest of all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property, but which are not yet payable. The Treasurer-Tax Collector is authorized to approve the security for payment of taxes required by this Section. 
(c)  Apportionment. The apportionment of security and delinquencies shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(d)  Release. The Treasurer-Tax Collector is authorized to release security required by this Chapter when the secured taxes and assessments have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.110. - Final parcel map requirements and procedures. 
(a)  Content and form. The content and form of final parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the City's procedures. 
(b)  Final parcel map required. 
(1)  When a subdivision is proposed to be created through the tentative parcel map process, a final parcel map shall be filed for record with the County Recorder. No proposed subdivision shall be complete until such parcel map has been filed for record, unless a waiver has been approved. 
(2)  A final parcel map, within commercial or industrial zoned areas, identifying lease lines or lines for tax purposes may be filed for record with the County Recorder without being required to comply with the tentative parcel map requirements of this Chapter. Each parcel on such map shall be identified by letter and shall not be considered to be a separate building site. No transfers of fee title may be made in connection with such map. Identification shall be shown on the face of such map as to its purpose that it does not create building sites and that it does not permit transfer of fee title interest. 
(c)  Signatures required. 
(1)  When dedications or offers of dedications, either limited or irrevocable, are made on the final parcel map, all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided, including parties to which an irrevocable offer of dedication has been made over the property, or any portion thereof, shall consent to the preparation and recordation of the final parcel map by signing the required certificate. Such signatures shall be properly acknowledged. The certificate need not be signed by public entities and public utilities which own rights-of-way, easements or other interests which cannot ripen into a fee, provided that: 
a.  The Planning Commission determines that division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the tentative map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; 
b.  The map contains a statement that the Planning Commission has determined that the division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; and 
c.  The public entity or utility has been given an opportunity to object to such a determination in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(2)  When dedications or offers of dedications are not being made, no owners' or subdividers' signatures shall be required on the parcel map. 
(d)  Method of approval. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this Chapter, the subdivider may submit a final parcel map at any time to the City Engineer for his/her preliminary review. Submission of a final parcel map to the City Engineer for preliminary review shall not be deemed to constitute "timely filing" within the meaning of Subdivision Map Act § 66452.6(d). 
(2)  In order to be approved, a final parcel map must demonstrate the following: 
a.  Compliance with any conditions imposed on the approval of the tentative parcel map. 
b.  Substantial conformance with the approved tentative parcel map and any approved alterations thereof. 
c.  Substantial completeness of the final parcel map submitted. 
(3)  The map shall be deemed "timely filed" within the meaning of Subdivision Map Act § 66452.6(d) when delivered to the City Engineer. Acceptance of a map for filing pursuant to this Subsection shall not be deemed to be acceptance of the map as having met the requirements of Subsection (2). The map shall be subject to such processing, approving and other actions necessary to prepare the map for approval and recording. 
(4)  Final parcel maps, together with any required improvement agreements and security, shall be submitted to the Development Services Director for review and preliminary determination as to satisfaction of the requirements of Subsection (2). In the event the Development Services Director determines that the final parcel map is not acceptable for further processing, the Development Services Director shall, within ten days of the date the processing fees were collected, advise the subdivider in writing of his/her preliminary determination and of the matters necessary to be satisfied in order to continue processing the final parcel map. In the event the subdivider fails to make reasonable progress in meeting the requirements identified by the Development Services Director for continued processing of the final parcel map, as set forth in Subsection (2), the map shall be presumed not to conform to the tentative parcel map and not to have satisfied the conditions of approval and no further processing of the map shall be required. However, the Development Services Director may cause the map to be forwarded to the City Council with a recommendation that the map be denied for failure to comply with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter. 
(5)  If and when the final parcel map submittal complies with the requirements of Subsection (2), the Development Services Director shall notify the subdivider and the City Engineer of his/her preliminary decision within ten days of receipt of the final map submittal. 
(6)  The subdivider may submit additional information in response to the notice provided by the Development Services Director. If the subdivider does not believe that additional information is necessary, the subdivider may request that the final parcel map, as originally submitted, be presented to the City Council for consideration. 
(7)  Within 20 days or more if requested by the subdivider after the Development Services Director notifies the City Engineer that all conditions precedent to the approval of the parcel map have been satisfied and any required improvement agreements and security are in order, the City Engineer shall examine the map and, if appropriate, shall execute the certificate required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(8)  The time limits set forth in the Subdivision Map Act for approval or disapproval of final parcel maps shall not commence until the Development Services Director has determined that the final parcel map submittal is complete. 
(9)  After the City Engineer executes his/her certificate, the Director shall transmit the parcel map to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall present the map and any required agreements, securities and approvals to the City Council for their approval. The City Clerk shall sign the City Clerk's certificate on the final parcel map after the City Council's approval. 
(e)  Filing with the County Recorder. The City Engineer shall transmit the approved final parcel map to the County Recorder for recordation, unless the surveyor/engineer/subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. 
(f)  Ties to horizontal control/digital map submission. 
(1)  The City Engineer shall provide coordinated positions in the vicinity of each new parcel map by tying the Section, quarter Section, rancho, or other appropriate land net corners or road centerlines, on an approximate one-half-mile grid convenient for proper coordinate tie-in of such map boundaries, to the existing monuments of, and, where possible, intervisible with the local control network, and by calculating and adjusting coordinates for these corners using the California Coordinate System based on the North American Datum of 1983, 1990 Adjustment (CCS NAD 83/90) or current adjustment as directed by the City Engineer. 
(2)  All data pertaining to these control monuments will be filed in accordance with the requirements of the Professional Land Surveyors Act and these records shall be indexed and made readily available to the general public. 
(3)  The City shall require the surveyor or engineer to show on the parcel map those ties made by the surveyor or engineer to such control monuments in accordance with Division 8, Chapter 1, § 8813.1 of the Public Resources Code; and that coordinates published by the City for these control monuments be shown on the map. 
(4)  The surveyor or engineer shall be permitted to show on any record of survey submitted for filing, the information prescribed above, when the normal course of survey activities include ties made to points for which coordinates have been provided or accepted into the control network by the City, and when such information may be shown pursuant to the requirements of the Public Resources Code. 
(5)  The City shall require the surveyor or engineer preparing the parcel map to tie the boundary of said map into the CCS NAD 83/90 in at least two locations, preferably on opposite sides of the boundary or as mutually agreed to by the surveyor or engineer and the City Engineer. 
(6)  The basis of bearings of the parcel map shall be the CCS NAD 83/90 Adjustment or current adjustment as directed by the City Engineer as established by the use of existing monuments, Global Positioning System Surveys (GPS), or by astronomic observation. 
(7)  In the event that the City Engineer is unable to provide the surveyor or engineer with coordinated monuments, as described in Subsection (1), within 30 days of a written request filed by the surveyor or engineer relating to any maps which is or will be processed by the City Engineer, the foregoing requirements may be waived. However, none of the above will preclude a person, authorized to practice land surveying within the State, from performing the necessary work to meet the requirements of this Section. 
(8)  The City Engineer shall require the surveyor or engineer preparing a parcel map to submit to the City, in addition to the material currently being submitted for map checking and recordation purposes, a digital graphics file containing the boundary, street centerline, right-of-way and lot/parcel line data necessary to facilitate transferring of the file into the City mapping system if the surveyor or engineer has the capability to provide such files. If the surveyor or engineer does not have this capability, the City shall create such a graphics file for entry into its system and recover the cost through the map check process. 
(9)  If the boundary of the parcel map being submitted is a parcel or lot of a map already tied to the CCS NAD 83/90 or current adjustment as directed by the City Engineer, the requirements in Subsection (5) shall be waived. 
(10)  In the event the surveyor or engineer submitting a parcel map to the City feels that compliance with the requirements stated in Subsections (3), (5), (6) and (8) will create a hardship on him/her or the client, he/she may appeal to the City Engineer to waive them. If the City Engineer refuses this appeal, the surveyor or engineer may further appeal this decision to a committee of members of the private sector recognized by the City Engineer as representative of the professional surveying community. Such a committee may be, but is not limited to, the California Land Surveyors Association, the California Council of Civil Engineers and Land Surveyors Joint Professional Practice Committee. The decision of this committee shall be final and binding on both parties. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.120. - Final tract map requirements and procedures. 
(a)  Content and form. The content and form of final tract maps shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the City's procedures. 
(b)  Final tract map required. When a subdivision is proposed to be created through the tentative tract map process, a final tract map shall be filed for record with the County Recorder. No proposed subdivision shall be complete until such tract map has been recorded, unless a waiver has been approved. 
(c)  Signatures required. All parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided, including parties to which an irrevocable offer has been made over the property, or any portion thereof, shall consent to the preparation and recordation of the final tract map by signing the required certificate. Such signatures shall be properly acknowledged. The certificate need not be signed by public entities and public utilities which own rights-of-way, easements or other interests which cannot ripen into a fee, provided that: 
(1)  The Planning Commission has determined that the division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the tentative map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; 
(2)  The map contains a statement that the Planning Commission has determined that the division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; and 
(3)  The public entity or utility has been given an opportunity to object to such a determination in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(d)  Method of approval. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this Chapter, the subdivider may submit a final tract map at any time to the City Engineer for his/her preliminary review. Submission of a final tract map to the City Engineer for preliminary review shall not be deemed to constitute "timely filing" within the meaning of Subdivision Map Act § 66452.6(d). 
(2)  In order to be approved, a final tract map must demonstrate the following: 
a.  Compliance with any conditions imposed on the approval of the tentative tract map. 
b.  Substantial conformance with the approved tentative tract map and any approved alterations thereof. 
c.  Substantial completeness of the final tract map submitted. 
(3)  The map shall be deemed "timely filed" within the meaning of Subdivision Map Act § 66452.6(d) when delivered to the City Engineer. Acceptance of a map for filing pursuant to this Subsection shall not be deemed to be acceptance of the map as having met the requirements of Subsection (2). The map shall be subject to such processing, approving and other actions necessary to prepare the map for approval and recording. 
(4)  Final tract maps, together with any required improvement agreements and security, shall be submitted to the Development Services Director for review and preliminary determination as to satisfaction of the requirements of Subsection (2). In the event the Development Services Director determines that the final tract map is not acceptable for further processing, the Development Services Director shall, within ten days of the date the processing fees were collected, advise the subdivider in writing of his/her preliminary determination and of the matters necessary to be satisfied in order to continue processing the final tract map. In the event the subdivider fails to make reasonable progress in meeting the requirements identified by the Development Services Director for continued processing of the final tract map, as set forth in Subsection (2), the map shall be presumed not to conform to the tentative tract map and not to have satisfied the conditions of approval and no further processing of the map shall be required. However, the Development Services Director may cause the map to be forwarded to the City Council with a recommendation that the map be denied for failure to comply with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this Title. 
(5)  If and when the final tract map submittal complies with the requirements of Subsection (2), the Development Services Director shall notify the subdivider and the City Engineer of his/her preliminary decision within ten days of receipt of the final map submittal. 
(6)  The subdivider may submit additional information in response to the notice provided by the Development Services Director. If the subdivider does not believe that additional information is necessary, the subdivider may request that the final tract map, as originally submitted, be presented to the City Council for consideration. 
(7)  Within 20 days or more if requested by the subdivider after the Development Services Director notifies the City Engineer that all conditions precedent to the approval of the tract map have been satisfied and any required improvement agreements and security are in order, the City Engineer shall examine the map and, if appropriate, shall execute the certificate required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(8)  The time limits set forth in the Subdivision Map Act for approval or disapproval of final tract maps shall not commence until the Development Services Director has determined that the final tract map submittal is complete. 
(9)  After the City Engineer executes his/her certificate, the Development Services Director shall transmit the tract map to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall present the map and any required agreements, securities and approvals to the City Council for their approval. The City Clerk shall sign the City Clerk's certificate on the final tract map after the City Council's approval. 
(e)  Filing with the County Recorder. The City Engineer shall transmit the approved final tract map to the County Recorder for recordation, unless the surveyor/engineer/subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. 
(f)  Ties to horizontal control/digital map submission. 
(1)  The City Engineer shall provide coordinated positions in the vicinity of each new tract map by tying the Section, quarter Section, rancho, or other appropriate land net corners or road centerlines, on an approximate one-half-mile grid convenient for proper coordinate tie-in of such map boundaries, to the existing monuments of, and, where possible, intervisible with the local control network, and by calculating and adjusting coordinates for these corners using the California Coordinate System based on the North American Datum of 1983, 1990 Adjustment (CCS NAD 83/90) or current adjustment as directed by the City Engineer. 
(2)  All data pertaining to these control monuments will be filed in accordance with the requirements of the Land Surveyor's Act and these records shall be indexed and made readily available to the general public. 
(3)  The City shall require the surveyor or engineer to show on the final tract map, those ties made by the surveyor or engineer to such control monuments in accordance with Division 8, Chapter 1, § 8813.1 of the Public Resources Code; and that coordinates published by the City for these control monuments be shown on the map. 
(4)  The surveyor or engineer shall be permitted to show on any record of survey submitted for filing, the information prescribed above, when the normal course of survey activities include ties made to points for which coordinates have been provided or accepted into the control network by the City, and when such information may be shown pursuant to the requirements of the Public Resources Code. 
(5)  The City shall require the surveyor or engineer preparing the Tract Map to tie the boundary of said map into the CCS NAD 83/90 in at least two locations, preferably on opposite sides of the boundary or as mutually agreed to by the surveyor or engineer and the City Engineer. 
(6)  The basis of bearings of the Tract Map shall be the CCS NAD 83/90 or current adjustment as directed by the City Engineer as established by the use of existing monuments, Global Positioning System Surveys (GPS), or by astronomic observation. 
(7)  In the event that the City Engineer is unable to provide the surveyor of engineer with coordinated monuments, as described in Subsection (1), within 30 days of a written request filed by the surveyor or engineer relating to any maps which is or will be processed by the City Engineer, the foregoing requirements may be waived. However, none of the above will preclude a person, authorized to practice land surveying within the State, from performing the necessary work to meet the requirements of this Section. 
(8)  The City Engineer shall require the surveyor or engineer preparing a tract map to submit to the City, in addition to the material currently being submitted for map checking and recordation purposes, a digital graphics file containing the boundary, street centerline, right-of-way and lot/parcel line data necessary to facilitate transferring of the file into the City mapping system in an acceptable format as determined by the City Engineer, if the surveyor or engineer has the capability to provide such files. If the surveyor or engineer does not have this capability, the City shall create such a graphics file for entry into its system and recover the cost through the map check process. 
(9)  If the boundary of the final tract map being submitted is a parcel or lot of a map already tied to the CCS NAD 83/90 or current adjustment as directed by the City Engineer, the requirements in Subsection (5) shall be waived. 
(10)  In the event the surveyor or engineer submitting a final tract map to the City feels that compliance with the requirements stated in Subsections (3), (5), (6) and (8) will create a hardship on him/her or the client, he/she may appeal to the City Engineer to waive them. If the City Engineer refuses this appeal, the surveyor or engineer may further appeal this decision to a committee of members of the private sector recognized by the City Engineer as representative of the professional surveying community. Such a committee may be, but not limited to, the California Land Surveyors Association, the California Council of Civil Engineers and Land Surveyors Joint Professional Practice Committee. The decision of this committee shall be final and binding on both parties. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.130. - Parcel map waivers and exceptions. 
(a)  Waivers and exceptions permitted. When requested by the subdivider or by a governmental agency, waivers from the requirement for recording a final parcel map and exceptions to the tentative parcel map process may be approved by the Planning Commission in compliance with the provisions of this Section. When any such waiver request is approved, a certificate of compliance may be recorded in lieu of a parcel map. The requirement for recording a parcel map shall not be waived when the City Engineer finds that a survey and/or monumentation is necessary. 
(b)  Types of subdivisions eligible. Only the following types of subdivisions are eligible to receive a parcel map recordation waiver: 
(1)  Subdivisions containing four or fewer parcels each of which is a minimum of five acres in area and is proposed for further subdivision. 
(2)  Subdivisions wherein each parcel will have a gross area of 20 acres or more and a right of vehicular access for a continuous width of not less than 40 feet to a maintained public street or highway having a right-of-way width of not less than 40 feet; 
(3)  Subdivisions wherein each parcel will have a gross area of not less than 40 acres. 
(c)  Waiver procedure. A waiver from the requirement for recording a final parcel map may be approved in compliance with the following procedure: 
(1)  A tentative map, accurately describing the existing legally created parcel and each proposed parcel, shall be submitted. Such tentative map shall be processed in compliance with the tentative map procedure except that it need not be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or civil engineer and need include only such information that the Development Services Director and the Planning Commission find to be necessary in order to make the required determinations. 
(2)  A waiver request shall accompany the tentative map. The exception to the tentative map requirements specified in Subsection (1) is permitted only when a tentative map proposes one of the subdivisions specified by Subsection (b). 
(3)  Prior to any action by the Planning Commission to approve a waiver, the Development Services Director shall examine the map and shall identify each proposed parcel as a building site or a nonbuilding site. 
(4)  Prior to any action to approve a waiver, the Planning Commission shall find that the subdivision: 
a.  Will comply with City requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection; 
b.  Will satisfy any other requirements pertaining to the subdivision of land as specified in the Subdivision Map Act, this Title and any other applicable City Ordinance; and 
c.  Will not create any unnecessary conditions or situations that will be incompatible with existing and potential future uses of adjacent properties. 
(d)  Waiver does not establish parcels. The approval of a waiver of the requirement to record a final parcel map does not create a subdivision or satisfy the requirements applicable to the division of a parcel of land. Any parcels shown on a tentative map for which a parcel map has been waived shall not be considered to be legally established until a certificate of compliance for such parcels has been recorded with the County Recorder. 
(e)  Time to record a certificate of compliance. A waiver of the requirement to record a final parcel map is valid only for such time as the subject tentative map is valid, and a waiver approval shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the tentative map approval. After a waiver has been approved and within the period of validity of a tentative map, and when the Development Services Director has determined that all conditions and requirements of the tentative map have been satisfied, he/she shall cause a certificate of compliance to be recorded in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.10.150. In the event any required conditions have not been satisfied, a conditional certificate of compliance may be recorded within the specified time period at the discretion of the Development Services Director. Such conditional certificate of compliance shall contain a notice of the conditions that are required to be satisfied prior to the recordation of a certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.140. - Reversions to acreage. 
(a)  Reversion authorized. Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this Chapter and the City's procedures. 
(b)  Content and form of petitions for reversion to acreage. Petitions shall conform with such requirements as to form and content as may be specified by City procedures and shall include a final tract map. If the land to be reverted consists of four or fewer contiguous parcels under the same ownership, a parcel map may be submitted in lieu of the tract map. No reversion shall be complete until such map has been recorded with the County Recorder. 
(c)  Planning commission review. Petitions for reversion to acreage shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. They shall make recommendations thereon within 30 days of the date the petition was filed with the Development Services Director. Thereafter, the Development Services Director shall transmit the petition and the Planning Commission's recommendations to the City Clerk, who shall set the matter for public hearing before the City Council. The City Clerk shall publish a notice of the time and place of said hearing in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and give written notice of the hearing to the petitioners. 
(d)  City council hearing. 
(1)  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may make such findings, including those set forth in the Subdivision Map Act, as the City Council deems appropriate. If the City Council intends to approve the reversion to acreage, it shall impose the conditions required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(2)  If the proposed final or parcel map has been previously approved by the City Engineer, the City Council may approve the reversion and authorize transmitting the map to the County Recorder for recordation. 
(3)  The City Council may disapprove the proposed reversion or may continue the matter until the final tract map or final parcel map has been approved by the City Engineer. Thereafter the City Council may approve the reversion and authorize transmitting the map to the County Recorder for recordation. 
(4)  After City Council approval, the City Engineer shall transmit the approved final tract or parcel map to the County Recorder for recordation, unless the surveyor/engineer/subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.150. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  Approval. Certificates of compliance shall be approved by the Development Services Director. 
(b)  Procedure. Requests for a certificate of compliance shall be processed and reviewed in compliance with the City procedures. No certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall be valid until it has been recorded in the office of the Orange County Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.160. - Lot line adjustments. 
(a)  Criteria. 
(1)  Person(s) owning four or fewer existing adjoining parcels who propose to adjust the boundaries of said parcels in a manner so that the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel and a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created may apply for a lot line adjustment. 
(2)  The application for lot line adjustment shall be prepared by a person authorized to practice land surveying pursuant to the Professional Land Surveyors Act. 
(b)  Application, review, and recordation. 
(1)  Applications for a lot line adjustment and the review and recordation thereof shall conform with such requirements as to form, contents, and process as may be specified by the Development Services Director. 
(2)  Applications for lot line adjustments shall be, if deemed necessary, reviewed by the Development Services Director for compliance the General Plan and applicable zoning and building ordinances. 
(3)  After the lot line adjustment proposal is approved by the Development Services Director, if all the parcels or lots involved are owned by a single individual or entity, the owner shall prepare deeds to convey the newly adjusted parcels or lot to said owner or entity. The legal descriptions shown on these deeds shall agree with the lots or parcels shown on the lot line adjustment approval. The City Engineer shall review the lot line adjustment and deeds and upon his/her approval, submit them to the County Recorder for recordation. 
(4)  After the lot line adjustment proposal is approved by the Development Services Director, if the parcels or lots involved are owned by different individuals or entities, these owners shall prepare deeds to convey the appropriate portions of the adjusted lots or parcels to each other. The City Engineer shall review the lot line adjustment and deeds, and upon his/her approval, submit them to the County Recorder for recordation. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.10.170. - Notices of violation. 
(a)  Tentative notices of violation. Whenever the Development Services Director has information indicating that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this Chapter, he/she shall file for record with the County Recorder and concurrently mail by certified mail to the owner a tentative notice of violation describing the real property in detail, naming the owners thereof, describing the violation, explaining why the property is not lawful, stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence on the issue whether the property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this Chapter, and shall state the time, date and place of the meeting. 
(b)  Receipt of evidence. Upon recordation of a tentative notice of violation, the Development Services Director shall bring the matter before the Planning Commission no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days from the date of the notice to the property owner, which shall schedule a meeting at which evidence as to why a final notice of violation should not be recorded may be presented. 
(c)  Planning commission determination. 
(1)  If the Planning Commission determines that there has been no violation, the Development Services Director shall file for record a release of the tentative notice of violation with the County Recorder. 
(2)  If the Planning Commission determines that there has been a violation, or if within 15 days of receipt of notice of the meeting, the owner of such real property fails to inform the Development Services Director of his/her objection to recording the notice of violation, the Development Services Director shall file a final notice of violation with the County Recorder. 
(3)  The determination of the Planning Commission shall be final. 
(d)  Release by certificate of compliance. A notice of violation may be released by a certificate of compliance pursuant to Section 9.10.150. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Chapter 9.11 - Local Park Code 
 
Sec. 9.11.010. - General provisions. 
(a)  Title. This Chapter may be cited as the City of Rancho Santa Margarita Local Park Code. 
(b)  Authority, purpose and objectives. 
(1)  The Local Park Code is adopted pursuant to Government Code § 66477 (the "Quimby Act"), the City's police power, the power to zone and the power to implement the conservation/open space element of the General Plan. 
(2)  The general purposes and objectives of the Local Park Code are: 
a.  To preserve, enhance and improve the quality of the physical environment of the City; 
b.  To ensure that adequate park and recreation facilities will be provided; 
c.  To secure for the residents of the City the social and physical advantages resulting from the provision of orderly park, recreation and open space facilities; 
d.  To establish conditions which will allow parks and recreation areas to be provided and to exist in harmony with surrounding and neighborhood land uses; 
e.  To ensure that park and recreation facilities are provided and maintained in a manner that will permit their maximum use and enjoyment by the residents. 
(c)  Interpretation and application. 
(1)  In all matters pertaining to local parks, the Local Park Code shall take precedence over all other ordinances or resolutions adopted by the City Council, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The provisions of the Local Park Code shall not be construed to repeal, amend, modify, impair, annul or otherwise interfere with any other existing article, ordinance, easement, deed restriction, covenant or other agreement between parties or any part thereof not specifically repealed, amended, modified, or annulled herein, except that where this Code imposes greater limitations or requirements on the use of land, or greater parks and open spaces, or larger areas or dimensions, or larger fees than the limitations or requirements imposed by any other article, ordinance, easement, deed restriction, covenant or agreement on the same premises or property, this Code shall control. 
b.  Nothing in this Code shall be construed to authorize the use of any premises or property in violation of this or any other applicable article, statute, ordinance or regulation. 
(2)  Whenever reference is made to any portion of this Code, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(3)  In the event any uncertainty exists as to the meaning or intent of any of the provisions or requirements of this Code, it shall be the duty of the Development Services Director to make a determination regarding such meaning or intent; such determination shall be that which best carries out the purposes and objectives of this Code as set forth in Subsection (b). 
(d)  Responsibility and enforcement. 
(1)  It is the responsibility of each person who proposes to establish a dwelling unit or units, or to increase the number of dwelling units, on his/her property, and of each person who proposes to create residential building sites, to provide an equitable portion of the necessary park lands as required by this Code. 
(2)  It is the responsibility of the City Council to approve all local park dedications and modifications to local park dedications in accordance with the requirements of this Code after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. 
(3)  It is the responsibility of the Planning Commission to approve all major modifications, major enhancements and changes in use for all local parks. 
(4)  The Development Services Director shall have the authority to approve minor modifications or minor enhancements. 
(5)  Routine maintenance, including, but not limited to, repair, modification or replacement of site furnishings, equipment, irrigation, landscaping and other similar projects, shall not be considered a modification or enhancement. 
(6)  It is the responsibility of the Development Services Director to verify that the requirements of this Code are complied with, and to notify all interested parties and agencies of such compliance. 
(7)  It is the responsibility of the Building Official to enforce the provisions of this Code that are applicable to the issuance of building permits and certificates of use and occupancy. 
(e)  Use of land and fees. 
(1)  All park land provided and all fees paid shall be used develop new or rehabilitate existing neighborhood or community park or recreation facilities to serve the subdivision. 
(2)  All park fees paid pursuant to this Chapter and interest accrued from such fees to the City shall be used for the purposes set forth in this Section and shall be deposited in a separate account reserved for such purposes. 
(f)  Refunds. Requests for refunds of park fees paid or release of security instruments may be directed to the Development Services Director at any time. The Director may approve a refund or a partial refund of park fees paid or release of security instruments when he/she has verified: 
(1)  That the refund amount requested corresponds to the amount of fees actually deposited in the local park trust fund for a given number of dwelling units; and 
(2)  That the local park requirement for the dwelling units in question has been met by actual City Council acceptance of park land, or by an irrevocable recorded offer to dedicate a park land on a final tract map or parcel map; or 
(3)  That the subdivision or building permit approval for which fees were required has been withdrawn or is otherwise no longer valid; or 
(4)  That the fees have not been committed within five years after payment or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later, in which case they shall be distributed to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that their lot size bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. 
Requests that do not comply with both criteria (1) and (2), or criteria (3) or (4) shall be denied by the Development Services Director. Appeals from the decision of the Development Services Director shall be to the Planning Commission as described in Section 9.08.100. 
When the Development Services Director approves a refund, he/she shall request a warrant from the Finance Director, citing in his/her request the City Council resolution accepting the park land, or the tract, book and page number in the case of a recorded offer to dedicate land or other reason for such refund. In the case of release of a security instrument, he/she shall request such release from the City Clerk. 
(h)  Modifications. Any person may apply for a modification of the methods used in fulfilling requirements of this Code. 
(1)  Each application for a modification shall be in writing and shall state specifically the exact requirement that is requested to be modified, and the applicant's reasons for requesting such a modification. 
(2)  Each application for a modification shall be filed with the Director. 
(3)  The Planning Commission shall consider the modification request at a public hearing. Such meeting shall be set for a date not later than 45 days subsequent to the filing of the application. 
(4)  Modifications of the methods used in complying with requirements of this Code may be approved only when the Planning Commission makes a determination that the future residents of the subject property will be better served by the approval of the modification. If there is a determination that the future residents will not be better served, the Planning Commission shall disapprove the application. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007)  
Sec. 9.11.020. - Requirements for subdivisions. 
(a)  Requirements. Any person who proposes to divide real property for the purpose of creating a residential subdivision or a parcel map for residential use shall pay a park fee or provide park land in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(b)  Method of fulfilling requirements. The requirements of this Chapter shall be complied with by the provision of park land or the payment of park fees, or by a combination of both. Provision of park land shall not be required for parcel maps or subdivisions containing 50 parcels or less; except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than 50. Whenever a person proposes to provide park land, such person shall comply with the requirements of Subsection (h). 
(c)  Amount of park land required. 
(1)  When the requirements of this Code are met solely on the basis of dedicating park land, the amount of land to be provided shall be computed by multiplying the number of proposed dwelling units by the park land acres per dwelling unit in accordance with the appropriate density classification in the following table: 
Dwellings Units Per Gross Acre 	Persons Per Dwelling Unit 	Park Land Acres Per Dwelling Unit 
Up to 6.5 	3.21 	0.016 
6.6 to 15.5 	2.59 	0.013 
15.6 to 25.5 	1.99 	0.010 
25.6 and up 	1.88 	0.009 
 
(2)  In the event the area to be dedicated is bounded or abutted by existing or proposed street frontage, the subdivider shall, at the time of approval of the tentative map, agree to a condition to provide curbs, gutters, sidewalk, drainage facilities, street lighting, stop lights, street signs, matching pavement and street trees to full city standards, to stub-in requested standard improvements required for residential property plus initial on site grading required for developing the park facility; provided, however, that, with the approval of the Planning Commission or City Council, whichever acts last on the tentative map, and in lieu of making said improvements, the subdivider may pay a sum as estimated by the City Engineer sufficient to cover the cost of said improvements. 
(d)  Amount of park fees required. 
(1)  When the requirements of this Code are met solely on the basis of the payment of park fees, the amount of such fees shall be computed by multiplying the number of proposed dwelling units by the park land acres per dwelling unit shown in the table of Subsection (c), and by multiplying the resultant acreage amount by the land value of the land being developed, per acre. 
(2)  The land value shall be based on the average per acre value of the property to be subdivided at the time of recording the final subdivision map, adjusted to reflect the value of such an acre of property rough graded to a maximum one percent slope. Fair market value shall be determined as of the date on which the parcel or final map is filed. 
(3)  Land value initially shall be determined by negotiations between the Development Services Director and the subdivider. If these negotiations are unsuccessful, the land value shall be determined by a member of the Appraisal Institute (MAI) mutually agreed upon by the Development Services Director and the subdivider. The subdivider shall pay for the cost of the appraisal. The subdivider shall select the appraiser from a list of three provided by the Development Services Director. 
(4)  In addition to the fee to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the subdivider shall also pay an amount equal to 20 percent of the in-lieu fee to provide curbs, gutters, drainage facilities, street lighting, stop lighting, stop lights, sidewalks, street signs, matching pavement and street trees to full city standards, stubbing in of requested utility line services to the park facility, and all standard improvements required by the City for residential subdivisions. 
(5)  Following recommendations received from the Planning Commission, the City Council may modify by resolution the above procedure for determining land value. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Amount of park land and park fees combined. Whenever the requirements of this Chapter are complied with by both the provision of park land and payment of park fee, the amount of the park fee shall be computed by determining the required amount of park land in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (c). and subtracting the amount of park land actually provided. The remainder shall be converted to a fee in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (d). 
(g)  Improvement of dedicated park land. If the person is required to provide dedicated park land and provides park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land pursuant to a development plan approved by the City, the value of the improvements together with any equipment located thereon shall be a credit against the payment of fees or dedication of land required by this Chapter. Value of such improvements shall be the cost to the developer. 
(h)  Park land requirements. Any person meeting either all or part of the requirements of this Chapter by providing park land shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  If the proposed park land is within or contiguous to the boundary of a tentative tract or parcel map, it shall be shown on the tentative tract or parcel map. 
(2)  If the proposed park land is outside the boundary of the tentative tract or parcel map, it shall be shown on a separate map accompanying the tentative tract map or shall be consistent with an approved park implementation plan. 
(3)  If the Planning Commission makes a determination that the future residents will be better served by the establishment of a park in a different location than that proposed, it may require payment of a park fee for all or part of the required park land, and the amount of park land required to be shown on the tentative map shall be reduced by an equivalent amount. 
(4)  Any proposal to provide park land on real property zoned for multiple residential uses shall include a statement on the face of the map specifying the number of proposed dwelling units, and the amount of park land required shall be computed on the basis of the number of dwelling units shown on the face of the map. If the number of building permits for dwelling units exceeds the amount proposed on the face of the tentative map, an appropriate park fee in accordance with the requirements of Subsection (d). shall be paid for the additional dwelling units or additional acreage dedicated. 
(5)  Each proposal to provide park land shall require a determination by the Development Services Director as to compliance with the regulations, standards and criteria specified by this Title and the conservation/open space element of the General Plan. The Development Services Director shall report all findings to the Planning Commission. All park land shown on a tentative tract or parcel map or a subdivision of land shall be recorded on a final tract map or a parcel map. Such map shall include an irrevocable offer of dedication to the City. 
(i)  Park fee procedures. Park fees shall be approved by the Planning Commission. The amount of park fees shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (d), based on the value of the land being developed at the time the building permits are issued. Fees shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits or at such time as otherwise provided by resolution of the City Council. 
Any recommendation of approval of the payment of park fees shall be made by the Planning Commission prior to or concurrently with the approval of the tentative map, and such approval shall be shown on the face of the tentative map and by conditions of approval. 
(j)  Change in requirements after approval of tentative map or division of land. If any person proposes to change the amount of the park land or the payment of the park fee, or the size, shape, location, terrain or improvements of the park shown on an approved tentative tract map, or tentative parcel map, such change shall be deemed to be a revision of the tentative tract map or tentative parcel map, and shall require the filing of a new or revised map. 
(k)  Standards. All required local park land provided in compliance with this Chapter shall comply with the standards and criteria contained in the conservation/open space element of the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4(Exh. A), 4-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-14-2007; Ord. No. 18-01, § 13, 2-14-2018)  
Title 10 - Buildings and Construction  
Chapter 10.01 - Authority, Purpose and Findings[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06, § 2, adopted Oct. 26, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 10.01, § 10.01.010, and enacted a new Ch. 10.01 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.01 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, adopted Dec. 8, 2010; and Ord. No. 13-03, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10.01.010. - Authority, purpose and findings. 
(a)  Authority . Health and Safety Code Section 17958 et seq., authorizes the City to adopt ordinances and regulations imposing the same requirements as are contained in the California Building Standards (California Code of Regulations, Title 24) adopted by the State pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17922. Health and Safety Code Sections 17958.5 and 18941.5 permit the City to make changes or modifications to the California Building Standards as are reasonably necessary because such changes or modifications are needed due to climatic, geographic, or topographic conditions. 
(b)  Purpose . The Fire Official and City Building Official recommend that certain changes and modifications to the 2016 California Building Standards are reasonably necessary due to local conditions within the City, certain changes and modifications are of an administrative or procedural nature or concern themselves with subjects not covered by the California Building Standards, and certain changes and modifications are reasonably necessary to safeguard life and property within the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(c)  Findings of local conditions. 
1.  Climatic Conditions: 
A.  Orange County and the City of Rancho Santa Margarita are located in a semi-arid Mediterranean type climate. It annually experiences extended periods of high temperatures with little or no precipitation. Hot, dry (Santa Ana) winds, which may reach speeds of 110 mph or greater, are also common to the area. These climatic conditions cause extreme drying of vegetation and common building materials. Frequent periods of drought and low humidity add to the fire danger. This predisposes the area to large destructive fires (conflagration). In addition to directly damaging or destroying buildings, these fires are also prone to disrupt utility services throughout the County. Obstacles generated by a strong wind, such as fallen trees, street lights and utility poles will greatly impact the response time to reach an incident scene. Additionally, there is a significant increase in the amount of wind force at 60 feet above the ground. Use of aerial type firefighting apparatus above this height would place rescue personnel at increased risk of injury. 
B.  The climate alternates between extended periods of drought and brief flooding conditions. Flood conditions may affect the Orange County Fire Authority's ability to respond to a fire or emergency condition. Floods also disrupt utility services to buildings and facilities within the County. 
C.  Water demand in this densely populated area far exceeds the quantity supplied by natural precipitation; and although the population continues to grow, the already-taxed water supply does not. California is projected to increase in population by nearly 10 million over the next quarter of a century with 50 percent of that growth centered in Southern California. Due to storage capacities and consumption, and a limited amount of rainfall future water allocation is not fully dependable. This necessitates the need for additional and on-site fire protection features. It would also leave tall buildings vulnerable to uncontrolled fires due to a lack of available water and an inability to pump sufficient quantities of available water to floors in a fire. 
D.  These dry climatic conditions and winds contribute to the rapid spread of even small fires originating in high-density housing or vegetation. These fires spread very quickly and create a need for increased levels of fire protection. The added protection of fire sprinkler systems and other fire protection features will supplement normal fire department response by providing immediate protection for the building occupants and by containing and controlling the fire spread to the area of origin. Fire sprinkler systems will also reduce the use of water for firefighting by as much as 50 to 75 percent. 
2.  Topographical conditions: 
A.  Natural slopes of 15 percent or greater generally occur throughout the foothills of Orange County. The elevation change cause by the hills creates the geological foundation on which communities within Orange County are built and will continue to be built. With much of the populated flatlands already built upon, future growth will occur in areas with steeper slopes and greater constraints in terrain. 
B.  Road circulation features located throughout the County also make amendments reasonably necessary. Located through the County are major roadways, highways and flood control channels that create barriers and slow response times. Hills, slopes, street and storm drain design accompanied with occasional heavy rainfall, cause roadway flooding and landslides, and at times may make an emergency access route impassable. There are areas in Orange County that naturally have extended Fire Department emergency response times that exceed the 5 minute goal. 
C.  Placement of multiple occupancy buildings, location of arterial roads, and fire department staffing constraints due to recent revenue-limiting state legislation have made it difficult for the fire department to locate additional fire stations and provide manpower sufficient to concentrate fire companies and personnel to control fires in high density apartment or condominium buildings. Fire Department equipment does not allow easy access to areas of buildings greater than 55 feet above the level of Fire Department vehicle access. These conditions create the need for built-in on-site fire protection systems to protect occupants and property until fire fighting apparatus and personnel arrive on the scene. 
D.  These topographical conditions combine to create a situation, which places fire department response time to fire occurrences at risk, and makes it necessary to provide automatic on-site fire-extinguishing systems and other protection measures to protect occupants and property. 
3.  Geological conditions: 
A.  Orange County and the City of Rancho Santa Margarita are located in a highly active seismic area. There are earthquake faults that run along both the northeastern and southwestern boundaries of Orange County. The Newport-Inglewood Fault Zone (NIFZ) which runs through Orange County was the source of the destructive 1933 Long Beach earthquake (6.3 magnitude, hypocenter off Newport Beach coast), which took 120 lives, with areas damaged from Laguna Beach to Marina del Rey and inland to Whittier, and poses one of the greatest hazards to lives and property in the nation. Regional planning for reoccurrence is recommended by the State of California, Department of Conservation. There was also an earthquake in December 1989, with the epicenter located near the City of Irvine. The fault on which this quake occurred was unknown prior to this activity. The October 17, 1989, Santa Cruz earthquake resulted in only one major San Francisco fire in the Marina district, but when combined with the 34 other fires and over 500 responses, the department was taxed to its full capabilities. The Marina fire was difficult to contain because mains supplying water to the district burst during the earthquake. If more fires had been ignited by the earthquake, it would have been difficult for the fire department to contain them. Experts predict a major earthquake in our area within the next 50 years. This situation creates the need for both additional fire protection measures and automatic on-site fire protection for building occupants since a multitude of fires may result from breakage of gas and electric lines as a result of an earthquake. As noted by "Planning Scenario on a Major Earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood Fault Zone, 1988, State Department of Conservation," page 59, "unfortunately, barely meeting the minimum earthquake standards of building codes places a building on the verge of being legally unsafe." 
B.  Traffic and circulation congestion presently existing in the City of Rancho Santa Margarita often places fire department response time to fire occurrences at risk. This condition will be exacerbated by any major disaster, including any earthquake wherein damage to the highway system will occur. This condition makes the need for additional on-site protection for property occupants necessary. 
C.  The City of Rancho Santa Margarita is located in an area subject to a climatic condition of high winds and low humidity. This combination of events creates an environment, which is conducive to rapidly spreading fires. Control of such fires requires rapid response. Obstacles generated by a strong wind, such as fallen trees, street lights and utility poles, and the requirement to climb 75 feet vertically up flights of stairs will greatly impact the response time to reach an incident scene. Additionally, Section 6, Figure 6-2 of ASCE 7 identifies a significant increase in the amount of wind force at 60 feet above the ground. Use of aerial type fire fighting apparatus above this height would place rescue personnel at increased risk of injury. 
D.  The City of Rancho Santa Margarita is located in the middle of the seismically active area. The viability of the public water system would be questionable at best after a major seismic event. This would leave tall buildings vulnerable to uncontrolled fires due to a lack of available water and an inability to pump sufficient quantities of any available water to floors above the 55-foot level. A severe seismic event has the potential to negatively impact any rescue or fire suppression activities because it is likely to create obstacles similar to those indicated under the high wind section above. With the probability of strong aftershocks there exists a need to provide increased protection for anyone on upper floors. 
E.  Untreated wood roofs cause or contribute to serious fire hazard and to the rapid spread of fires when such fires are accompanied by high winds. Pieces of burning wooden roofs become flying brands and are carried by the wind to other locations and thereby spread fire quickly. Recent Grand Jury Report findings support this concern. 
F.  Soils throughout the County possess corrosive properties that reduce the expected usable life of water services when metallic pipes in contact with soils are utilized. 
G.  Portions of the County contain active or former oil production fields. These areas contain a variety of naturally occurring gases, liquids and vapors. These compounds present toxicity or flammability hazards to building occupants. Evaluation of these hazards and the risks they pose to development is necessary to implement appropriate mitigation. 
Due to the topographical conditions of sprawling development separated by waterways and narrow and congested streets and the expected infrastructure damage inherent in seismic zone described above, it is prudent to rely on automatic fire sprinkler systems to mitigate extended fire department response time and keep fires manageable with reduced fire flow (water) requirements for given structures. Additional fire protection is also justified to match the current resources of firefighting equipment and personnel within the Orange County Fire Authority. 
Additional amendments have been made to the California Building Standards Code and other supplementary codes. Such amendments are hereby found to be either administrative or procedural in nature or concern themselves with subjects not covered in such codes. The changes made include provisions making each of said codes compatible with other codes enforced by the City. 
The amendments to the 2016 California Building Standards Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24) set forth herein, and indexed in the following table, are reasonably necessary because of the local climatic, geological and topographical conditions presented. 
Amendments to the
California Building Code 	Findings as
identified in
Sections 1, 2,
or 3, above 
104.8, 105.2, 113.1 	3 
903.2, 903.2.8, 	2 & 3 
1505.1, 1505.1.3, 1505.5, and 1505.7 	1, 2 & 3 
3109.4.4.2 	2 
Amendments to the
California Residential Code 	Findings as
identified in
Sections 1, 2,
or 3, above 
Table R301.2(1), R902.1, R902.1.3, and R902.2 	1, 2 & 3 
Amendments to the
California Green Building
Standards Code 	Findings as
identified in Sections 1, 2,
or 3, above 
GBSC 301.1, GBSC 301.1.1 	3 
Amendments to the
California Electrical Code 	Findings as identified in Sections I, 2, or 3, above 
CEC 690.13 	3 
 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Chapter 10.02 - Codes Adopted by Reference[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06, § 3, adopted Oct. 26, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 10.02, § 10.02.010, and enacted a new Ch. 10.02 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.02 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-03, § 3, adopted Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10.02.010. - Adoption of California Building Standards Code and related model codes. 
(a)  The City Council adopts and incorporates by reference, as though set forth in full in this Section, the following construction codes subject to the modifications set forth in this Title 10: 
1.  The California Building Code, 2016 Edition, including Chapter 1, Division II, based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council; 
2.  The California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, with Appendix V Swimming Pool Safety Act, based on the 2015 International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council; 
3.  The California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition, as published by the International Code Council; 
4.  The California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
5.  The California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
6.  The California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association; 
7.  The California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 Edition, as published by the International Code Council; 
8.  The California Energy Code, 2016 Edition, as published by the International Code Council; and 
9.  The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council 
(b)  The provisions of the codes, as amended by this Title 10, shall constitute the Building Regulations of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita and shall be known as the "Rancho Santa Margarita Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 3, 10-26-2016)  
Chapter 10.03 - Amendments to California Building Code[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06, § 4, adopted Oct. 26, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 10.03, §§ 10.03.010—10.03.130, and enacted a new Ch. 10.03 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.03 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-03, § 4, adopted Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10.03.010. - Amendment to Section 104. 
(a)  Section 104.8 is amended by adding a sentence to the end of the paragraph to read as follows: 
104.8. Liability. The provisions of this section shall apply if the Building Official or his/her authorized representative are employees of this jurisdiction and shall also apply if the Building Official or his/her authorized representative are acting under contract as agents of this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 4, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.03.020. - Amendment to Section 105. 
(a)  Section 105.2 is amended by revising "Building" exemption 2 to read as follows: 
2.  Fences not over 6 feet (2134 mm) high. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 4, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.03.030. - Amendments to Section 113. 
(a)  Section 113.1 is amended to read as follows: 
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. Any decision of the board of appeals may be appealed to City Council pursuant to Section 9.08.100 of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code. 
The board of appeals shall consist of five members, composed of the Planning Commission. Said members shall hold their respective membership on said board of appeals by reason of, and concurrently with their terms of service as Planning Commission members and shall cease to be such members upon their ceasing to be Planning Commission members. The building official shall be the secretary of the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all its decisions and findings on contested matters in writing to the building official, with duplicative copy thereof to any appellant or contestant affected by any such decision of finding. 
Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The Planning Commission Chair shall be the presiding officer of the board. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Brown Act. 
The board shall have the right, subject to such limits as the City Council may prescribe by resolution, to employ at the cost and expense of the City, such qualified individuals as the board, in its discretion, may deem reasonably necessary in order to assist it in its investigations and making its findings and decisions. 
(b)  Section 113.3 is deleted in its entirety without replacement. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 4, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.03.040. - Amendments to Section 903. 
(a)  Section 903.2 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in the CBC 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area, or more than two stories in height. 
Exception: Subject to approval by the Fire Code Official, open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 of the California Building Code. 
2.  Existing Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and when one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building area, and the resulting building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202; or 
b.  When an addition exceeds 2,000 square feet (186 m 2 ) and the resulting building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202; or 
c.  An additional story is added above the second floor regardless of fire areas or allowable area. 
Exception: Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8. 
(b)  Section 903.2.8 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows: 
1.  New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings. 
2.  Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  An addition when the existing building is already provided with automatic sprinklers; or 
b.  When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies and not housing bedridden clients, not housing nonambulatory clients above the first floor, and not housing clients above the second floor. 
2.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the California Building Code. 
3.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill children or children with intellectual disabilities, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and building or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors. 
4.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over). 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 4, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.03.050. - Amendments to Section 1505. 
(a)  Table 1505.1 is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE 1505.1 a 
Minimum Roof Covering Classifications 
Types of Construction 
IA 	IB 	IIA 	IIB 	IIIA 	IIIB 	IV 	VA 	VB 
B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 
 
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m 2 . 
a.  Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A. 
(b)  Section 1505.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B. 
(c)  Section 1505.5 is deleted in its entirety without replacement. 
(d)  Section 1505.7 is deleted in its entirety without replacement.  
Sec. 10.03.060. - Amendment to Section 3109. 
(a)  Section 3109.4.4.2 is amended to modify the first paragraph as follows: 
3109.4.4.2 Construction permit; safety features required. 
Commencing January 1, 2007, except as provided in Section 3109.4.4.5, whenever a building permit is issued for construction of a new swimming pool or spa, or any building permit is issued for remodeling of an existing pool or spa, at a private, single-family home, it shall have an enclosure complying with 3109.4.4.3 and, it shall be equipped with at least one of the following seven drowning prevention safety features: 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 4, 10-26-2016)  
Chapter 10.04 - Amendments to California Residential Code[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06, § 5, adopted Oct. 26, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 10.04, §§ 10.04.010—10.04.110, and enacted a new Ch. 10.04 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-03, § 5, adopted Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10.04.010. - Amendment to Section R301.2. 
(a)  Table R301.2(1) is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE R301.2(1) 
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria 
GROUND SNOW LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY f 	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM 	WINTER DESIGN TEMP e 	ICE BARRIER UNDERLAY-MENT REQUIRED h 	FLOOD HAZARDS g 	AIR FREEZING INDEX i 	MEAN ANNUAL TEMP j 
	Speed d 
(mph) 	Topographic effects* 	Special wind region 	Wind borne debris zone 		Weathering a 	Frost line Depth b 	Termite c 					
Zero 	110 	No 	No 	No 	D 2 or E 	Negligible 	12-24" 	Very Heavy 	43 	No 	No 	0 	60 
 
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s. 
a. Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., "negligible," "moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652. 
b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade. 
c. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage. 
d. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R30l.2(4)].Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4. 
e. The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 97½-percent values for winter from Appendix D of the California Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official. 
f. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1. 
g. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of all currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended. 
h. In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "NO." 
i. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the l00-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html. 
j. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html. 
k. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
l. In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES" and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
m. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 5, 10-26-2016) 
_____ 
Sec. 10.04.020. - Amendments to Section R902. 
(a)  Section R902.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Class A roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck. 
2.  Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks. 
3.  Class A roof assemblies include minimum 16 ounces per square foot copper sheets installed over combustible decks. 
4.  Class A roof assemblies include slate installed over underlayment over combustible decks. 
(b)  Section R902.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R902.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A. 
(c)  Section R902.2 is amended to modify the beginning paragraph as follows: 
R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes. Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A or B roofs. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 5, 10-26-2016)  
Chapter 10.05 - Amendments to California Green Building Standards Code[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06, § 6, adopted Oct. 26, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 10.05, §§ 10.05.010—10.05.110, and enacted a new Ch. 10.05 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.05 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-03, § 6, adopted Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10.05.010. - Amendments to Section 301. 
(a)  Section 301.1 is amended to read as follows: 
301.1 Scope. Buildings shall be designed to include the green building measures specified as mandatory in this code. Voluntary green building measures are also included in this code and may be included in the design and construction of structures covered by this code, but are not required unless they are adopted by a city or county as specified in Section 101.7. 
(b)  Section 301.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
301.1.1 Additions and alterations. [HCD] The mandatory provisions of Chapter 4 shall be applied to additions or alterations of existing residential buildings. Code sections relevant to additions and alterations shall only apply to the portions of the building being added or altered within the scope of the permitted work. 
Note: On and after January 1, 2014, residential buildings undergoing permitted alterations, additions or improvements shall replace noncompliant plumbing fixtures with water-conserving plumbing fixtures. Plumbing fixture replacement is required prior to issuance of a certificate of final completion, certificate of occupancy or final permit approval by the local building department. See Civil Code Section 1101.1, et seq., for the definition of a noncompliant plumbing fixture, types of residential buildings affected and other important enactment dates. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 6, 10-26-2016)  
Chapter 10.06 - California Fire Code—Adoption[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, adopted Oct. 26, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 10.06, § 10.06.010, and enacted a new Ch. 10.06 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.06 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-04, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10.06.010. - Adoption of California Fire Code. 
(a)  The City Council adopts and incorporates, as though set forth in full in this section, the 2016 California Fire Code, including Appendices B, BB, C, CC AND H based on the 2015 International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council, as amended by this Chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of the California Fire Code, as amended by this Title 10 shall constitute the Fire Code of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita and shall be known as the "Rancho Santa Margarita Fire Code". 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Chapter 10.07 - Amendments to the California Fire Code[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-07, § 3, adopted Oct. 26, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 10.07, §§ 10.07.010—10.07.180, and enacted a new Ch. 10.07 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.07 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-04, § 3, adopted Dec. 11, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10.07.010. - Chapter 1—Scope and Administration. 
Chapter 1 Scope and Administration is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section. 109.4 Violation penalties is hereby amended as follows: 
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall result in penalties assessed as prescribed in the OCFA Prevention Field Services adopted fee schedule. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Section 109.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor is hereby added as follows: 
109.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor. Persons operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code that shall permit any fire or life safety hazard to exist on premises under their control shall be guilty of an infraction. Persons who fail to take immediate action to abate a fire or life safety hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the chief or a duly authorized representative are guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.020. - Chapter 2—Definitions. 
Chapter 2 Definitions is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section 202 General Definitions is hereby revised by adding "OCFA," "Sky Lantern," and "Spark Arrester" as follows: 
OCFA. Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction. 
SKY LANTERN. An airborne lantern typically made of paper, Mylar, or other lightweight material with a wood, plastic, or metal frame containing a candle, fuel cell, or other heat source that provides buoyancy. 
SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions: 
1.  Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366. 
2.  Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.030. - Chapter 3—General Requirements. 
Chapter 3 General Requirements of the California Fire Code is adopted in its entirety, with the exception of section 308.1.4, with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section 304.1.2 Vegetation is hereby revised as follows: 
304.1.2 Vegetation. Type, amount, or arrangement of weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of being ignited and endangering property needing to comply with OCFA Guidelines, shall be cut, thinned, and removed by the owner or occupant of the premises in accordance with OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline—Technical Design for New Construction, Fuel Modification Plans, and Maintenance Program. Vegetation clearance requirement in urban-wildland interface areas shall be in accordance with Chapter 49. 
(b)  Section 305.6 Hazardous Conditions is hereby added as follows: 
305.6 Hazardous conditions. Outdoor fires are not allowed when predicted sustained winds exceed 8 MPH during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official. 
(c)  Section 307 OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES is hereby amended as follows: 
SECTION 307 OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES, FIRE PITS, FIRE RINGS, AND OUTDOOR FIREPLACES 
307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices used at Group R shall comply with this section. 
Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended for cooking. 
307.6.1 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. At other R occupancies, the minimum distance shall be ten feet. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester as defined in Section 202. 
307.6.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas. Fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks. The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 15 feet of combustible structures, unless within a permanent or portable fireplace. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure or to vegetation shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Fires in devices burning wood or solid fuel shall be managed per Sections 305, 307, and 308. 
307.6.2.1 Where prohibited. The burning of wood and other solid fuels shall not be conducted within a fuel modification zone. Wood and other solid fuel burning fires in devices other than permanent fireplaces are not allowed within Wildfire Risk Areas (WRA) and Wildland-Urban Interface Areas (WUI) or in locations where conditions could cause the spread of fire to the WRA or WUI, unless determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire. 
(d)  Section 309.2.1 Indoor charging of electric cars/cars is hereby added as follows: 
309.2.1 Indoor charging of electric carts/cars. Indoor charging of electric carts/cars where the combined volume of all battery electrolyte exceeds 50 gallons shall comply with following: 
1.  Spill control and neutralization shall be provided and comply with Section 608.5. 
2.  Room ventilation shall be provided and comply with Section 608.6.1 
3.  Signage shall be provided and comply with Section 608.7.1 
4.  Smoke detection shall be provided and comply with Section 608.9. 
(e)  Section 320 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is hereby added as follows: 
320 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline - Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
(f)  Section 321 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways is hereby added as follows: 
321 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3,048 mm) on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces. 
Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire. 
(g)  Section 322 Unusual Circumstances is hereby added as follows: 
322 Unusual circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement of the vegetation management requirements and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purpose of this code if determined that in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Difficult terrain. 
2.  Danger of erosion. 
3.  Presence of plants included in any state and federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society and county-approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species. 
4.  Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees. 
5.  Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions undesirable or impractical. 
(h)  Section 323 Use of Equipment is hereby added as follows: 
323 Use of equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as defined in Section 323.1 maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
2.  Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition 
(i)  Section 323.1 Use of Equipment and Devices Generating Heat, Sparks or Open Flames is hereby added as follows: 
323.1 Equipment and devices generating heat, sparks or open flames. During any time of the year within the Wildland Risk Areas, no person shall use or operate any stationary equipment, welding equipment, cutting torches, tarpots, or grinding devices from which a spark, fire, or flame may originate, which is located on or near any forest-covered land, brush-covered land, or grass-covered land, without doing the following: 
1.  First clearing away all flammable material, including snags, from the area around such operation for a distance of 30 feet or other approved method to reduce fire spread into the wildlands. If 30 foot clearing cannot be achieved then an alternate method shall be approved by the AHJ prior to work starting. 
2.  Maintain one serviceable round point shovel with an overall length of not less than forty-six (46) inches and one backpack pump water-type fire extinguisher fully equipped and ready for use at the immediate area during the operation. 
3.  Stop work when winds are 8 MPH during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official. 
4.  Keep a cell phone nearby and call 911 immediately in case of a fire. 
(j)  323.2 Spark arresters. Spark arresters shall comply with Section 202, and when affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to Section 323 shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material 
(k)  324 Sky Lanterns or similar devices. The ignition and/or launching of a Sky Lantern or similar device is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.040. - Chapter 4—Emergency Planning and Preparedness. 
(a)  Chapter 4 Emergency Planning and Preparedness. Only the following sections, subsections, and amendments are adopted: 
401 
401.3.4 
401.9 
402 
403.2 
404.5-404.6.6 
407 
(b)  Section 407.5 Hazardous Materials inventory Statement is revised as follows: 
407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each application for a permit shall include OCFA's Chemical Classification Packet in accordance with Section 5001.5.2. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.050. - Chapter 5—Fire Service Features. 
Chapter 5 Fire Service Features is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section 501.1 Scope is revised as follows: 
501.1 Scope. Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises shall comply with this Chapter and, where required by the fire code official, with OCFA Guideline B-09, "Fire Master Plan for Commercial & Residential Development." Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises located in State Responsibility Areas shall also comply with OCFA Guideline B-09a, "Fire Safe Development in State Responsibility Areas." 
(b)  Section 510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings is revised as follows: 
510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. All new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The Emergency responder radio coverage system shall comply with the local authority having jurisdiction's ordinance and this code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio coverage system is not needed. 
2.  In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment could have a negative impact on normal operations of the facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency responder radio coverage system. 
This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Existing buildings or structures, unless required by the Building Official and OCFA for buildings and structures undergoing extensive remodel and/or expansion. 
2.  Elevators. 
3.  Structures that are three stories or less without subterranean storage or parking and that do not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story. 
4.  Wood-constructed residential structures four stories or less without subterranean storage or parking that are not built integral to an above ground multi-story parking structure. 
5.  Should construction that is three stories or less that does not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story include subterranean storage or parking, then this ordinance shall apply only to the subterranean areas. 
(c)  Section 510.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings is hereby deleted without replacement. 
(d)  Section 510.4.2.2 Technical Criteria is revised as follows: 
510.4.2.2 Technical criteria. The fire code official shall maintain a document providing the specific technical information and requirements for the emergency responder radio coverage system. This document shall contain, but not be limited to, the various frequencies required, the location of radio sites, effective radiated power of radio sites, and other supporting technical information. 
1.  The frequency range supported from the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 851-869 MHz (base transmitter frequencies). 
2.  The frequency range supported to the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 806-824 MHz (radio field transmit frequencies). 
3.  A public safety radio amplification system shall include filters to reject frequencies below 851 MHz and frequencies above 869 MHz by a minimum of 35 dB. 
4.  All system components must be 100 percent compatible with analog and digital modulations after installation without adjustments or modifications. The systems must be capable of encompassing the frequencies stated herein and capable of future modifications to a frequency range subsequently established by the jurisdiction. 
5.  Active devices shall have a minimum of -50 dB 3 rd order intermodulation protection. 
6.  All active in-building coverage devices shall be FCC Part 90 Type Certified 
(e)  Section 510.5.1 Approval prior to installation is revised as follows: 
510.5.1 Approval prior to installation. Amplification systems capable of operating on frequencies licensed to any public safety agency by the FCC shall not be installed without prior plan submittal, coordination and approval from Orange County Communications and a copy of the approved plan provided to the fire and building code officials. 
(f)  Section 510.5.2 Minimum qualification of personnel is revised as follows: 
510.5.2 Minimum qualifications of personnel. The minimum qualifications of the system designer and lead installation personnel shall include both of the following: 
1.  A valid FCC-issued general radio operator's license. 
2.  Certification of in-building system training issued by a nationally recognized organization, school or a certificate issued by the manufacturer of the equipment being installed. 
(g)  Section 510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure item 7 is revised as follows: 
510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure. When an emergency responder radio coverage system is required, and upon completion of installation, the building owner shall have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is not less than 90 percent. The test procedure shall be conducted as follows: 
7. As part of the installation a spectrum analyzer or other suitable test equipment shall be utilized to ensure spurious oscillations are not being generated by the subject signal booster. This test shall be conducted at the time of installation and subsequent annual inspections by the FCC licensed technician hired by the property owner and an OCSD/Communications Division FCC-certified technician. 
(h)  Section 510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance is revised as follows: 
510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance. The owner of the building or their representative shall have the emergency responder radio coverage system inspected and tested annually or where structural changes occur including additions or remodels that could materially change the original field performance tests. Testing shall consist of the following: 
1.  In-building system components shall be tested to determine general functional operability. 
2.  Signal boosters shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. 
3.  Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load of a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the 1-hour test period the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional 1-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be determined. 
4.  Other active components shall be checked to verify operation within the manufacturer's specifications. 
5.  If noncompliance is found, the FCC licensed technician will assess improvements necessary and provide such information to OCSD Communications and the fire and building code officials. 
6.  At the conclusion of the testing, a certification report, which shall verify compliance with Section 510.5.3, shall be submitted to OCSD Communications and the fire and building code officials. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.060. - Chapter 9—Fire Protection Systems. 
Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section 903.2 Where required is revised as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area, or is more than two stories in height. 
Exception: Subject to approval by the Fire Code Official, open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 of the California Building Code. 
2.  Existing Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building area, and the resulting building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202; or 
b.  When an addition exceeds 2,000 square feet (186 m 2 ) and the resulting building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202; or 
c.  An additional story is added above the second floor regardless of fire areas or allowable area. 
Exception: Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8. 
(b)  Section 903.2.8 Group R is revised as follows: 
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows: 
1.  New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings. 
2.  Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  An addition when the existing building is already provided with automatic sprinklers; or 
b.  When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies and not housing bedridden clients, not housing nonambulatory clients above the first floor, and not housing clients above the second floor. 
2.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the California Building Code. 
3.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill children or children with intellectual disabilities, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and building or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors. 
4.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over). 
(c)  Section 903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems is hereby added as follows: 
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity 
Exception: When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and required by the Fire Code Official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3 
 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.070. - Chapter 11—Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings. 
Chapter 11 Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings. Only the following sections are adopted: 
1103.7 
1103.7.3 
1103.7.3.1 
1103.7.8—1103.7.8.2 
1103.7.9—1103.7.9.10 
1103.8—1103.8.5.3 
1107 
1113 
1114 
1115 
1116 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.080. - Chapter 28—Lumber Yards and Agro-Industrial, Solid Biomass and Woodworking Facilities. 
Chapter 28 Lumber Yards and Agro-Industrial, Solid Biomass and Woodworking Facilities is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section 2801.2 Permit is revised as follows: 
2801.2 Permit. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6 and 105.6.29. 
(b)  Section 2808.2 Storage site is revised as follows: 
2808.2 Storage site. Storage sites shall be level and on solid ground, elevated soil lifts or other all-weather surface. Sites shall be thoroughly cleaned and approval obtained from the fire code official before transferring products to the site. 
(c)  Section 2808.3 Size of piles is revised as follows: 
2808.3 Size of piles. Piles shall not exceed 15 feet (4,572 mm) in height, 50 feet (15,240 mm) in width and 100 feet (30,480 mm) in length. 
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to allow the pile size to be increased where a fire protection plan is provided for approval that includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Storage yard areas and materials-handling equipment selection, design and arrangement shall be based upon sound fire prevention and protection principles. 
2.  Factor that lead to spontaneous heating shall be identified in the plan, and control of the various factors shall be identified and implemented, including provisions for monitoring the internal condition of the pile. 
3.  The plan shall include means for early fire detection and reporting to the public fire department; and facilities needed by the fire department for fire extinguishment including a water supply and fire hydrants. 
4.  Fire apparatus access roads around the piles and access roads to the top of the piles shall be established, identified and maintained. 
5.  Regular yard inspections by trained personnel shall be included as part of an effective fire prevention maintenance program. 
Additional fire protection called for in the plan shall be provided and shall be installed in accordance with this code. The increase of the pile size shall be based upon the capabilities of the installed fire protection system and features. 
(d)  Section 2808.4 Pile Separation is revised as follows: 
2808.4. Pile separation. Piles shall be separated from adjacent piles by a minimum distance of 20 feet. Additionally, piles shall have a minimum separation of 100 feet from combustible vegetation. 
(e)  Section 2808.7 Pile fire protection is revised as follows: 
2808.7 Pile fire protection. Automatic sprinkler protection shall be provided in conveyor tunnels and combustible enclosures that pass under a pile. Combustible conveyor systems and enclosed conveyor systems shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. Oscillating sprinklers with a sufficient projectile reach are required to maintain a 40% to 60% moisture content and wet down burning/smoldering areas. 
(f)  Section 2808.9 Material-handling equipment is revised as follows: 2808.9 Material-handling equipment. All material handling equipment operated by an internal combustion engine shall be provided and maintained with an approved spark arrester. Approved material-handling equipment shall be available for moving wood chips, hogged material, wood fines and raw product during fire-fighting operations. 
(g)  Section 2808.11 Temperature control is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11 Temperature control. The temperature shall be monitored and maintained as specified in Sections 2808.11.1 and 2808.11.2. 
(h)  Section 2808.11.1 Pile temperature control is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11.1 Pile temperature control. Piles shall be rotated when internal temperature readings are in excess of 165 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(i)  Section 2808.11.2 New material temperature control is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11.2 New material temperature control. New loads delivered to the facility shall be inspected and tested at the facility entry prior to taking delivery. Material with temperature exceeding 165 degrees Fahrenheit shall not be accepted on the site. New loads shall be monitored to verify that the temperature remains stable. 
(j)  Section 2808.12 Water availability is hereby added as follows: 
2808.12 Water Availability. Facilities with over 2,500 cubic feet shall provide a water supply. The minimum fire flow shall be no less than 500 gpm @ 20 psi for a minimum of 1 hour duration for pile heights up to 6 feet and 2 hour duration for pile heights over 6 feet. If there is no water purveyor, an alternate water supply with storage tank(s) shall be provided for fire suppression. The water supply tank(s) shall provide a minimum capacity of 2,500 gallons per pile (maximum 30,000 gallons) for piles not exceeding 6 feet in height and 5,000 gallons per pile (maximum 60,000) for piles exceeding 6 feet in height. Water tank(s) shall not be used for any other purpose unless the required fire flow is left in reserve within the tank at all times. An approved method shall be provided to maintain the required amount of water within the tank(s). 
(k)  Section 2808.13 Tipping area is hereby added as follows: 
2808.13 Tipping areas shall comply with the following: 
1.  Tipping areas shall not exceed a maximum area of 50 feet by 50 feet. 
2.  Material within a tipping area shall not exceed 5 feet in height at any time. 
3.  Tipping areas shall be separated from all piles by a 20 foot wide fire access lane. 
4.  A fire hydrant or approved fire water supply outlet shall be located within 150 feet of all points along the perimeter of the tipping area. 
5.  All material within a tipping area shall be processed within 5 days of receipt. 
(l)  Section 2808.14 Emergency Contact is hereby added as follows: 
2808.14 Emergency Contact. The contact information of a responsible person or persons shall be provided to the Fire Department and shall be posted at the entrance to the facility for responding units. The responsible party should be available to respond to the business in emergency situation. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.090. - Chapter 49—Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Areas. 
Chapter 49 Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Areas is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section 4906.3 Vegetation is revised as follows: 
4906.3 Requirements. Hazardous vegetation and fuels around all applicable buildings and structure shall be maintained in accordance with the following laws and regulations: 
1.  Public Resources Code, Section 4291. 
2.  California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 1.5, Chapter 7, Subchapter 3, Section 1299 (see guidance for implementation "General Guideline to Create Defensible Space"). 
3.  California Government Code, Section 51182. 
4.  California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 7, Subchapter 1, Section 3.07. 
5.  OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline - Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
(b)  Section 4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is hereby added as follows: 
4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in a Wildfire Risk Area shall comply with the following: 
1.  Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to or concurrently with the approval of any tentative map. 
2.  Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
3.  The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel Modification Section of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline - Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
3.1  The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification in perpetuity. 
4.  The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official. 
5.  All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.100. - Chapter 50—Hazardous Materials—General Provisions. 
Chapter 50 Hazardous Materials—General Provisions is adopted in its entirely with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section 5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS), is revised as follows: 
5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS). Where required by the fire code official, an application for a permit shall include Orange County Fire Authority's Chemical Classification Packet, which shall be completed and approved prior to approval of plans, and/or the storage, use or handling of chemicals on the premises. The Chemical Classification Packet shall include the following information: 
1.  Product Name 
2.  Component 
3.  Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number 
4.  Location where stored or used. 
5.  Container size 
6.  Hazard classification 
7.  Amount in storage 
8.  Amount in use-closed systems 
9.  Amount in use-open systems. 
(b)  Section 5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances is hereby added as follows: 
5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances. No person shall use or store any amount of extremely hazardous substances (EHS) in excess of the disclosable amounts (see Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et al.) in a residential zoned or any residentially developed property. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.110. - Chapter 56—Explosives and Fireworks. 
Chapter 56 Explosives and Fireworks California Fire Code Chapter 56 is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  Section 5608.2 Firing is hereby added as follows: 
5608.2 Firing. All fireworks displays shall be electrically fired. 
(b)  Section 5608.3 Application for Permit is hereby added as follows: 
Section 5608.3 Application for Permit. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the fallout area based on 100 feet per inch of shell size, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone line, or other overhead obstructions shall be provided to OCFA. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.120. - Chapter 80—Referenced Standards. 
Chapter 80 Referenced Standards is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 6.7.3 is revised as follows: 
6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½" inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2 ½" inlets shall be provided. 
(2)  Section 8.3.3.1 is revised as follows: 
8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8 
(2)  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
(3)  Quick response CMSA sprinklers 
(4)  ESFR sprinklers 
(5)  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
(6)  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
(3)  Section 11.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new occupancy. 
(4)  Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the Fire Code Official: 
1.  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
2.  Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available; 
3.  Utilize the Orange County Fire Authority water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
(b)  NFPA 13D, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 7.1.2 is revised as follows: 
7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service. 
(c)  NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 7.3.1.1 is revised as follows: 
7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor. 
(d)  NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 6.2.8.1 is hereby added as follows: 
6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted. 
2.  Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red. 
(2)  Section 6.2.9 is revised as follows: 
All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated: 
1.  A post indicator valve installed not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building 
(a)  For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve. 
2.  A wall post indicator valve 
3.  An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4. 
4.  A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building 
(a)  For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer. 
5.  Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior 
6.  Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior 
(3)  Section 10.1.5 is hereby added as follows: 
10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings. 
(4)  Section 10.4.1.1 is revised as follows: 
10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation. 
Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel. 
(5)  Section 10.4.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel. 
(6)  Section 10.4.3.2 is deleted and replaced as follows: 
10.4.3.2 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Sec. 10.07.130. - Appendices. 
Appendix A is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix B is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix BB is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix C is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix CC is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix D is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix E is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix F is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix G is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix H is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix I is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix J is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix K is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix L is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix M is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix N is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 10-26-2016)  
Chapter 10.08 - Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Permits 
 
Sec. 10.08.010. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, California Government Code Section 65850.5) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter allows the City to achieve these goals and policy objectives while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 8-12-2015)  
Sec. 10.08.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building Department means the Building and Safety Division of the Development Services Department for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
Building Official means the Building Official for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
City means the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Email. 
(2)  The Internet. 
(3)  Facsimile. 
Expedited permitting and expedited review means the process outlined in Section 10.08.060. Permit review and inspection requirements. 
Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit. 
Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
(2)  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City of Rancho Santa Margarita and Civil Code Section 714(c)(3). 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City of Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code. 
Solar energy system means either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. 
Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 8-12-2015)  
Sec. 10.08.030. - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements with no structural alterations shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 8-12-2015)  
Sec. 10.08.040. - Solar energy system requirements. 
(a)  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the City and the State of California. 
(b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
(c)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 8-12-2015)  
Sec. 10.08.050. - Applications and documents. 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of a small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the City website. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required application and documents via email, the City's website, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
(c)  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(d)  The Building Department shall develop and implement a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review, which shall be published on the City's website. The standard plan and checklist shall substantially conform to the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(e)  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems pursuant to this chapter must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 8-12-2015)  
Sec. 10.08.060. - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
(a)  The Building Department shall implement the following administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications. 
(b)  Review of an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system shall be limited to the Building Official's review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. 
(c)  For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the City's checklist and standard plan, the Building Department shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit or authorization within three business days. 
(d)  If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
(e)  The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a residential rooftop solar energy system use permit if the Building Official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Planning Commission in accordance with Section 9.08.100 of this Code. 
(f)  The Building Official may not deny an application for the residential rooftop solar energy system use permit unless the Building Official makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Planning Commission in accordance with Section 9.08.100 of this Code. 
(g)  Any condition imposed on an application via a residential rooftop solar energy system use permit shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(h)  Approval of an application shall not be conditioned upon the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code, that manages a common interest development. 
(i)  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
(1)  The inspection shall be completed in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request. 
(2)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements made applicable to the first inspection. 
(Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, 8-12-2015)  
Chapter 10.09 - Amendments to California Electrical Code 
 
Sec. 10.09.010. - Amendment to section 690. 
(a)  Subsection (A) of Section 690.13 is amended to read as follows: 
690.13 Building or Other Structure Supplied by a Photovoltaic System. 
(A) Location. The PV disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either on the outside of a building or structure or inside nearest the point of entrance of the system conductors. A single, visible-open, lockable AC disconnect shall be within 3 feet of the meter on the exterior of the building. 
(Ord. No. 16-06, § 6, 10-26-2016)  
Chapter 10.10 - Electric Vehicle Charging Station Permits 
 
Sec. 10.10.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This Chapter is also intended to comply with Government Code § 65850.7. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 9-27-2017)  
Sec. 10.10.020. - Applicability. 
This Chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the City. Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this Chapter are not subject to the requirements of this Chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of an electric vehicle charging station system. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements of electric vehicle charging stations shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 9-27-2017)  
Sec. 10.10.030. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building Department means the Building and Safety Division of the Development Services Department for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
Building Official means the Building Official for the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
City means the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
Electric vehicle charging station or charging station means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads as of October 8, 2015, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Email. 
(2)  The internet. 
(3)  Facsimile. 
Expedited permitting and expedited review means the process outlined in Section 10.10.060 (Application Submittal and Expedited Review Process). 
Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit. 
Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 9-27-2017)  
Sec. 10.10.040. - Electric vehicle charging station system requirements. 
(a)  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the City, the Orange County Fire Authority, and the State of California. 
(b)  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 9-27-2017)  
Sec. 10.10.050. - Application and documents. 
(a)  The Building and Safety Division shall develop and implement a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist shall include, but may not be limited to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" as published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. The Building and Safety Division may develop and implement more than one checklist to differentiate the requirements for expedited review of commercial and residential applications. 
(b)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station application, including the checklist(s), shall be made available on the City's website. 
(c)  Electronic submittal of the required application and documents via email, the City's website, or facsimile shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants. 
(d)  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 9-27-2017)  
Sec. 10.10.060. - Application submittal and expedited review process. 
The Building Department shall implement the following administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of an application to install an electric vehicle charging station. 
(a)  An application that satisfies the information requirements in the City's checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the City's checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code § 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. 
(b)  If an application for an electric vehicle charging station is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant. 
(c)  The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for an electric vehicle charging station use permit if the Building Official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Planning Commission in accordance with Section 9.08.100 of this Code. 
(d)  Any condition imposed on an application for an electric vehicle charging station use permit shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(e)  The Building Official may not deny an application for an electric vehicle charging station use permit unless the Building Official makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Planning Commission in accordance with Section 9.08.100 of this Code. 
(f)  Approval of an application for an electric vehicle charging station shall not be based or conditioned on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code, that manages a common interest development. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 9-27-2017)  
Chapter 10.11 - Floodplain Management Regulations for Properties in Designated Zones 
 
Sec. 10.11.010. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 66560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.010), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.020. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City may be subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by uses being inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effects of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights and velocities, also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.020), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.030. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize" public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.030), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.040. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.040), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.050. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory use means a use, which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
Alluvial fan means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and five sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
Apex means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrators interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
AR Zone means a special flood hazard area that results from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flow is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. (See "special flood hazard area"). 
Base flood means a flood, which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100 year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
Building. (See "structure"). 
City means the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
Developed areas means an area of a community that is: 
(1)  A primarily urbanized, built-up area that is a minimum of 20 contiguous acres, has basic urban infrastructure, including roads, utilities, communications, and public facilities, to sustain industrial, residential, and commercial activities; and 
a.  Within which 75 percent or more of the parcels, tracts, or lots contain commercial, industrial, or residential structures of uses; 
b.  Is a single parcel, tract, or lot in which 75 percent of the area contains commercial or industrial structures or uses; or 
c.  Is a subdivision developed at a density of at least two residential structures per acre within which 75 percent or more of the lots contain existing residential structures. 
(2)  Undeveloped parcels, tracts, or lots, the combination of which is less than 20 and contiguous on at least three sides to areas meeting the criteria of subsection (1). 
(3)  A subdivision that is a minimum of 20 contiguous acres that has obtained all necessary government approvals, provided that the actual "start of construction" of structures has occurred on at least: 
a.  Tem percent of the lots or remaining lots of a subdivision; or 
b.  Ten percent of the maximum building coverage or remaining building coverage allowed for a single lot subdivision and construction of structures is underway. Residential subdivisions must meet the density criteria in subsection (1)c. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or after the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
Flood, flooding or floodwater means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters: the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
(2)  The condition resulting from flood related erosion. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding"). 
Floodplain Administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain management regulations mean this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface, elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway". 
Floodway fringe means the area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
Fraud and Victimization, as related to Section 10.11.240, [nature of] variances, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
Governing body is the local governing unit, i.e., the City Council of the City, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
Hardship as related to Section 10.11.240, [nature of] variances, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance. Even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "basement"). 
(1)  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The wet floodproofing standard in subsection 10.11.170(3). 
b.  The anchoring standards in subsection 10.11.170(1). 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in subsection 10.11.170(2). 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 10.11.180. 
(2)  For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the foodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction , for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carded downstream. 
One hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. (See "base flood"). 
Public safety and nuisance as related to Section 10.11.240, [nature of] variances, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance shall not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designated to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, or AH. 
Start of construction includes proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not however, include: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state of local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of flood various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.050), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.060. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.060), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.070. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 6, 1998 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs) dated July 6, 1998, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City by the Floodplain Administrator, the study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the office of the City Clerk and Engineering Department at City Hall located at 30211 Avenida de las Banderas, Suite 101, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.070), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.080. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.080), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.090. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.090), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.100. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.100), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.110. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights maybe increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.110), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.120. - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.120), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.130. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 10.11.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Site plan, including but not limited to: 
a.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
c.  If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and 
d.  If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and 
(2)  Foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
b.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 10.11.170 of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and 
c.  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to 95 percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and 
(3)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 10.11.170 of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and 
(4)  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 10.11.150 of this chapter; and 
(5)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.130), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.140. - Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The City Council shall designate the Floodplain Administrator by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.140), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.150. - Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Permit review. Review all development permits to determine that: 
a.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
d.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
(2)  Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 10.11.070, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal to state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 10.11.170 et seq. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption; or 
a.  If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995 in order to administer Section 10.11.170 et seq. 
1.  Simplified method. 
i.  One hundred year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and 
ii.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or 
2.  Detailed method. 
i.  One hundred year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; and 
ii.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-RAS computer program. 
(3)  Notification of other agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(4)  Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available, as needed the following: 
a.  Certification required by subsection 10.11.170(3)a. (lowest floor elevations), 
b.  Certification required by subsection 10.11.170(3)b. (elevation or floodproofing of non-residential structures), 
c.  Certification required by subsection 10.11.170(3)c. (wet floodproofing standard), 
d.  Certification of elevation required by subsection 10.11.190(b) (subdivision standards), and 
(5)  Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. 
(6)  Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 10.11.090. 
(7)  AR Zone Duties. 
a.  Use the adopted official map or legal description of those designated developed areas within Zones AR, AR/AR1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/A, AR/AO, to determine if a proposed project is in a developed area. 
b.  Determine the base flood elevation to be used for individual projects within developed areas, areas not designated as developed areas, and dual zone areas. 
c.  Require the applicable standards in Sections 10.11.170 et seq. 
d.  Provide written notification to the permit applicant that the area has been designated as an AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, or AR/A Zone and whether the structure will be elevated or protected to or above the AR base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.150), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.160. - Appeals. 
The City Council of the City shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.160), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.170. - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 10.11.200. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed: 
a.  With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if 
d.  Within Zones AH, AO, AR/AH, or AR/AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the proposed structures. 
(3)  Elevation and flood proofing. 
a.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, 
1.  In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grad if no depth number is specified. (The State of California recommends that in AO Zones without velocity the lowest floor be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least two feet, or elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.) 
2.  In an A Zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 10.11.150 of this chapter. (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation, as determined by the community.) 
3.  In all other Zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation.) 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
b.  Non-residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with subsection 10.11.170(3)a. or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities; 
1.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection 10.11.170(3)a. so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
2.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
3.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or 
2.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
d.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 10.11.200. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.170), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.180. - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
(1)  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
(2)  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
(b)  On site waste disposal systems to new construction shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.180), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.190. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
(b)  All subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.190), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.200. - Standards for manufactured homes. 
(a)  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map on sites located: 
(1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on 2 site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated an a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. 
(b)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE on the community Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection 10.11.200(a) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement, and be elevated so either the: 
(1)  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood; or 
(2)  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(3)  Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified if a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.200), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.210. - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
(a)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE, on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use—a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheals or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
(2)  Meet the permit requirements of Section 10.11.150 et seq. of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection 10.11.200(a). 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.210), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.220. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 10.11.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply. 
(1)  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection 10.11.220(1) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 10.11.170. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.220), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.230. - AR Zone Areas. 
Within areas designated as AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO or AR/A as established under Section 10.11.070, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Developed areas. All new construction in areas designated as developed areas shall meet the standards of Section 10.11.170 using the lower of either the AR base flood elevation or the elevation that is three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  Areas not designated as developed areas. All new construction in areas that are not designated as developed areas: 
a.  Where the AR flood depth is equal to or less than five feet above the highest adjacent grade, shall meet the standards of Section 10.11.170 using the lower of either the AR base flood elevation or the elevation that is 13 feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Where the AR flood depth is greater than five feet above the highest adjacent grade, shall meet the standards of Section 10.11.170 using the AR base flood elevation. 
(3)  Dual zone areas. 
a.  All new construction in areas within Zone AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, AR/A shall meet the standards of Section 5.0 using the higher of either the applicable AR Zone elevation (as determined from subsections 10.11.230(1) or (2) above) or the base flood elevation (or flood depth) for the underlying A1-30, AE, AH, AO, or A Zone. 
b.  All substantial improvements to existing construction within Zones AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, or AR/A shall meet the standard of Section 10.11.170 using the base flood elevation (or flood depth) for the underlying A1-30, AE, AH, AO, or A Zone. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.230), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.240. - Nature of variances. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the City to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.240), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.250. - Appeal board. 
(a)  In passing upon requests for variances, the City shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such, damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
(b)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall he recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Orange County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(c)  The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.250), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 10.11.260. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 10.11.140 et seq. and 10.11.170 et seq., of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
(c)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
(1)  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
(3)  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 10.11.050 of this chapter), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 10.11.050) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections 3.20.260(a) through 3.20.260(e) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 10.11.250(a) and the purposes of this chapter, the City may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 1(3.20.260), 6-21-2001)  
Chapter 10.12 - Grading and Excavation[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of Chapter 10.12 by Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, adopted December 8, 2010, Ord. No. 10-08, § 11, adopted December 8, 2010, repealed the former Chapter 10.12, § 10.12.010 in its entirety, which pertained to the California Administrative Code and derived from Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, adopted October 24, 2007. 
 
Sec. 10.12.010. - Title reference to Code. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of Rancho Santa Margarita Grading and Excavation Code." "Code" as referred to in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall mean the Rancho Santa Margarita Grading and Excavation Code. The requirements of this Code should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provisions of this Code imposes restrictions different from those imposed in any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose more protective standards, for human health or the environment, shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.020. - Grading manual. 
(a)  The City Engineer shall formulate and modify as necessary such rules, procedures, definitions and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer this chapter. Such rules, procedures, definitions and interpretations shall be referred to as the "City of Rancho Santa Margarita Grading Manual" or the "Grading Manual". 
(b)  The Grading Manual shall include provisions to assure that the Water Quality Control Requirements relevant to activities subject to this chapter apply to all such activities. 
(c)  In the event of any conflict between said Grading Manual and this Code, the provisions of this Code shall govern. The provisions of the said Grading Manual shall, to the extent that they are made conditions of any Grading Permit by the City Engineer, be binding on the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.030. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of this Code to safeguard life, limb, property, the public welfare, and the environment by regulating Grading and controlling the quality of water runoff on private and public property in the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.040. - Scope. 
This Code sets forth rules and regulations to control Excavation, Grading, and earthwork construction, including Fills and embankments, and establishes administrative requirements for issuance of Grading Permits and approval of plans and inspection of Grading construction in accordance with the requirements for Grading and Excavation as contained in the building code regulations then in effect as adopted and modified by City ordinance, as well as Water Quality Control Requirements relevant to activities subject to this chapter. In the event a particular topic is not covered in either this chapter or the Grading Manual, provisions of the building code regulations of the City shall govern. If a conflict arises between the building code regulations of the City and this chapter or the Grading Manual, the specific provisions of this chapter or the Grading Manual shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.050. - Definitions. 
Approval shall mean a written engineering or geological opinion by the responsible engineer, geologist of record, or responsible principal of the engineering company concerning the progress and completion of the work, unless the term specifically refers to approval of the City Engineer, Building Official, or other City official. 
Approved Plans shall mean the current Grading plans, which bear the approval of the City Engineer. 
Approved Testing Agency shall mean a facility whose testing operations are controlled and monitored by a registered Civil Engineer and which is equipped to perform and certify the tests required by this Code, or the Grading Manual, as determined by the City Engineer. This determination may be appealed to the City Council. 
Building Official shall mean the Building Official of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita or his or her duly delegated representative. 
City shall mean the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
City Engineer shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita or his or her duly delegated representative. 
City Manager shall mean the City Manager of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita or his or her duly delegated representative. 
Civil Engineer shall mean a professional engineer registered in the State of California to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
Civil Engineering shall mean the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials for the evaluation, design, and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind. 
Clearing, Brushing, and Grubbing shall mean the removal of vegetation (grass, brush, trees, and similar plant types) by mechanical or other means. 
Commercial Coach is a vehicle with or without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial purposes, and shall include a trailer coach. 
Compaction is the densification of a Fill by mechanical means. 
Director of Development Services shall mean the Development Services Director of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita or his or her duly delegated representative. 
Earth Material is any rock, natural Soil, or Fill and/or any combination thereof. 
Engineering Geologist shall mean a geologist certified in the State of California to practice Engineering Geology. 
Engineering Geology shall mean the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
Erosion is the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice. 
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is a plan prepared, stamped and signed by a Civil Engineer in accordance with the Grading Manual and the City's Local Implementation Plan, as defined in Chapter 5.10 of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code, which shows the various Temporary, Semi-permanent, and Permanent Erosion and Sediment Control Devices and Systems, and incorporates appropriate best management practices. 
Erosion and Sediment Control System shall mean an effective combination of source control practices that protect the soil surface and prevent soil particles from being detached by rainfall, flowing water or wind, and sediment control practices that trap soil particles after they have been detached and moved by rain, flowing water or wind, to protect adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities and receiving waters from an abnormal deposition of sediment or dust. 
Excavation is the mechanical removal of earth material. 
Fill is a deposit of Earth Material placed by artificial means. 
Grade shall mean the vertical location of the ground surface. 
(1)  Natural Grade is the ground surface unaltered by artificial means. 
(2)  Existing Grade is the ground surface prior to grading. 
(3)  Rough Grade is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the Approved Plan. 
(4)  Finished Grade is the final grade of the site, which conforms to the Approved Plan. 
Grading is any excavating or filling or combination thereof. 
Grading Contractor is a contractor licensed and regulated by the State of California who specializes in grading work or is otherwise licensed to do grading work. 
Grading Permit is an official document or certificate issued by the City Engineer authorizing Grading activity as specified by Approved Plans and specifications. 
Hillside Site is a Site which entails cut and/or fill grading of three feet or more in vertical height below or above natural ground; or a combination Fill-over-cut Slope equal to or greater than five feet in vertical height; or where the existing grade is 20 percent or greater; and which may be adversely affected by drainage and/or stability conditions within or from outside the site, or which may cause an adverse effect on adjacent property. 
Mobilehome means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system. Mobilehome does not include recreational vehicle, Commercial Coach, or factory-built housing. 
Owner is any person, agency, firm, private entity, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a given real property. 
Permanent Erosion and Sediment Control Devices are improvements that remain throughout the life of the development. They include Terrace drains, downdrains, Slope landscaping, channels, storm drains, etc. 
Precise Grading Permit is a permit that is issued on the basis of Approved Plans which show the precise structure location, finish elevations, and all on-site improvements. 
Preliminary Grading Permit or Rough Grading Permit is a permit that is issued on the basis of Approved Plans which need not show a structure location but must show interim building pad drainage to the degree required by the City Engineer. 
References. Unless indicated otherwise, or as reasonably appears from the context, References in this Code to the Civil Engineer, the Soil Engineer, the geologist, and the Engineering Geologist refer to the professional person(s) preparing, signing, or approving the project plans and specifications which comprise the Approved Grading Plan, and which professional person appears of record pursuant to Sections 10.12.160 through 10.12.210 or his or her successor appearing pursuant to Section 10.12.420, Transfer of responsibility for Approval. 
Sediment Control shall mean the measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the Site. 
Semi-permanent Erosion and Sediment Control Devices are devices that are used primarily during construction and are not relocateable. They include earthen berms, concrete spillways, desilting basins, riser/outlet pipes, etc. 
Site is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where Grading is performed or permitted. 
Slope is an included ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
Soil is naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock. 
Soils Engineer is a Civil Engineer duly registered in the State of California whose field of expertise is Soil mechanics. 
Soil Engineering shall mean the application of the principles of Soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil works involving the use of Earth Materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof. 
Special Inspector is an inspector duly licensed by the City Engineer to perform inspection of asphalt concrete placement, concrete work, welding or related construction work or other Grading related work approved by the City Engineer. 
Stockpiling is the temporary placement of imported and/or excavated compactable earth in excess of 50 cubic yards for future fill on or off Site. 
Stormwater Permits are any permits issued by a local, state, or federal regulatory agency regulating stormwater flow over and from any project subject to this chapter, including, but not limited to, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits and State General Permits, as defined in Chapter 5.10 (Water Quality Control) of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code. 
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for construction projects shall refer to a document that includes all necessary pollution prevention measures to prevent pollutants from being discharged into waterways and to comply with state and federal requirements to implement best management practices ("BMPs") to achieve compliance with discharge prohibitions and stormwater effluent limits as required by the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated With Construction and Land Disturbance Activities (the "State Construction General Permit") issued by the California State Water Resources Control Board. 
Temporary Erosion and Sediment Control Devices are devices that are removable and can rarely be salvaged for subsequent reuse. In most cases, they will last no longer than one rainy season. They include sandbags, gravel bags, plastic sheeting (visqueen), silt fencing, straw bales, and similar items. 
Terrace is a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded Slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
Water Quality Control Requirements are the requirements relevant to activities that are subject to this chapter contained in Chapter 5.10 of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code (Water Quality Control) and the Drainage Area Management Plan ("DAMP") and Local Implementation Plan ("LIP") as defined in Chapter 5.10, as well as requirements relevant to the activities that are subject to this chapter found in Stormwater Permits. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.060. - Grading permits. 
No person shall conduct any Grading, Clearing, Brushing, Grubbing, or Stockpiling on Natural or Existing Grade that is preparatory to Grading, without first having obtained a Grading Permit from the City Engineer. Exceptions to this requirement are as follows or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer: 
(a)  An Excavation below Finished Grade for basements and footings of a building, Mobilehome, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit or construction permit. This shall not exempt any Fill made with the material from such Excavation nor exempt any Excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure. This shall not prohibit a minimum-fee Grading Permit or Soil or geologic report from being required for foundation design and inspection purposes when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, stability or flooding considerations warrant such inspection. 
(b)  Cemetery graves. 
(c)  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Government Code Section 53097, earthwork construction regulated by the Federal, State, County, or City governments, or by any local agency as defined by Government Code Sections 53090 through 53095 (special districts); pipeline or conduit Excavation and backfill conducted by local agencies or public utilities; or earthwork construction performed by railway companies on their operating property. This exemption, however, shall apply only when the earthwork construction takes place on the property, or dedicated rights-of-way or easements of the above agencies. 
(e)  Excavation and backfill for installation of underground utilities by public utilities or companies operating under the authority of a franchise or public property encroachment permit. 
(f)  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressures upon any adjacent or contiguous property. 
(g)  Exploratory Excavations under the direction of Soil Engineers or Engineering Geologists, provided all Excavations are properly backfilled. All such Excavations and trenches are subject to the applicable sections of Title 8 of the State Orders, Division of Industrial Safety. 
(h)  An Excavation which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one Site and which (1) is less than two feet in vertical depth, or (2) which does not create a cut slope greater than five feet in vertical height and steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). 
(i)  A Fill less than one foot in depth placed on Natural Grade with a Slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1), which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. 
(j)  A Fill less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures or Mobilehomes, which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.070. - Grading permit, paving. 
No person shall construct pavement surfacing in excess of 3,000 square feet, on Natural or Existing Grade for the purpose of a private road or commercial, industrial, or multi-residential parking lot or travelway without a valid Grading Permit unless waived by the City Engineer or a separate improvement plan for such paving is approved and signed by an authorized City official. Resurfacing or maintenance of paved surfaces shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.080. - Grading permit, watercourse alteration. 
No person shall alter an existing watercourse, channel, or revetment by excavating, or placing Fill, rock protection, or structural improvements without a valid Grading Permit unless waived by the City Engineer or performed as interim protection under emergency flood-fighting conditions. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.090. - Excavation blasting permit. 
No person shall possess, store, sell, transport, or use explosives and blasting agents to do any Excavation without a permit from the Orange County Fire Authority and/or any other government agency with jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.100. - Types of grading permits. 
(a)  Either a Preliminary Grading Permit or a Precise Grading Permit may be issued for Grading work upon completion of an application in accordance with of the Grading Manual and approval by the City Engineer. The Preliminary or Precise Grading Permit is the option of the permittee provided that the plans satisfy the requirements of the Grading Manual. 
(b)  Building permits may be issued for a Site graded under a valid Precise Grading Permit upon completion and approval of Rough Grade inspection as specified in Subsection 10.12.430(e), Site inspection by the City Engineer/Building Official or their designated representative, of this Code. 
(c)  Building permits shall not be issued for a Site graded under a Preliminary Grading Permit until a new Precise Grading Permit has been issued and the provisions of Subsection (b) of this section have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.110. - Powers and duties of the City Engineer and Building Official. 
(a)  The provisions of the 2010 California Building Code, Section 104, Powers and Duties of Building Official, or the corresponding section of any subsequent edition of the California Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by City ordinance, shall apply to Grading construction work. 
(b)  Stop orders. Whenever any building or Grading work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or the Grading Permit, the City Engineer and/or Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the City Engineer or Building Official to proceed with the work. 
(c)  Whenever any building or Grading work is being done contrary to the provisions of the Water Quality Control Requirements related to activities subject to this chapter, in addition to the powers and duties specified in Subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the City Engineer and/or Building Official may utilize any enforcement provision specified in Chapter 5.10 of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.120. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to do Grading in the City of Rancho Santa Margarita, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The issuance of a building permit, performance of building permit inspections, or issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy may be withheld for property on which a violation of the provisions of this Code exists, including work performed not in accordance with Approved Grading Plan, until such violation has been corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the Building Official and City Engineer. The Building Official shall consult, as appropriate, with the Director of Development Services. 
(c)  No tentative tract map or parcel map shall be approved for property on which a violation of the provisions of this Code exists, including work performed not in accordance with Approved Grading Plans, unless conditioned to require such violation to be corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer prior to recordation. 
(d)  No zone change or discretionary permit per the City of Rancho Santa Margarita Zoning Code shall be approved for property on which a violation of the provisions of this Code exists, including work performed not in accordance with Approved Grading Plans, unless conditioned to require such violation to be corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and Building Official prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
(e)  The Director of Development Services shall determine if the corrective or mitigating action itself requires the approval of a site development permit per the City of Rancho Santa Margarita Zoning Code and/or an Initial Study per the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA"). 
(f)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to any such fine or imprisonment, the court may also require such party to correct or mitigate the Grading violation to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(g)  Public nuisance. 
(1)  Any Grading performed and/or maintained on any Site in the City of Rancho Santa Margarita contrary to, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this Code shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and any failure, refusal, or neglect to obtain a Grading Permit as required by the terms of this Code shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a public nuisance has been committed. 
(2)  The City may commence an appropriate civil action to abate a public nuisance and to collect a civil penalty. Any civil action shall be preceded by a finding by the City Council and by the City Engineer that a violation of this Code has occurred. 
(3)  The civil penalty shall not exceed $250.00 for each day on which such violation occurs and continues to occur. In addition, the civil penalty for violation of an abatement order or stop order shall be $500.00 for each day on which such violation occurs and continues to occur. 
(4)  The abatement of a public nuisance may be made at the expense of the Owner of the property on which the nuisance is located. If the City abates the public nuisance, the costs of such abatement shall be charged to the Owner of the premises involved. The City Engineer may apply to the City Council to cause costs for such work to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property and collected in the manner provided for special assessments. 
(h)  This Code may also be enforced by injunctive relief, including, but not limited to, temporary restraining orders and preliminary and permanent injunctions issued by the Superior Court upon suit by the City of Rancho Santa Margarita. 
(i)  In addition to the provisions of the subsections above, a notice of violation of this Code may be recorded in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Notice of intent. A written notice of intent to record a notice of violation shall be served on the current Owner of record of the property. Such notice shall describe the property, the violation, and the action necessary to correct or mitigate the violation. The notice shall inform the Owner that a notice of violation will be recorded if the Owner does not, within 20 days of receipt thereof, either correct the violation or request a meeting with the City Engineer as set forth below. The notice shall include a copy of this subsection (i) and be substantially as follows: 
Notice of Continuing Violation 
of the 
City of Rancho Santa Margarita 
Grading and Excavation Code 
Notice is hereby given that the City of Rancho Santa Margarita has determined that a violation of the above Code exists on the following described property (description). The violation consists of (description). 
While a violation of the above Code exists, the City of Rancho Santa Margarita may refuse to approve building or occupancy permits, subdivision maps, use permits, and other discretionary permits and development approvals. 
(2)  Correction of violation. If, within 20 days of receipt of a notice of intent, the Owner corrects the violation, no notice of violation shall be recorded. The City Engineer may grant extensions of time for good cause. 
(3)  Meeting. If the Owner requests a meeting, the City Engineer shall schedule a meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be served on the Owner not less than 15 days prior thereto. The City Engineer may reschedule the meeting from time to time for a good cause with adequate notice to the landowner. At the meeting, the Owner may be represented by counsel and may present any relevant evidence that violations do not exist. 
(4)  Decision, notice. Within thirty (30) days following completion of the meeting, the City Engineer shall issue and serve on the Owner his or her determination as to whether or not a notice of violation will be recorded. This determination shall be supported by appropriate findings on all material issues raised at the meeting. The decision of the City Engineer shall be final with respect to recordation of a notice of violation, but shall not affect other proceedings under Section 10.12.120. 
(5)  Recordation. If the City Engineer determines that a notice will be recorded, such notice shall be recorded 15 or more days after service of notice of the decision. 
(6)  Release of notice. When a violation is corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, if a notice of violation had been recorded, the City Engineer shall cause a release to be recorded. Said release shall refer to the notice of violation and shall state that the violation described therein has been corrected. 
(j)  All of the foregoing remedies shall be cumulative and not exclusive, except when otherwise provided. Penalties and/or remedies under this Code are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, administrative, civil, or criminal. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.130. - Hazardous conditions. 
(a)  Hazardous conditions exist when the state of any natural ground, natural Slopes, Excavation, Fill, or drainage device, any of which exist on public or private property, is a menace to life or limb, or a danger to public safety, or endangers or adversely affects the safety, usability, or stability of adjacent property, structures, or public facilities. 
(b)  The City Engineer and/or Building Official may examine or cause to be examined every condition reported as hazardous as set forth in Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Notice of hazardous condition. In any case where a hazardous condition is found by the City Engineer and/or Building Official, he or she shall give all Owners of the property affected by the hazardous condition, the authorized representative of the Owners, or the permittee under any active permit issued pursuant to this Code which gives permittee control of the property, hereinafter collectively referred to as "Owner," notice of such finding and demand for immediate corrective action of any such conditions. The notice may state the time and place of a hearing to be held if the Owner fails to comply with any demand for corrective work or reports. The purpose of the hearing would be for the presentation of evidence concerning the hazardous conditions and demand for corrective work or submission of reports. The notice shall set forth the right of the Owner to be present at the hearing, at his or her option, and introduce such relevant evidence on the issues as he or she desires. If the time and place of any hearing scheduled for the presentation of evidence is not included in the initial notice(s), it shall be included in a subsequent notice. 
(d)  Evidence. At the time and place so specified for the hearing, evidence shall be submitted as to the facts of any condition as to reasonably establish its existence, and the City Engineer or his or her designee, as Hearing Officer, shall determine whether the facts presented reasonably establish the existence of a hazardous condition to the satisfaction of the Hearing Officer. Evidence may further be submitted as to the work or reports considered necessary to correct or determine work to correct said hazard. 
Exception: Where City property or facilities are endangered by the hazardous condition found by the City Engineer, at the request of the Owner, the hearing may be held before the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. The City Engineer may appeal such Hearing Officer's order as set forth in this section. 
(e)  Order, finality, and appeal. If the Hearing Officer determines the existence of a hazardous condition, he or she shall determine whether such hazards are subject to corrective work and/or the need for more analysis through the preparation of reports and shall order such work or reports and specify a completion time. 
(1)  Finality of order. The determination and order may be made orally at the hearing and shall be written and transmitted to the Owner within a reasonable time. The determination and order shall become final within five days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, from the time it is first rendered in the event that the Owner was not present at the hearing, within five days of the mailing of the order to the last known address of said Owner. 
(2)  Appeal. The Owner may, at any time prior to the determination and order becoming final, appeal in writing the decision of the Hearing Officer to the City Council. The City Council shall fix a time and place and hold a hearing, consider the evidence, and make a determination as set forth in Section 10.12.140, Appeals, of this Code. The order of the City Council shall be immediately final. 
(f)  Completion of work. The Owner shall, following the finality of the determination and order of the Hearing Officer, or if appealed, the determination and order of the City Council, commence the corrective action ordered or preparation of reports and such work or submission shall be completed within the specified time. 
(g)  Failure to complete work. If the Owner neglects or fails to complete the corrective work or submit the reports ordered by the Hearing Officer or City Council within the specified time, the City Engineer may: (1) cause the work to be performed or reports to be prepared, or (2) advise the Owner of the need for corrective work and warn him/her/it that in the absence of such corrective work, subsequent future hazards may occur which could result in an order to vacate the premises. Nothing in this subsection (g) shall be construed to limit the type of remedy or relief that the City may have under any other provision of law. 
(h)  Costs. Costs incurred by the City to perform any corrective work or prepare reports under Subsection (g) above shall be charged to the Owner. The City Engineer may apply to the City Council to cause the costs to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property and collected in a manner provided for special assessments. 
(i)  Vacation of property. If necessary, the notice and order in Subsections (c) or (e) of this section shall include the requirement that the property, a portion thereof or adjacent sites be vacated within a specified time, in the interest of public safety, pending the finality of any determination and order or completion of corrective work. 
The City Engineer shall cause the property to be posted at conspicuous locations with a notice containing at least the following: 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
DO NOT ENTER 
City Engineer, City of Rancho Santa Margarita 
Date Posted _______ 
Said posted notice may also contain the date, time, and place of the hearing and the name, address, and telephone number of the office or City Engineer where additional information may be obtained. 
Such posted notices shall remain posted until any necessary corrective work is completed. Such posted notices shall not be removed without written permission of the City Engineer, and no person shall enter the property except for the purpose of making the required corrections or preparing reports. 
(j)  Service of notices. The notices and order required by Subsections (c) and (e) of this section may be served either: 
(1)  By mailing a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Owner's address as designated on papers, applications, or permits on file with the City of Rancho Santa Margarita; 
(2)  By personally delivering a copy to the Owner's address as designated on papers, applications, or permits on file with the City of Rancho Santa Margarita; 
(3)  If the Owner is absent from his or her place of residence and from his or her usual or designated place of business, by leaving a copy with some person of suitable age and discretion at either place, and sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the Owner or authorized representative at his or her place of residence; or 
(4)  If such place of residence and business cannot be ascertained, or a person of suitable age or discretion there cannot be found, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place on the property, building, or structure and also delivering a copy to a person there residing, if any, or to the person in charge if any; and also sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the Owner at the place where the property, building or structure is situated, or to the Owner at his or her last known or designated address, or both. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.140. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any determination of the Hearing Officer regarding the existence of a hazardous condition or required corrective action made pursuant to Section 10.12.130, Hazardous conditions, of this Code, or any other order, decision, or determination made by the City Engineer or Building Official relative to the application or interpretation of this Code, may be appealed to the City Council, sitting as the Board of Appeals, in the same manner and subject to the same rules and regulations as appeals of decisions of the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of the building code regulations then in effect as adopted and modified by City ordinance. 
(b)  The City Council, sitting as the Board of Appeals, shall have the power, upon an appeal by the Owner, agent in control, or permittee under permit issued pursuant to this Code, to affirm, reverse, modify, or otherwise alter the determinations and orders of the Hearing Officer made pursuant to the procedures authorized in Section 10.12.130, Hazardous conditions, of this Code. An application for appeal of any other order, decision, or determination of the City Engineer or Building Official shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The City Council, sitting as the Board of Appeals, shall have no authority to waive requirements of this Code. 
(c)  The City Council's decision on an appeal shall be furnished in writing to the appellant and to the City Engineer, and all such decisions shall be final immediately. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.150. - Technical advice. 
(a)  Technical advice will be provided by the City Engineer in accordance with the Grading Manual. 
(b)  The City Engineer may provide an advisory technical opinion on any matter to which this Code is applicable. The advisory technical opinion of the City Engineer shall not deprive the City Council of its jurisdiction to consider any appeal from a subsequent determination of the City Engineer in regard to the same matter. The City Engineer may also serve as a board of review to provide for interpretation of data, opinions, conclusions, or adequacy of technical or geological reports. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.160. - Grading permits required. 
Except as exempted in Section 10.12.060, Grading Permits, of this Code, no person shall conduct any Grading or Clearing, Brushing, Grubbing, or Stockpiling on Natural Grade or Existing Grade that is preparatory to Grading, without first obtaining a Grading Permit from the City Engineer. A separate Grading Permit shall be required for each Site and may cover both Excavations and Fills. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.170. - Application for grading permits. 
(a)  To obtain a Grading Permit, the applicant must first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the City Engineer. The Grading Permit application shall be accompanied by information required by the City Engineer and as specified in the Grading Manual, including, but not limited to, all documents and information required by Chapter 5.10 (Water Quality Control) of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code and evidence that the Grading will be performed in compliance with all applicable Water Quality Control Requirements. Each application for a Grading Permit for a construction Site for which compliance with the State Construction General Permit is required shall submit satisfactory proof to the City that coverage under the State Construction General Permit has been obtained before the City shall issue any Grading Permit. Documents required under the State Construction General Permit shall be maintained on-site during Grading and construction and shall be made available upon the request of any City inspector. 
(b)  Applications for which no Grading Permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action for an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.180. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Each application for a Grading Permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology reports when required by the City Engineer, as specified in Section 10.12.200, Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology reports, of this Code. 
(b)  Plans and specifications for earthwork projects of 5,000 cubic yards or more, and/or subdivisions and Hillside commercial, industrial, and multi-residential projects shall be prepared and signed by a Civil Engineer, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. This requirement may be extended to any project when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, critical drainage or geologic factors may be involved and there is need for civil engineering design and control. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.190. - Information on plans and specifications. 
Grading plans and specifications shall be prepared in accordance with the Grading requirements of Section 10.12.400(a), Grading requirements, of this Code and the Grading Manual. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.200. - Soil engineering and engineering geology reports. 
A Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology report shall be required for Grading projects, unless otherwise waived by the City Engineer. The reports shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Grading Manual and shall include information appropriate for the Site including any information required by the City Engineer. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the City Engineer shall be incorporated in the Grading plans or specifications. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.210. - Issuance, expiration, and renewal of grading permits. 
(a)  The application and required accompanying information filed by the applicant for a Grading Permit shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, Building Official, and/or other City departments to verify compliance with the requirements of this Code, the Grading Manual, and any other applicable City requirements, laws, or ordinances. If the City Engineer finds that the work described in the application for a Grading Permit and submitted plans, specifications, and other data filed conform to the requirements of this chapter, the Grading Manual, and other pertinent laws, ordinances, City requirements, and the required fees have been paid, a grading permit shall be issued. 
(b)  In issuing any Grading Permits under this chapter, the City Engineer may attach any conditions as may be reasonable and necessary to protect the public welfare, including, but not limited to, conditions to prevent danger to public or private property, to prevent hazards to life or property, to minimize adverse effects on the environment, to ensure proper cleanup operations, to ensure compliance with and to recover costs for enforcement of Water Quality Control Requirements, and to recover costs for construction hours enforcement. 
(c)  The issuance of a Grading Permit shall constitute authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the Grading Permit, or on the Grading plans and specifications approved by the City. 
(d)  Grading permits issued under the provisions of this section shall not relieve the applicant and/or Owner of the responsibility for securing other permits or licenses that may be required from other departments or divisions of the City or other government entities. 
(e)  Every Grading Permit issued shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance. 
(f)  Every Grading Permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. 
(g)  The time limitations and provisions of Section 105.5, Permits, Expiration, of the 2010 California Building Code, or the corresponding section of any subsequent edition of the California Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by City ordinance, are applicable to Grading Permits, except as stated in (1) and (2) below: 
(1)  A Grading Permit issued hereunder shall expire upon a change of ownership if the Grading work thereon, for which said permit was issued, has not been completed, and a new Grading Permit shall be required for the completion of the work. If the time limitations of Subsections (e) and (f) of this section are not applicable and if no changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the City Engineer, no charge shall be made for the issuance of the new Grading Permit under such circumstances. If, however, changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the City Engineer, fees based on the valuation of the additional work, additional yardage and necessary plan checking as provided for in the Grading Manual shall be charged to the permit applicant. 
(2)  The City Engineer may extend the 180-day expiration time limit on permits not to exceed two successive periods of 180 days each upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. 
(d)  The City Engineer may require that Grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur due to weather-related problems not considered at the time the Grading Permit was issued, and further subject to the provisions of Section 10.12.220, Denial of permit, of this Code. 
(e)  If the permittee presents satisfactory reasons for failure to continue or begin the work within the period specified in Subsection (f) of this section, the City Engineer, upon receiving a written request, may grant an extension of time as specified in Subsection (g)(2) of this section without additional fees, provided that: 
(1)  No changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work. 
(2)  Suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. 
(3)  A re-endorsement of the compliance of the plans with the applicable regulations by the City Engineer shall be obtained. 
Such request for extensions must be submitted no later than the 60th day following the date on which said permit would otherwise expire. If the permittee fails to request an extension within the time provided, the City Engineer may renew the Grading Permit for a fee of one-half the amount required for the original permit provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work. 
(f)  If the permittee is unable to complete the work by the end of a two-year period, the City Engineer may renew the Grading Permit on an annual basis for a fee of one-half the amount required for the original permit for such work, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.220. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  The City Engineer shall not issue a Grading Permit in any case where he or she finds that the work as proposed by the applicant is liable to constitute a hazard to property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course. If it can be shown to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the hazard can be essentially eliminated by the construction of retaining structures, buttress Fills, drainage devices, or by other means, the City Engineer may issue the Grading Permit with the condition that such work be performed. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the land area for which Grading is proposed is subject to geological or flood hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to human life or property, the Grading Permit and the Building Permits for habitable structures shall be denied. 
(c)  The City Engineer may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to mitigate anticipated adverse environmental effects of proposed Grading projects. He or she may, under circumstances where the significant adverse environmental effects of a proposed Grading project cannot be mitigated, deny the issuance of a Grading Permit. 
(d)  The City Engineer may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to make them consistent with the Rancho Santa Margarita General Plan, Specific Plans, Zoning Code, Water Quality Control Requirements, or other rules, regulations, or conditions applicable to the project. He or she may deny the Grading Permit if the proposed project cannot be designed in accordance with these rules, regulations, or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.230. - Time of grading operations. 
Grading and equipment operations within one-half mile of a structure for human occupancy shall not be conducted between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. nor on Sundays and federal holidays. The City Engineer may, however, permit Grading or equipment operations during specific hours after 8:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. or on Sundays and federal holidays if he or she determines that such operations are not detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of such a structure. Permitted hours of operation may be shortened by the City Engineer's finding of a previously unforeseen effect on the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding community. However, no permit that has been issued, nor any provision of this section shall be construed to be a waiver of the applicability of the provisions set forth in Chapter 5.04 (Noise Control) of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.240. - Responsibility of permittee. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to be knowledgeable of the conditions and/or restrictions of the Grading Permit as outlined in applicable sections of this Code, the Grading Manual, and as contained on the Approved Grading Plans and in the approved Soil and geology reports. The permittee shall also be responsible to maintain in an obvious and accessible location on the Site, a copy of the Grading plans and any applicable stormwater pollution control documents bearing the approval by the City Engineer. 
(b)  All Grading Permits, waivers, or exemptions issued hereunder shall be deemed to include the provisions that the permittee, his or her agents, contractors, and employees, shall carry out the proposed work in accordance with the Approved Plans and specifications, where such Approval is required, and in accordance with any applicable Water Quality Control Requirements prepared and maintained pursuant to federal or state requirements or a City directive, and in compliance with all requirements of the Permit and this chapter. Failure to carry out the work in accordance with Approved Plans and specifications, the applicable Water Quality Control Requirements, and in compliance with all requirements of the Permit and this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.250. - Protection of adjoining property. 
Each adjacent Owner is entitled to the lateral and subjacent support, which his or her land receives from the adjoining land, subject to the right of the Owner of the adjoining land to make proper and usual Excavations on the same for purposes of construction or improvement as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.260. - Import and export of earth material. 
Where an excess of 5,000 cubic yards of earth per project site is moved on public roadways from or to the Site of an earth Grading operation, all of the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Either water or dust palliative or both must be applied for the alleviation or prevention of excessive dust resulting from the loading or transportation of earth from or to the project Site on public roadways. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining public rights-of-way used for handling purposes in a condition free of dust, earth, or debris attributed to the Grading operation. 
(b)  Loading and transportation of earth from or to the Site must be accomplished within the limitations established in Section 10.12.230, Time of Grading operations, of this Grading Code. 
(c)  Access roads to the premises shall be only at points designated on the Approved Grading Plan. 
(d)  The last 50 feet of the access road, as it approaches the intersection with the public roadway, shall have a Grade not to exceed three percent. There must be 300 feet clear, unobstructed sight distance to the intersection from both the public roadway and the access road. If the 300 feet sight distance cannot be obtained, flagman shall be posted. 
(e)  A stop sign conforming to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code shall be posted at the entrance of the access road to the public roadway. 
(f)  An advance warning sign must be posted on the public roadway 400 feet on either side of the access intersection, carrying the words "truck crossing." This 400-foot requirement may be increased for higher speed roads as determined by the City Engineer. The sign shall be diamond shape, each side being 30 inches in length, shall have a yellow background, and the letters thereon shall be five inches in height. The sign shall be placed six feet from the edge of the pavement and the base of the sign shall be five feet above the pavement level. The advance warning sign shall be covered or removed when the access intersection is not in use. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.270. - Grading plan check fees. 
Before accepting a Grading Permit application and plans and specifications for checking, the City Engineer, or his or her designee, shall collect a plan-checking fee as approved by resolution of the City Council and as provided in the Grading Manual. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.280. - Grading permit fees. 
(a)  A fee for each Grading Permit shall be paid to the City Engineer prior to issuance of a Grading Permit as approved by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Failure to pay fees and obtain a permit before commencing work shall be deemed a violation of this Code, except when it can be proven to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that an emergency existed which made it impractical to first obtain the permit. A violation shall result in an assessment of double permit fees for work done prior to permit issuance. Payment of a double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(c)  Additional fees approved by resolution of the City Council shall be paid as required to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.290. - Cost recovery fees. 
If the City Engineer performs emergency work on private property, he or she shall charge the property Owner all direct and indirect costs which are necessary to complete the work to his satisfaction. In addition, the City Engineer may charge a mobilization cost equal to ten percent of the cost for performing the work. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.300. - Grading permit security. 
(a)  Grading permit security required; exceptions. A Grading Permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first post with the City Engineer Grading Permit Security in a form approved by the City Attorney and in an amount set forth by resolution of the City Council. The Grading Permit Security is required to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with Approved Plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions and/or correct conditions that pose a threat to environmental resources including but not limited to a threat to water quality. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the City Engineer if he or she determines that: 
(1)  No hazardous situation is likely to occur as a result of incomplete or improper Grading; 
(2)  No adverse effect is likely to occur to subject property, adjacent property or an existing or proposed structure thereon as a result of incomplete or improper Grading; 
(3)  No significant drainage, Erosion, flooding, or siltation problems will exist as a result of incomplete or improper Grading; 
(4)  No adverse geological or environmental impacts will occur as a result of incomplete or improper Grading; 
(5)  No conditions of the Grading Permit warrant a financial guarantee to assure their satisfactory completion. 
(b)  Multiple projects. On developments where progressive individual Grading projects or several concurrent projects are being constructed by one Owner, a continuing (blanket) form of Grading Permit Security which will cover all such projects may be accepted and the amount determined by the City Engineer. 
(c)  Additional grading permit security. Additional Grading Permit Security in an amount determined by the City Engineer may be required to ensure the completion of finish Grading under the Grading Permit as a condition of occupancy and energizing utilities. Grading Permit Security in an amount determined by the City Engineer may be required for Grading Permits involving temporary earthen stockpiles to ensure their timely removal. 
(d)  Failure to complete work. In the event of failure to comply with all of the conditions and terms of the Grading Permit, the City Engineer may order the work authorized by the Grading Permit to be completed or put in a safe condition to his or her satisfaction at the cost of the permittee. 
(e)  Default in performance of conditions. Whenever the City Engineer finds or determines that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement of a condition of a Grading Permit, or there is a failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to Subsection (d) of this section, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee and, when applicable, to the surety on the bond or other security. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the City Engineer to be reasonably necessary for the completion. After receipt of such notice, the permittee and, if applicable, surety, shall within the time specified, cause or require the work to be performed. If the work is not performed, the estimated cost of performing the work shall be demanded from the surety or, if there is no surety, obtained from the security, and the City Engineer shall cause such work to be performed and completed. The cost of the work shall include a mobilization charge as specified in Section 10.12.290. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.310. - Cuts. 
Cut Slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless otherwise recommended in the Soil Engineering or Engineering Geology report and approved by the City Engineer. The Slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use as certified by the Soils Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.320. - Fills. 
(a)  Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer and recommended in the approved Soil Engineering report, Fills shall conform to provisions set forth in the Grading Manual. The provisions therein may be waived for minor Fills not intended to support structures upon written request by the applicant on a form prescribed by the City Engineer. 
(b)  The City Engineer may require that the Soil tests or testing be performed by an approved Testing Agency. 
(c)  Fill Slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless otherwise recommended in the Soil Engineering report and approved by the City Engineer. The Slope of Fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.330. - Setbacks. 
The setbacks and other restrictions specified by provisions of the Grading Manual are minimum and may be increased by the City Engineer or by the recommendation of a Civil Engineer, Soil Engineer, or Engineering Geologist, if necessary for safety and stability or to prevent damage to structures of adjacent properties from sediment deposition, Erosion, water runoff of the Slopes, or to provide access for Slope and drainage structure maintenance. The minimum setback may be reduced only in special circumstances where stability is proven to the satisfaction of the City Engineer by the Soil Engineer or Engineering Geologist and other factors are of primary importance. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.340. - Drainage and terracing. 
Drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of the Grading Manual unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer and delineated on the Approved Grading Plan. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.350. - Asphalt concrete pavement. 
(a)  Asphalt concrete pavement for surfacing of parking lots, private streets, or other similar use shall conform to the provisions of the Grading Manual unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
(b)  The Site Soil Engineer or Special Inspector shall inspect the construction of asphalt-paved areas and verify to the City Engineer that the work has been performed in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.360. - Erosion and sediment control and water quality control requirement systems. 
(a)  The faces of cut and Fill Slopes and project Site shall be prepared and maintained to control against Erosion and sediments in accordance with this chapter. Where cut Slopes are not subject to Erosion due to the Erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted upon approval by the City Engineer. 
(b)  Where necessary, Temporary, Semi-permanent, and/or Permanent Erosion and Sediment Control Devices such as desilting basins, gravel bags, check dams, cribbing, riprap, or other devices or methods, as approved by the City Engineer, shall be employed to control Erosion and Sediment and provide safety. 
(c)  No Grading work in excess of 200 cubic yards will be allowed between October 1st and April 30th on any single Grading Site under permit unless an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan has been approved or waived by the City Engineer. 
(d)  Paved streets, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition free of loose Soil, construction, debris, and trash. Street sweeping or other equally effective means shall be used on a regular basis to prevent storm flows from carrying sediment and debris outside the project boundaries. 
(e)  Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, the Owner shall be required to retain a Civil Engineer who will be responsible for the design of all Erosion control improvements and initial Approval of the installation of Permanent and Semi-Permanent Erosion Control Devices during each rainy season until the work authorized by the Grading Permit is given final approval. The Owner shall retain the Civil Engineer to periodically review the field condition and modify, as needed, the design of the Permanent and Semi-permanent Erosion and Sediment Control Devices during the rainy season. Installation and maintenance of all Erosion and Sediment Control Devices shall be the responsibility of the Owner. 
(f)  Desilting facilities shall be provided at drainage outlets from the graded Site. 
(g)  Desilting basins shall be designed to provide a minimum desilting capacity equal to the current City of Rancho Santa Margarita standards. 
(h)  Desilting basins shall be constructed around the perimeter of projects whenever feasible when it provides improved maintenance access from paved roads during wet weather. 
(i)  Desilting basins constructed of compacted earth shall be compacted to a relative Compaction on 90 percent of maximum density. A Soil Engineering report, prepared by the Soil Engineer, which includes the type of field testing performed, location, and results of testing shall be submitted to the City Engineer for Approval upon completion of the desilting basins. 
(j)  During the rainy season (October 1 through April 30), disturbed site areas that are not complete and that are not being actively Graded shall be fully protected from erosion with appropriate best management practices (BMPs) deployed. Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be made available at all times during the rainy season. Materials needed to install standby Erosion and sediment control BMPs sufficient to completely protect other exposed portions of the Site from Erosion and to prevent Sediment discharges shall be stored on-site and shall be deployed prior to a storm event. 
(k)  Erosion protection shall consist of effective planting of all Slopes in excess of five feet high unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Slopes exceeding 15 feet high may require an adequate sprinkler system, as determined by the City Engineer. Protection for the Slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable which may be prior to Rough Grade Approval. Effective planting shall be installed, fully germinated, and effectively cover the required Slopes prior to final Approval unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
(l)  The Erosion and sediment control provisions shall take into account drainage patterns during the current and future phases of Grading throughout the rainy season. 
(m)  During the dry season (from May 1 to September 30), sufficient materials needed to install standby sediment control BMPs sufficient to completely prevent discharges of sediment from exposed portions of the Site shall be stored on-site and deployed as needed to completely protect the exposed portion of the Site within 48 hours of a predicted storm event (a predicted storm event is defined as when the five-day rain probability forecast exceeds 40 percent). 
(n)  Graded areas around the tract perimeter must drain away from the face of Slopes at the conclusion of each working day. 
(o)  In addition to the requirements specified above, the permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the Water Quality Control Requirements. 
(p)  Any violation of an applicable federal or state-issued Stormwater Permit, or failure to conform to the City's Water Quality Control Requirements or failure to comply with stormwater related provisions of a City-issued Grading Permit or of a Grading plan prepared to secure such a permit, is also a violation of this chapter. 
(q)  All landscaping shall comply with Chapter 9.05 of Title 9 (Landscape Water Efficiency) of the City of Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.370. - Erosion and sediment control plans. 
Erosion and Sediment Control Plans prepared in accordance with this chapter and the Grading Manual shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval by September 15th each year for projects under a Grading Permit. The Erosion and Sediment Control plan may be waived for Grading projects on single residential lot projects providing that an Erosion and Sediment Control System, meeting the Approval of the City Engineer, has been installed, placed, planted, or constructed before October 15th. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.380. - Erosion and sediment control and water quality control system maintenance. 
(a)  After each rainstorm, silt and debris shall be removed from check berms and desilting basins and the basins pumped dry. 
(b)  After each rainstorm, the performance of the Erosion and Sediment Control System shall be evaluated and revised and repaired as necessary. If the design is found to be ineffective, the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be revised by the Civil Engineer responsible for the design and approved by the City Engineer. 
(c)  Devices shall not be moved or modified without the approval of the City Engineer. 
(d)  The contractor shall be responsible and shall take necessary precautions to prevent public trespass onto areas where impounded water creates a hazardous condition. 
(e)  The contractor and permittee or project Owner shall be responsible for continual maintenance of the devices during the rainy season. In the event of failure or refusal by the contractor, permittee, or project Owner to properly maintain the devices, the City Engineer may cause emergency maintenance work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property and environmental resources. The cost shall be charged to the Owner and shall include an initial mobilization cost plus the cost of doing the work. 
(f)  In the event the City Engineer must cause emergency maintenance work to be done, he or she may revoke the Grading Permit in writing. The Grading Permit shall not be renewed until an Erosion and Sediment Control System and/or other systems necessary to comply with Water Quality Control Requirements approved by the City Engineer are installed and a fee of one-half the amount required for the original Grading Permit paid by the Owner. The City Engineer may waive installation of an Erosion and Sediment Control System after April 30th. 
(g)  If any Grading subject to Section 10.12.060, Grading Permits, of this Code has commenced on private property without a valid Grading Permit, the property Owner may be required to prepare and implement an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as well as other plans required under the Water Quality Control Requirements, which have been approved by the City Engineer. In the event of failure by the property Owner to install an approved Erosion and Sediment Control System and/or other systems necessary to comply with Water Quality Control Requirements, the City Engineer may cause emergency work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property. The procedures of Section 10.12.130, Hazardous conditions, of this Code need not apply for emergency Erosion control work between October 1st and April 30th and emergency work necessary to protect environmental resources. The cost shall be charged to the Owner in accordance with Subsection (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.390. - Grading inspection. 
All Grading operations for which a Grading Permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer and/or Building Official or their designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.400. - Grading requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the Civil Engineer, architect, or other qualified individual who prepares the Grading plan approved by the City Engineer to incorporate all recommendations from the Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology reports and any applicable reports required by Stormwater Permits or the Water Quality Control Requirements into the Grading plan. He or she shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and Approval of the Grading within his or her area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and Approval as to the establishment of line, Grade, and drainage of the development area. The project Civil Engineer and/or general contractor shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the project professional, Grading Contractor, and the City Engineer/Building Official. The Civil Engineer or other qualified person who prepares and signs the Grading plan shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans, Erosion and Sediment Control Plans, stormwater pollution control and water quality control documents, and the submission of as-graded Grading plans when required by the City Engineer upon completion of the work. 
(b)  Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology reports shall be required as specified in Section 10.12.200, Soil Engineering and Engineering Geology reports, of this Code. During Grading, all necessary reports, Compaction data, Soil Engineering, and Engineering Geology recommendations shall be submitted to the Owner by the Soil Engineer and Engineering Geologist. The Owner shall submit copies of the reports to the Civil Engineer and two copies of all reports to the City Engineer. 
(c)  The Soil Engineer's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and Approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive Fills, testing for required Compaction, stability of all finish Slopes, design of buttress Fills, subdrain installation, and incorporation of data supplied by the Engineering Geologist. 
(d)  The Engineering Geologist's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and written Approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving Fills, the stability of cut Slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He or she shall report his or her findings to the Soil Engineer and the Civil Engineer for engineering analysis. 
(e)  The City Engineer and/or Building Official may expeditiously inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring Approval and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants. 
(f)  When preliminary Soil Engineering reports are not required by the City Engineer, he or she may require inspection and testing by an Approved Testing Agency. The testing agency's responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, Approval of cleared areas and benches to receive Fill and the Compaction of Fills. 
(g)  The City Engineer shall not issue any Grading Permit, waiver, or exemption pursuant to this chapter unless the City Engineer finds that the work authorized by the Grading Permit, waiver, or exemption complies with applicable Water Quality Control Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.410. - Notification of noncompliance. 
If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this Code, the Civil Engineer, the Soil Engineer, the Engineering Geologist, or the Approved Testing Agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with the provisions of the approved specifications and Grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the Grading work and to the City Engineer. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted to the Owner. The Owner shall submit two copies of all recommendations and reports to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.420. - Transfer of responsibility for approval. 
If the Civil Engineer, the Soil Engineer, the Engineering Geologist, the testing agency, or the Grading Contractor of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped unless: (1) the Owner submits a letter of notification verifying the change of the responsible professional, and (2) the new responsible professional submits in writing that he or she has reviewed all prior reports and/or plans (specified by date and title) and work performed by the prior responsible professional and that he or she concurs with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations, and is satisfied with the work performed. He or she may modify or revise recommendations, specifications, or work performed if accompanied by supporting data and approved by the City Engineer. He or she must state that he or she assumes all responsibility within his or her purview as of a specified date. All exceptions must be justified to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
Exception: Where clearly indicated that the firm, not the individual engineer and/or geologist, is the contracting party, the designated engineer or geologist may be reassigned and another engineer and/or geologist within the firm may assume responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.430. - Site inspection by the City Engineer/Building Official. 
(a)  Prior to the Approval of any building or Grading plans and specifications, the City Engineer and/or the Building Official, or their respective designated representatives, may inspect the Site to determine that the plans and specifications are current and reflect existing conditions. 
(b)  The permittee or his or her agent shall notify the City Engineer and/or Building Official when the Grading operations for which inspection is required are ready for inspection. 
(c)  If the inspector finds the Soil or other conditions not as stated in the Approved Plans and Soil or geology reports or as in additional information which was required for issuance of the Grading Permit, he or she may, using reasonable judgment, refuse to allow further work until approval is obtained for a revised Grading plan which will conform to the conditions. 
(d)  The provisions of the 2010 California Building Code, Section 115, Stop Work Order, or the corresponding section of any subsequent edition of the California Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by City ordinance, shall apply to all Grading work and whenever the City Engineer and/or Building Official determines that any work does not comply with the terms of a permit, or this Code, or that the Soil or other conditions are not as stated on the permit, he or she may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing of such work to be done and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the City Engineer and/or Building Official to proceed with the work. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of building permits for a graded Site, the Rough Grading shall be completed in accordance with applicable requirements and to the satisfaction of the responsible Civil Engineer or architect, Engineering Geologist, Soil Engineer, and the Building Official. 
(f)  Whenever any work on which inspections are required is covered or concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the City Engineer may require by written notice, that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering shall not entail or be subject to expense by the City. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.440. - Special inspections. 
The City Engineer and/or Building Official may establish special inspection requirements in accordance with the 2010 California Building Code, Section 1701, Special Inspections, or the corresponding section of any subsequent edition of the California Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by City ordinance, for special cases involving Grading or paving related operations. Special cases may apply to work where in the opinion of the City Engineer and/or Building Official it is necessary to supplement the resources or expertise available for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.450. - Final reports. 
Upon completion of the Rough Grading work and at the final completion of the work, the City Engineer may require the written Approvals, reports, drawings, and supplements thereto specified in the Grading Manual. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Sec. 10.12.460. - Notification of completion of work. 
The permittee or his or her agent shall notify the City Engineer when the Grading operation is ready for final inspection. All work including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all Erosion control measures must be completed in accordance with the final Approved Grading Plan and the required reports approved by the City Engineer before final Approval of the Grading Permit is given by the City Engineer. He or she may approve the Grading work prior to completion of all work in special cases of extreme hardship and if no hazard exists and adequate security is posted to assure completion of all remaining work. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 12-8-2010)  
Title 11 - Streets and Sidewalks[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority to establish or construct streets, Government Code § 40401; city streets generally, Streets and Highways Code § 1800 et seq.; vacating streets, Streets and Highways Code § 8300 et seq. 
 
Chapter 11.01 - City Streets Defined, Construction Standards, Driving Over New Pavements, and Closing City Streets 
 
Sec. 11.01.010. - City streets defined. 
All public streets and highways within the City that have been acquired by the City either by purchase, dedication or condemnation proceedings, are hereby declared to be City streets, and all streets and highways that shall hereafter be acquired by either purchase, dedication or condemnation proceedings shall be and remain City streets. 
(OCC § 6-2-1)  
Sec. 11.01.020. - Adoption of plans, specifications and regulations. 
Standard plans and specifications for the construction, improvement and maintenance of highways, bridges, flood control, landscaping, grading, small drainage structures, irrigation and recreational facilities, and for the protection, supervision, management, control or use of such facilities, shall, from time to time, be submitted by the City Engineer, and upon approval and adoption by resolution, shall be enforced by both the City Engineer and the Director of Planning, and shall be complied with and adhered to, except as provided by Section 11.01.030 by developers, builders, contractors, subcontractors, agents and all others engaged in such construction, improvement or maintenance. Copies of said standard plans and specifications shall be available for inspection at the office of the City Engineer or at the office of the Planning Director. 
(OCC § 6-2-12; Ord. No. 3980, § 2, 4-1-1997)  
Sec. 11.01.030. - Modification and deviation from plans. 
In any case where strict adherence to the City's standard plans and specifications enumerated in Section 11.01.020 would be impractical or unreasonable, the City Engineer may grant such modification or deviation therefrom as will, in accordance with good engineering practice and public health and safety, conform to a plan that will, under the circumstances in such case, be practical and reasonable. 
(OCC § 6-2-13; Ord. No. 3980, § 3, 4-1-1997)  
Sec. 11.01.040. - Travel over newly made pavement and markings prohibited. 
(a)  Highway construction. Whenever any public highway, City street, or State highway within the City shall be hereafter in course of construction or improvement with cement, asphalt, or any other substance that is soft when first applied, it shall be unlawful for any person to step, walk, ride, or drive upon that portion of any such public highway, City street, or State highway that is being at the time so improved until after the same shall become set or hard. 
(b)  Pavement and markings. No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement, any pavement under construction, or any freshly painted markings upon any public street or highway when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or markings, or when a sign is in place stating that the street is closed. 
(OCC § 6-3-91)  
Sec. 11.01.050. - Closing highway. 
(a)  Necessity determined by the City Engineer. Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the City Engineer to restrict the use of, or close any City street for the protection of the public, or for the protection of such City street from damage during storms or during construction, improvement, or maintenance operations thereon, the City Engineer may close or restrict the use of the whole or any part of such City street deemed necessary to be excluded from public travel. 
(b)  Warning signs, lights, and devices required for closed highway or during construction. While any such City street, or portion thereof, is closed, or while such City street, or portion thereof, is in the process of construction or repair or maintenance, the City Engineer may erect, or cause to be erected, suitable barriers or obstructions thereon, may post, or cause to be posted, conspicuous notices to the effect that such City street, or portion thereof, is closed or directing the traffic, and may place, or cause to be placed, warning lights or devices on such street or portion thereof. All warning signs, lights and devices shall conform to the State of California, Division of Highways Uniform Sign Chart and/or the 2006 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) California Supplement, as may be revised. 
(c)  Violation; damage to barrier, notices, warning signs. When such City street, or portion thereof, is closed to the public or is in process of construction, repair or maintenance, as provided herein, any person who willfully breaks down, removes, injures or destroys any such barrier or obstruction, or tears down, removes or destroys any such notices, or extinguishes, removes, injures or destroys any such warning lights or devices so erected, posted or placed by the City Engineer, or willfully enters upon or drives any vehicle on or over said road or highway or portion thereof when in the process of construction, repair, or maintenance, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the City Engineer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(OCC § 6-3-92; Ord. No. 10-01, § 2, 2-24-2010)  
Chapter 11.02 - Appurtenant Construction 
 
Sec. 11.02.010. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the respective meanings set forth in this section: 
Highway means any public highway, public street, public way or public place in the City that has been acquired by the City by purchase, dedication, or condemnation proceedings. 
Public agency means and includes the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State of California or any department or agency thereof, county, any municipal corporation or any public district. 
(OCC § 6-1-1)  
Sec. 11.02.020. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, construct, or repair any curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, roadway surface retaining wall or storm drain or culvert in, over, along, across, or through any highway, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Engineer as herein provided. 
(OCC § 6-1-2)  
Sec. 11.02.030. - Public agencies may guarantee costs; no permit fee. 
If a public agency files with the City Engineer a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which it may become liable to the City hereunder, then no deposit for costs shall be required from such public agency. No permit issuance fee shall be required of any public agency entitled to exemption therefrom pursuant to Government Code § 6103. 
(OCC § 6-1-4)  
Sec. 11.02.040. - Holding City harmless. 
On each permit application, the applicant shall sign a statement that he agrees to preserve and save harmless the City and each officer and employee thereof from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss, or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under any permit granted pursuant to the application. 
(OCC § 6-1-5)  
Sec. 11.02.050. - Application. 
A permit applicant shall state the following in the application: 
(1)  The location, nature and extent of the work to be performed; 
(2)  The materials to be used; 
(3)  Such other information, including plans and specifications as the City Engineer may require. 
(OCC § 6-1-11)  
Sec. 11.02.060. - City Engineer may require application changes. 
The City Engineer may require such changes in the application respecting the location, dimensions, method or manner of construction, installation or repair as may reasonably be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, or assuring the safety of persons using the highway. 
(OCC § 6-1-12)  
Sec. 11.02.070. - Fees. 
A permit applicant shall pay fees for processing, engineering, plan checking, and inspection as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(OCC § 6-1-13; Ord. No. 3077, § 2, 8-1-1978)  
Sec. 11.02.080. - Refunds. 
(a)  The engineering and inspection fees provided for in Section 11.02.070 shall be presumed to be the actual cost. A refund thereof shall not be made to any applicant unless: 
(1)  The inspection and/or engineering fee was erroneously collected, in which case the entire amount may be returned; or 
(2)  The improvements are not constructed or installed, in which event the applicant may apply for a refund of the unused fees. The City Engineer shall deduct from the deposit the actual cost incurred by the City for the required engineering and inspection plus the cost of overhead, not to exceed 15 percent of the total cost. If such cost, including overhead, is less than the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the person making the deposit in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as authorizing the repayment of any issuance fee. 
(b)  Permit cancellation. When a permit has been canceled by the City Engineer, the permittee may obtain a refund of any unused fee paid or deposited. No part of any issuance fee may be refunded. 
(OCC § 6-1-14)  
Sec. 11.02.090. - Recovery of costs in excess of deposit. 
If the cost exceeds the deposit, the permittee shall, upon demand by the City Engineer, pay the deficiency to the City. If payment is not made within 15 days after such demand, the City may recover the amount by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such amount is paid, further permits under this chapter shall not be issued to such permittee. 
(OCC § 6-1-15)  
Sec. 11.02.100. - Plans may be required. 
If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the City Engineer may require the application to be accompanied by the necessary plans, which shall be prepared by a competent engineer. 
(OCC § 6-1-22)  
Sec. 11.02.110. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  If the applicant complies with every provision of this chapter and with all applicable provisions of all other ordinances and statutes, the City Engineer shall issue to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the application. 
(b)  The applicant shall comply with all written requirements on or made part of the permit by the City Engineer. 
(OCC § 6-1-23)  
Sec. 11.02.120. - Sixty days to commence work. 
Every permittee shall commence the proposed work within 60 days after the granting of the permit and thereafter prosecute the work to completion in a diligent and workmanlike manner. 
(OCC § 6-1-24)  
Sec. 11.02.130. - Permit cancellation. 
The City Engineer may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within 60 days of the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice thereof by sending the same to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application. 
(OCC § 6-1-25)  
Sec. 11.02.140. - Relocation of plants and structures. 
If so required by the City Engineer, the permittee shall make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of, relocating any structure, public utility, tree, or shrub, where such is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The City Engineer may elect to do the necessary relocation, in which event the permittee shall deposit with the City Engineer a sum of money estimated by him to be sufficient to pay the cost thereof. After such relocation, a refund shall be paid to, or a deficiency shall be paid by, the permittee as provided in Sections 11.02.080 and 11.02.090. 
(OCC § 6-1-31)  
Sec. 11.02.150. - City standards for work. 
(a)  The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the plans, if plans are made and specifications referred to in the permit, and to the satisfaction of and under the supervision of the City Engineer. In addition, all work to be performed in, upon, or across City streets shall be in accordance with and conform to the City standards established by Article 2, Division 2 of Title 6 of the Orange County Code. 
(b)  The City Engineer may waive inspection if he believes such inspection is not necessary for the best interests of the City. 
(OCC § 6-1-33)  
Sec. 11.02.160. - Notice prior to commencement of work. 
Not less than two working days before the commencement of any work covered by this chapter, the permittee shall notify the City Inspector. 
(OCC § 6-1-35)  
Sec. 11.02.170. - Safety and warning devices required. 
A permittee shall place and maintain adequate warning signs, lights, and devices conforming to the State of California Division of Highways Uniform Sign Chart and the 2006 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) California Supplement, as may be revised, throughout the length of the work and at each end of the project until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The permittee shall take such other precautions as may be necessary for the protection of the traveling public. The City Engineer may, as a condition of the issuance of a permit, specify such additional signs, warning devices, or measures to be used by the permittee, but the failure of the City Engineer to so specify the signs, devices, or measures shall not relieve the permittee of his obligation hereunder. 
(OCC § 6-1-41; Ord. No. 10-01, § 3, 2-24-2010)  
Sec. 11.02.180. - Notice upon completion of work. 
Whenever any permittee has completed any work for which a permit has been granted, he shall notify the City Engineer in writing. 
(OCC § 6-1-42)  
Sec. 11.02.190. - Certificate of acceptance. 
If the City Engineer, by survey, inspection, or both, ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor and of all of the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue, if requested to do so by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance that shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. 
(OCC § 6-1-43)  
Sec. 11.02.200. - Removal of material and debris. 
A permittee shall remove all material and debris: 
(1)  Where new work is covered with earth, in accordance with the terms of the specifications attached to the permit; 
(2)  In all other cases within three days. 
(OCC § 6-1-44)  
Sec. 11.02.210. - Violation. 
Every person who performs any work covered by this chapter in any amount greater than or in any way different from or contrary to the terms of any permit issued therefor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(OCC § 6-1-45)  
Chapter 11.03 - Obstructions 
 
Sec. 11.03.010. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-02, § 2, adopted Nov. 28, 2018, repealed § 11.03.010, which pertained to water and derived from OCC § 6-1-58.  
Chapter 11.04 - News Racks 
 
Sec. 11.04.010. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
News rack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals. 
Parkway means the area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway also includes any area within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel. 
Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(OCC § 6-1-90; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 6-10-1975)  
Sec. 11.04.020. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall install, use, or maintain any news rack or other structure that projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway of any public street. 
(b)  No person shall install, use, or maintain any news rack that, in whole or in part, rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway when such installation, use, or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, when such site or location is used for public use, when such news rack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near the location, or when such news rack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. 
(c)  No person shall install, use, or maintain any news rack that, in whole or in part, rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the City Engineer. 
(OCC § 6-1-91; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 6-10-1975)  
Sec. 11.04.030. - Standards. 
Any news rack that, in whole or in part, rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No news rack shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width, or two feet in thickness. 
(2)  News racks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than 18 inches nor more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. News racks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. No news rack shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another news rack. 
(3)  No news rack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the news rack or to any permanently fixed object. 
(4)  News racks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than three news racks may be jointed together in this manner, and a space of no less than 18 inches shall separate each group of three (3) news racks so attached. 
(5)  No news rack or group of attached news racks allowed under this section shall weigh, in aggregate, in excess of 125 pounds when empty. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.04.020, no news rack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
a.  Within three feet of any marked crosswalk; 
b.  Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; 
c.  Within three feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or other emergency facility; 
d.  Within three feet of any driveway; 
e.  Within three feet ahead of, and 15 feet to the rear of, any sign marking a designated bus stop; 
f.  Within three feet of any bus bench; 
g.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet; 
h.  Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees or within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes. 
(7)  No news rack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein. 
(8)  Each news rack shall be maintained in a clean, neat, and attractive condition and in good repair at all times. 
(OCC § 6-1-92; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 6-10-1975)  
Sec. 11.04.040. - Identification. 
Every person or other entity which places or maintains a news rack on the streets of the City shall have his or its name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. 
(OCC § 6-1-93; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 6-10-1975)  
Sec. 11.04.050. - Removal. 
(a)  Any news rack installed, used, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be summarily removed and stored in any convenient place by the Sheriff. The Sheriff shall, prior to removal, take reasonable steps to notify the owner thereof. Upon failure of the owner, following notice, to claim such news rack and pay the expenses of removal and storage within 30 days after such removal, such news rack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the Sheriff's Department and may be disposed of pursuant to law. 
(b)  In the case of violations of this chapter relative to restrictions upon attachments of news racks to property other than that owned by the owner of the news rack, to fixed objects or each other, and upon location of news racks, the Sheriff may, as an alternative to removal under this section, remove such attachment and/or move such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition. 
(OCC § 6-1-94; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 6-10-1975)  
Sec. 11.04.060. - Abandonment. 
In the event any news rack installed pursuant to this chapter is not serviced with the publication it is designed to disseminate for a period of over seven days, the City reserves the right to remove such pursuant to the procedure set out in Section 11.04.050. For purposes of this section, abandonment shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances in which no publication is in the rack for a period of over seven days. 
(OCC § 6-1-95; Ord. No. 2845, § 1, 6-10-1975)  
Sec. 11.04.070. - Prohibitions. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, or keep or maintain any newspaper or news periodical in any news rack on any sidewalk in such manner as to expose to the public view any photograph, cartoon, or drawing contained within such publication that displays any obscene matter, as such term is defined in Penal Code Section 311(a), or any of the following: 
(1)  The genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region of any person other than a child under the age of puberty; 
(2)  Any portion of the breast, at or below the areola thereof, of any female person, other than a child under the age of puberty. 
(OCC § 6-1-111; Ord. No. 2844, § 1, 6-10-1975; Ord. No. 98-15, § 62, 12-8-1998)  
Chapter 11.05 - Bus Passenger Shelters and Benches 
 
Sec. 11.05.010. - Permit required. 
No person shall erect, place, construct or maintain a bus passenger shelter or a bus passenger bench on any highway unless an encroachment permit to do so has first been obtained from the City Engineer under such terms and restrictions as are hereinafter set forth and in compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
(OCC § 6-1-120; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Highway means all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way of a City street, whether or not such entire area is actually used for street purposes. 
Bus stop bench or bench means a seat located upon a highway for the comfort, convenience and accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation. 
Bus stop shelter or shelter means a covered waiting area located upon a highway, often semi-enclosed, with a bench, that provides protection from sun, wind and rain for passersby or persons awaiting transportation. 
Encroachment permit or permit means prescribed written approval by the City Engineer for placement of shelters and benches on a highway. Master permit is an annual permit form used for setting forth all requirements and conditions for approval. Permit rider is that form used for approval of each shelter or bench location subject to conditions of master permit. 
(OCC § 6-1-121; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.030. - Permit application. 
(a)  No encroachment permit shall be issued except upon written application filed with and upon a form prescribed by the City Engineer showing the proposed location of each shelter or bench and such other provisions, conditions, and information as the City Engineer may require. 
(b)  Detailed plans and specifications for each shelter and/or each bench meeting the approval of the City Engineer shall be supplied by the applicant. Shelter plans and structures shall be certified by an engineer or architect registered or licensed by the State of California. 
(OCC § 6-1-122; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.040. - Permit denial, cancellation, or revocation. 
(a)  The City Engineer shall deny any application for a shelter and/or a bench permit if he finds that the location of the proposed shelter and/or bench would tend to obstruct passage along the highway, to create a traffic hazard, to impair sight distance, or otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience. 
(b)  The City Engineer may revoke the encroachment permit or deny renewal thereof for reasons in the best interest of the City, for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, for any fraud or misrepresentation in the application, or for any reason that would have been grounds for denial of the application. 
(c)  The application shall be cancelled and denied if the applicant fails to deposit the permit fees and accept the permit within ten days after notice of approval of the application by the City Engineer. 
(d)  The permit rider shall automatically become null and void if the permittee fails to install the permitted bench or shelter within 60 days after the issuance date of the permit. Each shelter shall provide adequate self-contained illumination, as determined by the City Engineer, within 60 days of installation, and a bench at all times, or such permit shall be void. In such case, the permit fee is not refundable. The provision of trash containers is permitted and may be required at any time by the City Engineer. The permittee shall be responsible for removal of trash from trash containers. 
(OCC § 6-1-123; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.050. - Location, type, numbers, and priorities for placement of shelters and benches. 
(a)  Shelters and/or benches shall conform to all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Shelters and/or benches shall be located only at approved public transportation stops, including school bus stops. A combination of shelters and/or bench(es) shall not exceed two at any location unless specifically approved by the City Engineer and the need substantiated in writing by the Orange County Transportation Authority. 
(c)  Shelters and/or benches shall be installed in accordance with design criteria established by the City and only at locations where a curb separates the travelway from the sidewalk or parkway. Shelters and/or benches shall be set back from the face of curb a distance not less than 18 inches and such that an unobstructed minimum pedestrian travelway of four feet will be provided. 
(d)  Shelter and/or bench permits shall be issued on a first-come, first-served basis and shall be nonexclusive for any location. 
(e)  Where placement of both shelter and a bench at a location cannot be accommodated because of limited space or any other reasons, the shelter shall take precedence over the bus bench unless determined otherwise by the City Engineer. Applications for benches/shelters without advertising signs shall have preference over applications for benches/shelters with advertising signs. 
(OCC § 6-1-124; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.060. - Advertising. 
Shelter or bench advertising shall not be allowed. 
(OCC § 6-1-125; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.070. - Inspection and maintenance. 
It shall be the duty of each permittee to maintain such shelters and benches in a safe and presentable condition at all times. Damaged or unsafe and unsightly shelters or benches, if not repaired or maintained in a presentable condition, shall be removed by permittee immediately, or shall be removed by the City Engineer at permittee's expense. 
(OCC § 6-1-126; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.080. - Removal and impounding of shelters and benches. 
Upon the expiration or revocation of any permit, the permittee shall forthwith remove such shelter or bench from the highway. The City Engineer shall give the permittee ten days notice to remove the shelter or bench, and upon his failure to do so, may remove and store the shelter or bench pending the recovery thereof by the permittee, or its sale, destruction or other disposition, as hereinafter provided. The City Engineer shall store the shelter or bench for at least 30 days after its removal, during which time the permittee may recover the shelter or bench by paying the City for the cost of such removal and storage. Said costs shall not exceed $300.00 a month per shelter and $100.00 a month per bench for removal and storage. At the expiration of said 30-day period, the City Engineer shall salvage such structure for public use on public property, or he may have it destroyed. All of the foregoing shall be at the sole risk of the permittee and shall be in addition to any other remedy that the City may have by law. 
(OCC § 6-1-127; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.090. - Surety and liability insurance risk. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the applicant shall post and maintain with the City surety and a policy of public liability insurance approved by the City Attorney and conditioned as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The liability policy shall be conditioned that the permittee will indemnify and save the City and its officers and employees from any and all loss, cost, damages, expenses, or liability that may result from or arise out of the granting of the permit, or the installation or maintenance of the shelter and/or bench for which the permit is issued, and that the permittee will pay any and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person as a result of, or which may be caused by or arise out of such installation or maintenance. The policy of insurance shall be maintained in its original form by the permittee at his expense, at all times during the period for which the permit is in effect. In the event two or more permits are issued to one permittee, one such policy of insurance may be furnished to cover two or more shelters and/or benches, and each shall be of such type that its coverage shall be automatically restored from and after the time of the reporting of any accident from which liability may thereafter accrue. 
(c)  Such policy shall provide a minimum of 30 days written advance notice of cancellation to the City Manger with no attached disclaimer. 
(d)  The limit of liability upon a policy of insurance, posted pursuant to the requirements of this section, shall in no case be less than $1,000,000.00, combined single limit for bodily injury to or death of one person or more and property damage. 
(OCC § 6-1-128; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.100. - Interference with shelters and benches. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with the exception of an authorized City official or the permittee or his agent, to tamper with or move any shelter and/or bench lawfully placed upon a highway pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, or commit acts of vandalism upon any shelter and/or bench lawfully placed upon a highway, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(OCC § 6-1-129; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.05.110. - Enforcement. 
The City Engineer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(OCC § 6-1-130; Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 4-26-1983; Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987) 
(Ord. No. 3636, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Chapter 11.06 - Private Streets 
 
Sec. 11.06.010. - Naming or change of name; procedure. 
Whenever the City Council or a City officer designated by the Council to be in charge of naming private streets, finds that a name should be adopted or that the existing name of any private street should be changed, the Council or the designated City officer shall hold a public hearing on the proposed name for, or the change of name of, such street. Notice of such hearing shall be given by posting notice in at least three public places along the street or streets proposed to be affected and mailing notice to the U.S. Postmaster for the City, such posting to be completed at least ten days before the day set for the hearing. At the time set for the hearing or at any time to which the hearing may be continued, the Council or the designated City officer shall hear and consider proposals to adopt a name for or change the name of the street mentioned in the notice and objections to such proposal. At or after the conclusion of the hearing, the Council or the designated City officer may adopt a name for or change the name of such street, and upon the adoption or change thereof shall make an order and file said order with the City Council officially designating the name for such street. Thereafter, such street shall be known by the name so designated. 
(OCC § 6-1-135; Ord. No. 3134, § 1, 5-29-1979; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 1-9-1996)  
Chapter 11.07 - Encroachment Excavation, Filling and Obstruction of Highways 
 
Sec. 11.07.010. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the respective meanings herein set forth: 
County means the County of Orange, California. 
Highway means the entire public right-of-way of any public highway, public street, public way, or public place in the City that has been acquired by the City by purchase, dedication, or condemnation proceedings. 
Public agency means and includes the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State of California or any department or agency thereof, any municipal corporation, or any public district. 
(OCC § 6-3-27)  
Sec. 11.07.020. - Encroachment of public right-of-way. 
No person shall permanently or temporarily encroach upon, block, or otherwise interfere with the intended use of the highway, or dig up, plow up, remove, or break the earth, soil, stone, pavement, or other surface of, or otherwise injure, any highway, or make or cause to be made any excavation, or construct, place upon, maintain, or leave any material or any obstruction or impediment to travel in or upon a highway, or install or maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, sign or any other installation of any nature across, upon, in or under any highway, unless he shall have first obtained an encroachment permit to do so. 
(OCC § 6-3-28)  
Sec. 11.07.030. - Application prior to work commencement. 
Applications for permits hereunder shall be filed not less than two working days before the work is proposed to be done. 
(OCC § 6-3-29)  
Sec. 11.07.040. - Permit application. 
Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be filed with the City Engineer upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by the City. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall include the following minimum standard provisions: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location, purpose, extent and nature of the proposed excavation, fill or obstruction; 
(3)  The time during which it is estimated that the excavation, fill or obstruction will exist; 
(4)  That the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend, and save the City, its authorized agents, officers, representatives, and employees harmless from and against any and all penalties, liabilities, annoyances, or loss resulting from claims or court action arising out of any accident, loss, or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under the permit granted pursuant to the application; 
(5)  That the applicant agrees that if any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other installation of any nature or kind placed in the public right-of-way for which the permit is issued, shall interfere, at any time in the future, with the use, repair, improvement, widening, or change of grade of the highway, the applicant or his successors or assigns, within ten days after the receipt of a written notice from the City to do so, at his own expense, will either relocate or remove such tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other installation, subject to the approval of the City, and relocate them to a site that may be designated by the City Engineer; 
(6)  Any additional information which the City Engineer may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. 
(OCC § 6-3-30)  
Sec. 11.07.050. - Plan must be filed. 
The application, at the discretion of the City Engineer, shall be accompanied by a plan signed by a registered engineer, traffic engineer, or landscape architect, showing the location, dimension, nature of the proposed encroachment, excavation, obstruction, or fill, and any other detail which the City Engineer may require. 
(OCC § 6-3-31)  
Sec. 11.07.060. - Proof of right to use highway. 
If the applicant is other than the owner of the underlying fee, each such applicant for a permit shall submit to the City Engineer satisfactory proof of the applicant's right to use the highway for the purposes set forth in the application. 
(OCC § 6-3-37)  
Sec. 11.07.070. - Application may be modified. 
The City Engineer may require such changes in the application respecting the location, dimensions, character, or number of the proposed encroachment, excavations, fills, or obstructions as in his opinion may be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, or the assurance of the safety of persons using the highway. 
(OCC § 6-3-38)  
Sec. 11.07.080. - Fees. 
An applicant for a permit for encroachment, improvement, construction, or repair shall pay fees for processing, engineering, and inspection as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(OCC § 6-3-41; Ord. No. 3077, § 2, 8-1-1978)  
Sec. 11.07.090. - Special deposit of costs; furnishing of surety bond. 
(a)  In cases where the applicant is granted authority to perform the work required under the permit, the City Engineer, in order to insure the completion of said repairs in a satisfactory manner, may require the applicant to furnish a surety bond and/or provide a cash deposit. Such bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of California. The bond or cash deposit shall be in an amount determined by resolution of City Council in conjunction with the establishment of fees. The condition of said bond shall be that the applicant will perform the work authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this chapter in a good and workmanlike manner and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(b)  The amount of a cash deposit shall be determined by resolution of the City Council in conjunction with the establishment of fees. 
(OCC § 6-3-47; Ord. No. 98-15, § 63, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 11.07.100. - Applicant may make general deposit. 
At the discretion of the City Engineer, the applicant may make and maintain with the City a general deposit in an amount estimated by the City Engineer to be reasonably sufficient to pay for the cost of permit issuance fees, inspection fees, and expected repairs occasioned by future excavations or obstructions. 
(OCC § 6-3-48; Ord. No. 98-15, § 63, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 11.07.110. - Cost computation where not provided. 
Whenever in this chapter any costs are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation thereof is specified, such cost shall be the actual cost, including the proportionate part of the salaries, wages or other compensation of any deputy or employee, plus the cost of overhead, not to exceed 15 percent of the total cost. 
(OCC § 6-3-49)  
Sec. 11.07.120. - Exemption of public agencies. 
If a public agency files with the City Engineer a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which they may become liable to the City hereunder, then no deposit for costs shall be required from such persons. No permit issuance fee shall be required of any public agency entitled to exemption therefrom pursuant to Section 6103 of the Government Code of the State of California. 
(OCC § 6-3-50)  
Sec. 11.07.130. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  If the applicant for a permit hereunder complies in all respects with this chapter and with all other applicable laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances of the City or of any other public agency, and pays the fees and deposits required by this chapter, the City Engineer shall approve the application and issue the permit. 
(b)  The City is under no obligation to approve an application that is not in the best interest of the City or of public safety. 
(c)  If an application submitted by a state franchised video service provider or cable operator is denied, the City Engineer shall provide a detailed explanation of the reason for denial. Within ten days of the date of notice of denial, the applicant may file a written appeal with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall schedule an appeal hearing before the City Manager to be held within 30 days of receipt of the request. If the City Manager upholds the decision to deny the application, within ten days of the date of notice of denial, the applicant may file a written appeal with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall schedule a hearing on such appeal before the City Council to be held within 60 days of receipt of the request. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(OCC § 6-3-51; Ord. No. 07-09, § 5, 1-9-2008)  
Sec. 11.07.140. - Conditions of permit. 
The permit shall be subject to the following conditions, which shall be stated thereon: 
(1)  The permit must be kept at the site of the work and be shown on demand to any authorized representative of the City or any law enforcement officer. 
(2)  The permit shall authorize work to be performed only as to such portion of the highway over which the City has jurisdiction. 
(3)  All work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations of the City and any other public agency, and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(4)  The permit shall be nontransferable. 
(5)  The City Engineer may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within 60 days after the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application. 
(6)  The City Engineer, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter until the completion of the work, may prescribe such additional conditions as he may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, or the assurance of the safety of persons using the highway. 
(OCC § 6-3-57)  
Sec. 11.07.150. - Compliance with terms of permit. 
A permittee shall not make or cause to be made any excavation, construct, place upon, maintain or leave any obstruction or impediment to travel, pile or place any material in or upon any highway, install or maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any tank, pipe, conduit, sign, duct or tunnel in, upon or under the surface of any highway at any location or in any manner other than that described in the application as approved by the City Engineer, or contrary to the terms of the permit or of any provision of this chapter. 
(OCC § 6-3-58)  
Sec. 11.07.160. - Restoration of highway. 
(a)  Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or obstruction authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or remove the obstruction to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(b)  If any permittee fails or refuses to refill any excavation he has made, to remove any obstruction he has placed on any highway, or to repair any other damage done to improvements within the public right-of-way, the City may do so, and the applicant shall promptly reimburse the City the cost thereof. 
(OCC § 6-3-59)  
Sec. 11.07.170. - Resurfacing and specifications therefor. 
(a)  Resurfacing after refilling and compacting. After completion of the refilling and compacting of the backfill material in the excavation, as specified in Section 11.07.220 and further specified in the permit, and after the removal of the obstruction, the permittee either shall promptly replace with temporary or permanent patching material, or shall repair any portion of the highway surface removed or damaged by the excavation, obstruction or construction operations as specified elsewhere herein, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(b)  Permanent repaving. Where the pavement (except Portland cement concrete pavement) or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it with a standard repair consisting of the depth of the existing pavement structural section plus one inch or as required by the City Engineer. Plant-mixed surfacing shall consist of mineral aggregate and liquid asphalt grade SC-6, or grade 200-300 penetration paving asphalt. If Portland cement concrete pavement is removed, it shall first be sawed at the neat lines of the excavation and subsequently replaced with Portland cement concrete. 
(c)  Tunneling or boring. Excavation of pavement or surfacing on an arterial highway (as shown on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways) determined by the City Engineer as having been improved with plant-mixed surfacing or Portland cement concrete pavement will be permitted only when physical conditions make boring or tunneling impossible. All boring and tunneling and placing conduits, casings, and pipelines shall be done in such a manner that the existing driving lanes will not be disturbed. If a casing is installed to receive the conduit or pipeline, all voids between the casing and conduit shall be filled with grout or sand. 
(d)  Replacing entire driving lane. If the surfacing or pavement within the driving lanes of an arterial highway (as shown on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways) determined by the City Engineer as having been improved with plant-mixed surfacing or Portland cement concrete is removed or damaged by parallel construction operations, the existing surfacing or pavement of the width of the driving lane for the length of the damaged surfacing shall be removed and replaced, except that such a removal and replacement shall in no case be less than 100 feet in length. 
(OCC § 6-3-60)  
Sec. 11.07.180. - Cost of resurfacing. 
If, after the refilling of an excavation, the permittee fails or refuses to resurface or repair that portion of the surface of the highway damaged by him, or if the City Engineer has elected to do such resurfacing or repairing, the City Engineer shall do so, and the permittee shall be charged with the cost thereof computed by the City Engineer as provided in Section 11.07.080 or Section 11.07.110 of this chapter, whichever in the judgment of the City Engineer will most fairly compensate the City for the expenses incurred by it. 
(OCC § 6-3-61)  
Sec. 11.07.190. - Cost of further repairs. 
If, at any time subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by any excavation or obstruction in such highway, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation or obstruction, the permittee shall pay to the City the cost of such additional repairs made by the City Engineer. The City Engineer, at his discretion, may give the permitee the opportunity to repair the work at permitee's own cost. 
(OCC § 6-3-67)  
Sec. 11.07.200. - Traffic to be kept open. 
Trenching for installation across any intersecting roadway open to traffic shall be progressive. Not more than one-half of the width of a traveled way shall be disturbed at one time, and the remaining width shall be kept open to traffic by bridging or backfilling, unless specifically allowed by the City Engineer. 
(OCC § 6-3-68)  
Sec. 11.07.210. - Location of pipes and conduits. 
The shallowest portion of any pipeline or other facility shall be installed not less than 30 inches below the roadway surface unless otherwise authorized in writing by the City Engineer. 
(OCC § 6-3-69; Ord. No. 3721, § 1, 7-12-1988)  
Sec. 11.07.220. - Work regulations. 
(a)  General compaction requirements. All backfill replaced in excavations within the road right-of-way shall be compacted until the relative compaction within six feet of the top surface is not less than 90 percent and below six feet is not less than the adjacent undisturbed soil as determined by the Relative Compaction Test specified in Section 6, article b-21 of the State Standard Specifications. 
(b)  Compaction of clayey soils. 
(1)  Clayey materials shall be defined as a soil containing more than 30 percent of material that will pass a No. 200 mesh screen. Clayey material replaced as backfill may not be pounded or jetted, but shall be compacted as specified under general compaction requirements or by any other suitable method providing the material is first conditioned by wetting or drying to within two percent of optimum moisture content. 
(2)  In lieu of backfilling with clayey material, the permittee, at his option, may elect to furnish sandy or granular material, less than 30 percent of which will pass a No. 200 mesh screen, in which case compaction may be obtained as specified under general compaction requirements. 
(c)  Finishing and cleanup. 
(1)  After the work has been completed, all debris and excess material from excavation and backfill operations shall be removed from the right-of-way and the roadway left in a neat and orderly condition. 
(2)  All roadside drainage ditches shall be restored to the original grades and the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts shall be left free and clear. 
(3)  All approaches to private driveways and intersecting highways and streets shall be kept open to traffic at all times. 
(4)  Excess and nonsurfacing materials that adhere to roadway surfacing as a result of construction operations shall be removed by approved methods to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(OCC § 6-3-70)  
Sec. 11.07.230. - Deductions from deposit; payment of balance to permittee. 
The City shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee: 
(1)  Issuance fee. The permit issuance fee if it has not otherwise been paid. 
(2)  Additional repair costs. The cost to the City of any additional repairs as provided in Section 11.07.190 of this chapter. 
(3)  Inspection costs. The inspection fees provided for in Section 11.07.080 shall be presumed to be the actual cost of inspection, and a refund thereof shall not be made to any applicant. 
(4)  Engineering and inspection costs. Engineering fees will be charged by the City for services rendered pursuant to this chapter. Inspection costs will also be paid for by the applicant as provided for in Sections 11.07.080 and 11.07.230. 
(5)  Penalties. Unpermitted work shall be subject to additional fees in accordance with the City Council adopted fee schedule. 
(6)  Actual or unusual costs. The City reserves the right to provide service on an actual cost basis or otherwise modify fees for unusual circumstances. 
(7)  Refunds. After making the deductions specified above, the City, unless the deductions are made from a general deposit, shall refund any balance to the applicant in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. The balance remaining in the general deposit shall be retained by the City Engineer and applied to the issuance fees and costs in connection with any future excavations, fills, or obstructions pursuant to a permit issued hereunder, unless a written demand for the balance be made by the depositor, in which event any balance therein shall be refunded in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. 
(OCC § 6-3-71)  
Sec. 11.07.240. - Permittee to pay deficiency. 
If any deposit is insufficient to pay all fees and costs herein provided, the permittee shall, within 15 days of demand, pay the deficiency. 
(OCC § 6-3-77)  
Sec. 11.07.250. - Failure to pay costs. 
If a permittee fails to pay any deficiency as provided in Section 11.07.240 or fails to pay any other costs due to the City hereunder for which no deposit has been made, the City may recover the amount by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency or cost is paid in full, further permits issued under this chapter shall not be issued to such permittee. 
(OCC § 6-3-78)  
Sec. 11.07.260. - Emergency permits. 
Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the City are closed, if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor within one day after the offices of the City Engineer are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. 
(OCC § 6-3-79)  
Sec. 11.07.270. - Encroachment permits; liability insurance required. 
No permit shall be approved for encroachment onto any property owned by the City for any purpose whatsoever unless the applicant provides proof of insurance coverage for bodily injury and property damage in a form and in an amount acceptable to the City Manager. In fixing the form and amount of such insurance requirement, the City Manager shall take into consideration the nature and extent of the proposed encroachment. The City Manager may waive the requirements of this section if he determines that the proposed encroachment will not constitute any significant possibility of City liability. 
(OCC § 2-7-1; Ord. No. 3634, § 1, 5-26-1987)  
Sec. 11.07.280. - Traffic control devices and procedures. 
As directed by the City Engineer, all traffic control devices, procedures, including, but not limited to street closures, related material, and equipment shall conform to the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) California Supplement, as may be revised. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, § 4, 2-24-2010)  
Chapter 11.08 - Major Thoroughfare and Bridge Fees 
 
Sec. 11.08.010. - Purpose. 
A subdivider, as a condition of approval of a final or parcel map, or a building permit applicant, as a condition of approval of a final map, or a building permit applicant, as a condition of issuance of a building permit, shall pay a fee as hereinafter established to defray the costs of either constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways, and canyons, or constructing major thoroughfares. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(1), 3-2-2000)  
Sec. 11.08.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction includes preliminary studies, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, actual construction, and also includes those activities within the definition of "construction" in Government Code Section 66484.3(g). 
Major thoroughfare means those roads designated as transportation corridors and major, primary, secondary, or commuter highways on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways in the circulation element of the City's General Plan. The primary purpose of such roads is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to and including the State highway system. 
Bridge facilities mean those locations identified in the transportation or flood control provisions of the circulation element or other element of the City's General Plan as requiring a bridge to span a waterway, a railway, freeway, or canyon. 
Area of benefit means a specified area wherein it has been determined that the real property located therein will benefit from the construction of a major thoroughfare or bridge project. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(2), 3-2-2000)  
Sec. 11.08.030. - Applicability. 
The provisions herein for payment of a fee shall apply only if the major thoroughfare of bridge facility has been included in an element of the General Plan adopted by the City Council at least 30 days prior to the filing of a map or application for a building permit and on land located within the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(3), 3-2-2000)  
Sec. 11.08.040. - Payment of fees; where required. 
(a)  Payment of fees shall not be required unless any major thoroughfare is in addition to or a widening or reconstruction of any existing major thoroughfare serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(b)  Payment of fees shall not be required unless any planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to an existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(4—5), 3-2-2000)  
Sec. 11.08.050. - Establishment of area of benefit; proposal. 
Action to establish an area of benefit may be initiated by the City Council upon its own motion or upon the recommendation of the City Engineer or other designated City employee. The proposal shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendations. The Planning Commission comments and recommendations and the City Engineer's report shall be transmitted to the City Council. The City Council shall set a public hearing for each proposed area benefited. Notice of the time and place of said hearing, including preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated costs and the method of fee apportionment, shall be given by first class mail addressed to each owner as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of property within the proposed area of benefit. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(6), 3-2-2000)  
Sec. 11.08.060. - Public hearing and protests. 
(a)  At the public hearing the City Council shall consider the testimony, written protests, and other evidence. At the conclusion of the public hearing the City Council may, unless a majority written protest is filed and not withdrawn as specified in Subsection(c) hereof, establish an area of benefit. If established, the City Council shall adopt a resolution describing the boundaries of the area of benefit, setting forth the cost, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment. A certified copy of such resolution shall be recorded with the County Recorder of Orange County. 
(b)  Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions thereof. Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this section, the City Council shall make provisions for payment of the share of improvement costs apportioned to such lands from other sources. 
(c)  Written protest shall be received by the City Clerk any time prior to the close of the public hearing. If written protests are filed by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented by the protests to less than 1/2 of the area to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the City Council shall not, for one year from the filing of said written protests, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this section, unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of 4/5 of the City Council. Any protests may be withdrawn by the owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. 
(d)  If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this section to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the City Council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement so protested against. Such proceedings shall be commenced by a new notice and public hearing as set forth in Section 11.08.050 above. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City Council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of an improvement or portion of the improvements so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of 4/5 of its members, that the owners of more than 1/2 of the area of the property to be benefited are in favor of going forward with such improvement or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(7), 3-2-2000)  
Sec. 11.08.070. - Bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund. 
Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund. A fund shall be established for each planned bridge facility project or each planned major thoroughfare project. If the area of benefit is one in which more than one bridge or major thoroughfare is required to be constructed, a separate fund may be established covering all of the bridge projects or major thoroughfares in the area of benefit. If the area of benefit encompasses one or more bridges and one or more thoroughfares and all lands within the area of benefit are subject to the same proportionate fee for all bridges and thoroughfares, a single fund may be established to account for fees paid. Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of improvements serving the area to be benefited and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the City for the costs of constructing the improvement. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(8), 3-2-2000)  
Sec. 11.08.080. - Advancement of funding for construction. 
The City Council may approve the advancement of money from the general fund or road fund to pay the costs of constructing the improvements covered herein and may reimburse the general fund or road fund for such advances from planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare funds established pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(9), 3-2-2000)  
Sec. 11.08.090. - Reimbursement of applicant or subdivider. 
If the subdivider, as a condition of approval of the subdivision, or the building permit applicant, as a condition of the issuance of the building permit, is required or desires to construct a bridge or major thoroughfare, the City Council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider or building permit applicant and the Foothill/Eastern Transportation Corridor Agency. Such agreement may provide for payments to the subdivider or applicant from the bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund covering that specific project to reimburse the subdivider or applicant for costs not allocated to the subdividers or applicant's property in the resolution establishing the area of benefit. If the bridge or major thoroughfare fund covers more than one project, reimbursements shall be made on a pro rata basis reflecting the actual or estimated costs of the projects covered by the fund. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1(10), 3-2-2000)  
Chapter 11.09 - Pedestrians Prohibited on City Street Medians 
 
Sec. 11.09.010. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to ensure the safety of pedestrians and drivers in the City and preserve the landscaping and hardscaping of the City's median islands. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 4-12-2006)  
Sec. 11.09.020. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Chapter, words, phrases and terms used herein shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise indicated as follows: 
Median shall be defined as a raised and curbed area within the City street right of way, located in the approximate center of the street, parallel to the travel lanes, separating opposing lanes of traffic. "Median" is also synonymous with "street median", "City median" and "median island". 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 4-12-2006)  
Sec. 11.09.030. - Pedestrians prohibited on city street medians. 
No pedestrian shall step, stand, sit, or lay upon any City street median. For purposes of this Chapter, pedestrians do not include City employees or contractors maintaining the medians, emergency personnel or other persons temporarily using the median because of an accident or vehicular emergency, or persons actively using an existing City crosswalk, which intersects a median, who are otherwise required to step onto a median for safety reasons. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 4-12-2006)  
Title 12 - Vehicles and Traffic[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General powers of local authorities, Vehicle Code § 21100 et seq. 
 
Chapter 12.01 - General and Administrative Provisions 
 
Sec. 12.01.010. - Definitions. 
Whenever any words or phrases used herein are defined in the California Vehicle Code, such definitions shall apply if not elsewhere defined in this title. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bicycle lane. A marked lane within the roadway designated by appropriate signs and markings for the one-way use of bicycles. 
Bicycle path or bicycle trail. A specifically designated area for bicycle use physically separated from the roadway. 
Bicycle route. Any roadway designated as a bikeway pursuant to the California Bicycle Transportation Act (Streets and Highways Code § 890 et seq.) with official signs giving notice of such a bikeway. 
Bus stop zone. The space adjacent to the curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of buses during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Curb. The lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb be marked by curbing construction or not so marked; it does not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
Holidays. Within the meaning of this title, holidays are the holidays defined by the City Council. 
Loading zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Passenger loading zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
School days. Days on which regularly scheduled public school classes are in session. 
Skateboard. A conveyance consisting of a short, oblong board with small wheels, propelled with or without mechanical power, which can be ridden by one or more persons at a time. 
(OCC § 6-4-102; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Vehicle Code definitions generally, Vehicle Code §§ 100, 21000 et seq.  
Sec. 12.01.020. - Traffic policy and procedures. 
To guide the application of the laws contained in this title not in the California Vehicle Code, the City Council has adopted the various traffic engineering policies and procedures, which defines engineering policies, procedures, and interpretations of traffic engineering practice. Any amendments to the policies and procedures shall be approved by resolution of the City Council. 
(OCC § 6-4-101; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.01.030. - City traffic engineering. 
The City Engineer is hereby charged with the responsibility, under the powers and duties specified in this division, to carry out and review all traffic engineering functions affecting the City. 
(OCC § 6-4-201; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.01.040. - Duties of City Engineer. 
It shall be the general duty of City Engineer to determine the installation, design, operation, and maintenance of traffic-control devices, design and/or review traffic flow systems and appurtenances, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents, to devise remedial measures, and to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions. Traffic engineering shall also cooperate with the California Highway Patrol, the Orange County Sheriff's Department, the Orange County Fire Authority, and other agencies as appropriate in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and carry out the additional duties imposed by the ordinances of the City. In making decisions pursuant to the provisions of this title, the department shall act so as to preserve public safety and the orderly movement of traffic. 
(OCC § 6-4-202; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of official traffic control devices, Vehicle Code § 21100(d); when signs required, Vehicle Code § 21461.5.  
Sec. 12.01.050. - Authority to designate multiple turning lanes at intersections. 
The City Engineer is authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the director is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left turns. 
(OCC § 6-4-300; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Authority to restrict turns, Vehicle Code §§ 22101, 22113.  
Sec. 12.01.060. - Two-way left turn lanes. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to establish and designate two-way left turn lanes on highways. 
(OCC § 6-4-301; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Authority to restrict turns, Vehicle Code §§ 22101, 22113.  
Sec. 12.01.070. - Intersection turning movements. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to place and maintain signs or markings to prohibit or to restrict left turns, right turns, or U-turns at intersections or driveways. 
(OCC § 6-4-302; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Authority to restrict turns, Vehicle Code §§ 22101, 22113.  
Sec. 12.01.080. - Stop intersections designated. 
The City Engineer is authorized to install stop signs at intersections where, in his opinion, there is an imminent danger without such control. The City Engineer shall follow said installation with request for City Council approval at the earliest opportunity. 
(OCC § 6-4-401; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Authority to erect stop signs and yield signs, Vehicle Code §§ 21351.5, 21353 et seq.  
Sec. 12.01.090. - Speed limits. 
The following speed limits are hereby established in the City: 
ID 	Street 	Segment 	Speed 
Limit 
1 	Alas de Paz 	Antonio Parkway to Plano Trabuco Road 	40 
2 	Alma Aldea 	La Promesa to Santa Margarita Parkway 	35 
3 	Antonio Parkway 	Coto de Caza Drive to Santa Margarita Parkway 	50 
4 	Antonio Parkway 	Santa Margarita Parkway to Avenida de Las Flores 	45 
5 	Arroyo Vista 	Las Mesitas to Ria 	40 
6 	Avenida de Las Banderas 	El Carazon to Avenida de Las Flores 	25 
7 	Avenida de Las Banderas 	Avenida Empresa to Antonio Parkway 	45 
8 	Avenida de Las Flores 	Avenida de Las Banderas to Santa Margarita Parkway 	40 
9 	Avenida de Las Flores 	Santa Margarita Parkway to Laurel Road 	45 
10 	Avenida de Las Flores 	Laurel Road to Antonio Parkway 	45 
12 	Avenida Empresa 	Santa Margarita Parkway to Avenida de Las Banderas 	40 
13 	Avenida de Las Fundadores 	Avenida de Las Flores to Santa Margarita Parkway 	30 
14 	Avenida de Las Fundadores 	Santa Margarita Parkway to Alma Aldea 	30 
15 	Aventura 	West Terminus to Avenida Empresa 	35 
16 	Aventura 	Avenida Empresa to Avenida de Las Banderas 	35 
17 	Bienvenidos 	Alma Aldea to Antonio Parkway 	30 
18 	Buena Suerte 	Avenida de Las Flores to Santa Margarita Parkway 	35 
19 	Comercio 	Avenida Empresa to Avenida de Las Banderas 	35 
20 	Coto de Caza Drive 	Antonio Parkway to Access Gate 	35 
21 	El Camino Montana 	Avenida de Las Flores to Juneberry 	40 
22 	El Camino Montana 	Juneberry to Via Con Dios 	40 
23 	Richard Reese Way 	Avenida de Las Flores to El Paseo 	35 
24 	Richard Reese Way 	El Paseo to La Promesa 	30 
25 	Esperanza 	Avenida Empresa to Avenida de Las Banderas 	40 
26 	Heritage Drive 	Robinson Ranch Road to Bird Hollow Drive 	40 
27 	La Promesa 	Richard Reese Way to Antonio Parkway 	30 
28 	Los Alisos Boulevard 	SR-241 to Altisima 	50 
29 	Melinda Road 	Santa Margarita Parkway to Via Regressos 	50 
30 	Melinda Road 	Via Regressos to SR-241 (Overcrossing) 	50 
31 	Melinda Road 	SR-241 (Overcrossing) to Altisima 	50 
32 	Plano Trabuco Road 	Trabuco Canyon Road to Robinson Ranch Road 	45 
33 	Plano Trabuco Road 	Robinson Ranch Road to Santa Margarita Parkway 	45 
34 	Plano Trabuco Road 	Santa Margarita Parkway to Dove Canyon Road 	45 
36 	Rancho Trabuco Road 	Melinda Road to Las Sordina 	30 
37 	Santa Margarita Parkway 	Avenida Empresa to Avenida de Las Flores 	50 
38 	Santa Margarita Parkway 	Avenida de Las Flores to Alma Aldea 	50 
39 	Santa Margarita Parkway 	Alma Aldea to Plano Trabuco Road 	50 
40 	Via Arribo 	Melinda Road to Via Regressos 	40 
41 	Via Con Dios 	El Camino Montana to Avenida de Las Flores 	30 
42 	Via Petalos 	Avenida de Las Flores to El Camino Montana 	30 
43 	Via Regressos 	Via Arribo to Melinda Road 	40 
44 	Alicia Parkway 	Santa Margarita Parkway to South City Limits 	55 
45 	Alma Aldea 	Avenida de Las Banderas to La Promesa 	40 
46 	Altisima 	Melinda Road to Rancho Trabuco 	35 
47 	Altisima 	Rancho Trabuco to Celeste 	35 
48 	Antonio Parkway 	South City Limits to Tijeras Creek 	60 
50 	Antonio Parkway 	Avenida de Las Banderas to SR-241 	55 
51 	Antonio Parkway 	SR-241 to Coto de Caza Drive/La Promesa 	55 
52 	Arroyo Vista 	Avenida de Las Banderas to Las Mesitas 	35 
53 	Avenida de Las Banderas 	Avenida de Las Flores to Aventura/Esperanza 	45 
54 	Avenida de Las Banderas 	Aventura/Esperanza to Avenida Empresa 	45 
55 	Avenida Empresa 	Avenida de Las Banderas to Antonio Parkway 	40 
57 	Robinson Ranch Road 	Plano Trabuco to Lindsay Drive 	40 
58 	Robinson Ranch Road 	Lindsay Drive to Shadow Rock Lane 	40 
59 	Robinson Ranch Road 	Shadow Road to North Peak Drive 	40 
61 	Santa Margarita Parkway 	Melinda Road to Alicia Parkway 	55 
62 	Santa Margarita Parkway 	Alicia Parkway to Avenida Empresa 	55 
63 	Camino Altozano 	Avenida de Las Banderas to North Cul-de-sac 	35 
64 	Dove Canyon Drive 	Plano Trabuco Road to Gate Entrance 	40 
65 	Trabuco Canyon Road 	West City Limits to Plano Trabuco Road 	45 
66 	Sycamore Canyon Drive 	Dove Canyon Drive to Inverary 	35 
67 	Sycamore Canyon Drive 	Inverary to Mountain Laurel 	40 
68 	Dove Canyon Drive 	Main Gate to Ravensridge 	40 
69 	Arroyo Vista 	Avenida Empresa to Avenida de Las Banderas 	40 
 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 8-7-2003; Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 7-27-2005; Ord. No. 10-03, § 3, 6-9-2010; Ord. No. 10-05, § 3, 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 12-05, § 3, 12-12-2012; Ord. No. 19-02, § 2, 3-27-2019) 
State Law reference— Local alteration of speed limits, Vehicle Code §§ 22352, 22357 et seq.  
Chapter 12.02 - Stopping, Standing, and Parking[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing, and parking, Vehicle Code §§ 21100(l), 21458, 22500 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12.02.010. - Regulations adopted by City Council. 
Except as hereinafter provided, regulations pertaining to the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(OCC § 6-4-600; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.02.020. - City Engineer to establish and maintain prohibited or restricted no-stopping, no-standing, or no-parking zones. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to place appropriate signs or markings prohibiting or restricting stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on City highways for purposes and conditions as set forth herein: 
(1)  Bus stop zones. For a distance not to exceed 170 feet for loading and unloading passengers at a bus stop or for a distance not to exceed 150 feet for loading and unloading children at a school bus stop. 
(2)  Loading zones. For a distance not to exceed 50 feet in length for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers or materials. 
(3)  Passenger loading zone. For a distance not to exceed 100 feet for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. 
(4)  School zones. 
a.  For a distance not to exceed 400 feet from either side of any marked school pedestrian crosswalk. 
b.  Prohibiting parking or restricting parking during specific hours of the day on the side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking, in the opinion of the City Engineer, interferes with pedestrian, bicycle or vehicle traffic, or creates a hazardous situation. 
(5)  Crosswalks. For a distance not to exceed 400 feet from either side of any marked pedestrian crosswalk. 
(6)  Street intersections. For a distance not to exceed 400 feet on either side of any street from its intersection with any other street for purpose of turn lanes or sight distance and visibility. 
(7)  Driveway. For a distance not to exceed 400 feet adjacent to either side of a driveway entrance to any street for purpose of sight distance and visibility. 
(8)  Temporary "no-parking" zones. Parking is temporarily not permitted on any City street where the use of such street or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or the installation of underground utilities, where the use of the street or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicles would prohibit or interfere with such use of movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicles may be removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such "no parking." 
(9)  Railroad crossing. Prohibit stopping for a distance not to exceed 50 feet from the center line of a railroad track crossing on any street. 
(10)  Narrow streets. Prohibit stopping on only one side of a street which is 30 feet or less in width. 
(OCC § 6-4-601; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.02.030. - Violations. 
(a)  Loading zones. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park or stop said vehicle in any loading zone for any purpose other than unloading or loading of passengers or materials, provided that no stop for the loading or unloading of passengers shall be made for more than five minutes, or provided that no stop for the loading or unloading of materials shall be made for more than 20 minutes. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle other than a bus or school bus to stop or park said vehicle in a "bus stop" zone. 
(b)  Maximum parking time limit. It shall be unlawful to park or stop a vehicle for a period of time longer than 72 consecutive hours upon any City street. 
(c)  Recreational vehicle; camping overnight. It shall be unlawful for any person to camp overnight in a recreational vehicle upon any City street, including any part of the right-of-way thereof. "Recreational vehicle" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. 
(d)  No-parking zones. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a designated "no-parking," "no-stopping," or any time-specific no-parking or no-stopping zone when signs or markings are placed giving notice of such prohibition. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a designated "no-parking for street sweeping purposes," zone when signs or markings are placed giving notice of such prohibition. 
(e)  Vehicle not in condition to be lawfully operated. Notwithstanding subsection (b) above, it shall be unlawful to park, stop, or leave sitting, for a period of time longer than 12 consecutive hours upon any public street or highway in the City, any vehicle not in a condition to be lawfully operated on the public highways. 
(f)  Vehicle repair. It shall be unlawful to repair, dismantle, overhaul, or perform any mechanical work upon a vehicle, trailer, camp car, trailer coach, or recreational vehicle on any part of any City street area, except to replace or otherwise repair a tire or to make emergency repairs to enable such vehicle to be removed to a proper place. 
(g)  Trailers and nonmotorized vehicles. No person shall at any time park or leave standing a nonmotorized vehicle or camper, regardless of width or length, when it has been detached from its motor vehicle, on any public street except for purposes of loading or unloading and for a period not to exceed two hours. 
(h)  Bicycle lanes. No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle on a designated on-road bicycle lane anywhere on the City arterial highway system, providing signs identifying such a lane and prohibiting parking are posted. 
(OCC § 6-4-603; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989; Ord. No. 19-03, § 2, 4-24-2019)  
Sec. 12.02.040. - Removal of vehicles from City streets. 
The removal of vehicles from a City street, pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code Div. 11, Ch. 10, Art. 1 (§ 22650 et seq.), is authorized under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a vehicle is parked or left standing for 72 or more consecutive hours. 
(2)  Whenever any vehicle is parked or left standing on a street or portion thereof where such parking has been prohibited by this Code. No vehicle may be removed unless signs are posted giving notice of such removal. 
(OCC § 6-4-604; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989; Ord. No. 98-15, § 65, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 12.02.050. - Tow-away zone. 
Whenever a "no-parking area" has been established in accordance with the provisions of this Code, the City Council may by resolution determine that any one or more of the circumstances described in section 22651 of the Vehicle Code exist in such area, and may designate such area as a "tow-away zone." Whenever the City Council has designated a "tow-away zone," it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to cause signs to be posted, giving notice that any vehicle parked in such "tow-away zone" may be removed. 
(OCC § 6-4-605; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.02.060. - Oversized vehicle parking regulation. 
(a)  No person shall park or leave standing upon any portion of any public street or highway within the City: 
(1)  Any vehicle of a length in excess of 25 feet or a weight in excess of 10,000 pounds. 
(2)  Any vehicle used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit, and designed and used or maintained for the transportation of property, including buses, motor trucks, trailers, semi-trailers, trailer coaches or truck tractors, as defined in the State of California Vehicle Code, and similar vehicles, which are of a width in excess of 90 inches as measured at the widest portion of the body, not including mirrors or other extensions. 
(3)  Any item of farm machinery or special construction equipment. 
(b)  Prohibited vehicles may be parked on public streets and highways: 
(1)  While loading or unloading persons and/or property. 
(2)  When such vehicle is parked in connection with, or in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked, not to exceed 72 consecutive hours. 
(3)  When performing repairs of an emergency nature on the vehicle itself not to exceed 12 consecutive hours. 
(4)  When the vehicle, while occupied by a duly licensed operator, is awaiting the opening of a closed facility for the purpose of loading or unloading or to perform a prescheduled service or to store the subject vehicle. 
(c)  Loading and unloading, as used in this section, shall mean active loading and unloading, including the performance of those activities required to prepare the vehicle for either travel or storage for a period of time not to exceed 12 hours, during which the vehicle cannot reasonably be taken on the road or moved to a place of otherwise lawful storage. 
(d)  Any commercially licensed vehicle legally parked upon any City street for any purpose during the hours of darkness shall be required to place and maintain a minimum of three reflective triangular "parked vehicle" delineators, evenly spaced, for a distance of 100 feet behind the parked vehicle or equipment. 
(Ord. No.01-07, § 1(3.10.010), 6-21-2001)  
Sec. 12.02.070. - Penalty. 
Violations of the parking restrictions set forth in this Chapter shall be prosecuted as civil administrative penalties, which civil penalties and fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, § 4, 4-24-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-03, § 3, adopted April 24, 2019, repealed the former § 12.02.070, and enacted a new § 12.02.070 as set out herein. The former § 12.02.070 pertained to advertising on parked vehicles; purpose, and derived from OCC § 6-1-71; Ord. No. 3783, 3-13-1990.  
Sec. 12.02.080. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-03, § 3, adopted April 24, 2019, repealed § 12.02.080, which pertained to definitions and derived from OCC § 6-1-72; Ord. No. 3783, 3-13-1990.  
Sec. 12.02.090. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-03, § 3, adopted April 24, 2019, repealed § 12.02.090, which pertained to violation and derived from OCC § 6-1-73; Ord. No. 3783, 3-13-1990.  
Sec. 12.02.100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-03, § 3, adopted April 24, 2019, repealed § 12.02.100, which pertained to exemption and derived from OCC § 6-1-74; Ord. No. 3783, 3-13-1990.  
Sec. 12.02.110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-03, § 3, adopted April 24, 2019, repealed § 12.02.110, which pertained to penalties and derived from OCC § 6-1-75; Ord. No. 3783, 3-13-1990.  
Chapter 12.03 - Bicycles, Play Vehicles, and Pedestrians[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Bicycles, Vehicle Code § 21200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12.03.010. - Bicycle operation. 
(a)  Direction of travel. Persons riding or operating a bicycle on a bicycle trail or path may proceed in either direction except on those trails or paths designated for one-way traffic by appropriate markings or signs defined by the direction of adjacent vehicular traffic. 
(b)  Walking bicycles. : Bicycles may be walked subject to all provisions of law applicable to pedestrians. 
(OCC § 6-4-500; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989; Ord. No. 98-15, § 64, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 12.03.020. - Bicycles on sidewalks. 
(a)  Riding on sidewalks. Bicycles may be ridden on all sidewalks at a speed not to exceed five miles per hour except upon sidewalks within a business district, upon sidewalks adjacent to any public school building when school is in session, recreation center when in use, or church during services, or over any pedestrian overcrossing or other sidewalk where prohibited by posted signs. 
(b)  City Engineer to designate prohibitions. The City Engineer may designate and declare certain portions of sidewalk to be prohibited to bicycle use. 
(c)  City Engineer to post prohibitions. The City Engineer is authorized to erect and maintain signs adjacent to sidewalks designating limits of bicycle prohibitions. 
(d)  Yielding right-of-way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield right-of-way to any and all pedestrians. A person riding a bicycle upon entering a roadway or driveway from a sidewalk shall yield to all traffic. 
(OCC § 6-4-501; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate operation of bicycles on sidewalks, Vehicle Code § 21100(h).  
Sec. 12.03.030. - Skateboards, roller skates, and similar pedestrian traffic. 
(a)  No person shall ride a skateboard, roller skates, or other conveyance propelled by human power, other than a bicycle, or cause or permit same to roll or coast on the roadway of any highway in the City. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to cul-de-sacs where the length of the cul-de-sac is 500 feet or less. 
(OCC § 6-4-502; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.03.040. - Pedestrian movements. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to place and maintain signs or markings to prohibit or to restrict pedestrian crossings at certain legs of intersection. 
(OCC § 6-4-503; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.03.050. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-02, §§ 3, 4, adopted February 25, 2009, repealed section 12.03.050 in its entirety, which pertained to prohibited pedestrian crossing, and derived from Ord. No. 02-04, §§ 2—6, adopted June 6, 2002. Sections 3 and 4 of the 2009 ordinance read as follows: 
 Section 3. The City Council has determined that prohibiting pedestrian crossings of certain streets can best be attained by establishing No Pedestrian Crossing Zones on segments of the specified streets, except at the intersections. Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 32, the City Council elected to adopt such prohibitions by Resolution rather than by Ordinance. As a result, the existing Ordinance 02-04, and Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code Section 12.03.050, shall be repealed and replaced with a Resolution establishing No Pedestrian Crossing Zones adopted concurrently herewith. 
 Section 4. Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, Ordinance 02-04, and Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code Section 12.03.050 are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall limit or have the effect of limiting the effectiveness of the Resolution establishing No Pedestrian Crossing Zones adopted concurrently herewith.  
Chapter 12.04 - Vehicle Size, Weight, and Load[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicle size, weight and load, Vehicle Code § 35000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12.04.010. - Permits. 
(a)  The City Engineer is authorized to issue permits for variations from the size, weight and load limitations set forth in Vehicle Code Div. 15 (§ 35000 et seq.). Such authorization shall be exercised in accordance with the guidelines and restrictions set forth in Vehicle Code Div. 15, Ch. 5, Art. 6 (§ 35780 et seq.). 
(b)  An administration fee for permits issued for a vehicle or combination of vehicles under the provisions of this section shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  The City Engineer may require such undertaking or security as he deems necessary to protect the highways and bridges from injury, or to provide indemnity for any injury resulting from the operation of the vehicle. 
(OCC § 6-4-701; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.04.020. - Regulations for moving buildings or structures. 
(a)  Manpower minimum. It shall be unlawful for any building or structure 20 feet or more in width to be moved over, upon, along, or across any highway, street, alley, or way unless the contractor so moving the same shall have not less than five persons engaged in said moving operations comprised as follows: 
(1)  A foreman; 
(2)  A truck driver; 
(3)  A person on the building to handle wire clearances; 
(4)  Two flagmen, one to be at least 300 feet ahead of the building or structure, the other flagman to follow said building or structure at a distance sufficient to give adequate warning to approaching traffic. Said flagman shall carry the signals required by law. 
(OCC § 6-4-702; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Chapter 12.05 - Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative Vehicles[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Removal of parked and abandoned vehicles, Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.; local ordinances for removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, Vehicle Code § 22660 
 
Sec. 12.05.010. - Purpose; findings. 
(a)  In addition to other statutory authority for the removal of vehicles from public or private property and in accordance with the authority granted by the State of California under Vehicle Code § 22669 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the City Council hereby makes the findings and declarations enumerated in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety for minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(OCC § 6-4-800; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner of the land means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
Owner of the vehicle means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
(OCC § 6-4-801; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.030. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This chapter is not applicable to: 
(1)  A vehicle, or parts thereof, that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  A vehicle, or parts thereof, that is stored or parked in lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this chapter. 
(OCC § 6-4-802; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Required provisions, Vehicle Code § 22661(b).  
Sec. 12.05.040. - Other remedies. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinance. 
(OCC § 6-4-803; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.050. - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Sheriff. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his regularly salaried fulltime deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of the owner of the vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(OCC § 6-4-8804; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.060. - Authority to remove. 
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons to do so, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(OCC § 6-4-805; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.070. - Costs of administration. 
The City Council shall, by resolution, determine and fix an amount to be assessed as costs of administration and removal of any vehicle or parts thereof under this chapter. 
(OCC § 6-4-806; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.080. - Authority to abate and cause removal. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private property or public property, the Sheriff shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(OCC § 6-4-701; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.090. - Notice of intention to abate and remove; form and mailing of notices. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be given unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicles or parts thereof. Said notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notice of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
LAND OWNER 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
"(Name and address of owner of the land) 
"As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to section 12.05.080 of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof (hereinafter "vehicle"), registered to _____________, license number _____________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of section 12.05.010 of said Code. 
"You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle or parts thereof, within ten days of the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City, with administrative costs assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle is located. Upon removal, said vehicle(s) shall not be reconstructed or made operable unless it qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to section 5004 of the Vehicle Code. 
"As owner of the land on which said vehicle is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and if such a request is not received by the Sheriff within such ten-day period, the Sheriff shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle as a public nuisance and assess the cost as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice mailed ____________ (date). 
/s/ ______________________ 
Sheriff" 
VEHICLE OWNER 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
"(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle. Notice should be given to both if different.) 
"As the last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to section 12.05.080 of the Rancho Santa Margarita Municipal Code, has determined that said vehicle, or parts thereof (hereinafter "vehicle"), exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of section 12.05.010 of said Code. 
"You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle within ten days after the mailing of this notice. You are further notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and if such a request is not received by the Sheriff within such ten-day period, the Sheriff shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle without a hearing. Upon removal, said vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable unless it qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license. 
Notice mailed ___________ (date). 
/s/ _____________________ 
Sheriff" 
(OCC § 6-4-808; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.100. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the Sheriff within ten days after the mailing of the notices of the intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Sheriff on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administration cost and the costs of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
(b)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing that does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, at least ten days before the hearing, to the owner of the land, and to the owner of the vehicle, if known. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the Sheriff shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(OCC § 6-4-809; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Required provisions, Vehicle Code § 22661(d), (g).  
Sec. 12.05.110. - Procedure for hearings and orders. 
(a)  All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the Sheriff, who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on said private or public property. The Sheriff shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
(b)  The Sheriff may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, he may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available. Such order shall be in writing. 
(c)  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Sheriff shall not assess the cost of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
(d)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, he shall be notified by registered or certified mail of the decision. If the owner of the vehicle requested the hearing, but does not appear, he shall be notified by registered or certified mail of the decision. 
(OCC § 6-4-810; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Required provisions, Vehicle Code § 22661 (g).  
Sec. 12.05.120. - Appeal to City Council. 
(a)  The owner of the land or the owner of the vehicle who requested a public hearing by the Sheriff may appeal the decision of the Sheriff by filing a written notice of appeal with the Sheriff within five days after the Sheriff's decision. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council, which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
(c)  The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in section 12.05.090. 
(d)  In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(OCC § 6-4-811; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.130. - Repair or reconstruction after removal prohibited. 
After a vehicle has been removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle that qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Vehicle Code § 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable, 
State Law reference— Required provisions, Vehicle Code § 22661(f).  
Sec. 12.05.140. - Disposition of vehicle after order or appeal. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing the notice of the decision, if such notice is required by section 12.05.110, or 15 days after such action of the City Council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard, subject to the provisions of section 12.05.130 relating to horseless carriages or historic vehicles. 
(OCC § 6-4-812; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Sec. 12.05.150. - Notice to state. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence or registration available, including, but not limited to, registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates. 
(OCC § 6-4-813; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989) 
State Law reference— Required provisions, Vehicle Code § 22661(a).  
Sec. 12.05.160. - Assessment of costs against the land. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal that are charged against the owner of the parcel of land pursuant to section 12.05.070 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall become a nuisance abatement lien. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code § 38773.1. 
(OCC § 6-4-814; Ord. No. 3768, § 2, 11-7-1989)  
Chapter 12.06 - Sleeping In Vehicles 
 
Sec. 12.06.010. - Purpose. 
The act of persons sleeping in vehicles in public places within the City is hereby determined to be detrimental to the general health, safety, and welfare of the community in that such activity tends to cause degradation of neighborhoods, cause an increase in problems related to refuse and sanitation, and to increase the likelihood of a rise in crimes of opportunity. Therefore, the act of persons sleeping in a vehicle in a public place as expressed in this chapter is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 3-14-2012)  
Sec. 12.06.020. - Sleeping in vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in any camper truck, camper trailer, tent trailer, travel trailer, or vehicle (as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 670), which is located upon any City owned, operated, or maintained street, sidewalk, alley, public right-of-way, or any other public property within the city, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 3-14-2012)  
Chapter 12.07 - Advertising on Parked Vehicles 
 
Sec. 12.07.010. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter regulating the use of parked vehicles for the primary purpose of advertising is to promote traffic safety, to maximize the availability of highway parking for use by the general public, and to promote the aesthetic appearance of highways and adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, § 5, 4-24-2019)  
Sec. 12.07.020. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertising signs shall include, but not be limited to, any kind of display, printing, writing, or banner for the primary purpose of advertising the sale, purchase, or promotion of a product, business, or service. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, § 5, 4-24-2019)  
Sec. 12.07.030. - Violation. 
No person shall park any vehicle on a public or private street, parking lot, or any public property or off-street parking facility with any advertising sign painted on, affixed to, or resting on the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, § 5, 4-24-2019)  
Sec. 12.07.040. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempted from the provisions of this Chapter: 
(1)  Vehicles displaying signs, decals, or other inscriptions mandated or expressly authorized by statute or other City ordinances, but only to the extent such signs, decals, or other inscriptions are expressly authorized or mandated. 
(2)  Signs permanently affixed to commercial vehicles while engaged in the ordinary business for which they are registered or maintained; provided, however, that a commercial vehicle parked in the same space for more than four hours shall be presumed not engaged in its ordinary business. 
(3)  Taxicabs while engaged in the ordinary course of business. 
(4)  Vehicles owned by public agencies. 
(5)  Vehicles operated by entities subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. 
(6)  Vehicles parked within 300 feet of the residence of the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, § 5, 4-24-2019)  
Sec. 12.07.050. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(b)  Any person violating this Chapter more than one time in a 12-month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for the second and subsequent violations. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, § 5, 4-24-2019) 
